UNITED

NATIONS

L
THIRTY-THIRD

REC

S

YEAR

2057
th

MEETING: 27 JANUARY 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

... ... .. . ... .., .. .. .. ,.. .. ,. ,.

1

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . , , , . , . . , . . , , . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . , . , .

1

The question of South Africa:
(al Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent Representatives of Gabon,
Mauritius and Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 2538);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (S/12536) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2057)

S/PV.2057

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2057th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 27 January
President: Mr. L. 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

1978, at 10.30 a.m.

3. The delegationof Gabon is pleasedto have beenelected
to the Security Council and it assuresall membersof the
Council of its total availability. It is an honour for us to be
a part of this the chief organ of the United Nations in that
this will give us an opportunity to become familiar with its
methods of work. It is in full consciousnessof the
complexity of the questionsbefore the Council and of its
role in the questfor their solution that Gabon will take part
in its activities.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kin@
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2057)

4. Need I recall that the Charter of the United Nations
confers upon the Council the main responsibility for
international peace and security? Bearing in mind the
difficulty of the task, I believe the successof our action
essentially dependsupon the constructive co-operation of
all its members.As a new member, my delegationcounts on
that mutual co-operation and understanding.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent
Representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 12538);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (S/ 12536)

5. Consideringthe tasks that lie ahead, we can clearly see
that world peaceand security cannot be taken for granted
as long as there remain hotbeds of tension here and there,
aslong asthe armsrace is not halted, aslong asthe historic
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoplesis not implemented throughout the
world and, fmalIy, as long as the last manifestations of
colonialism and racism have not been effectively
eliminated.

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
(a) Letter dated 25 January 1978 from the Permanent
Representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12538);
(b) Note by the Secretary-General (S/12536)

6. We therefore hope that the Council will study these
different problems with the attention and seriousnessfor
which it is known and that it will do everything possibleto
find solutionsin keeping with the aspirationsof the whole
of mankind. It is in that spirit that we intend to work in
this important organ, convinced, as we are, that al1
members,large or small, permanent or elected, will in most
casesset aside their respective powers with a view to
adopting proposalsthat will truly servethe demandsof our
time. In fact, every memberof the Council isin duty bound
to contribute to the work of the Council and therefore
decisionsadopted here should be the result of compromise
acceptablet6 all.

1. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the custom of this body, I should like on
behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Gabon to
extend to you, Sir, sincere congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January. It is always a great pleasure for my
delegation to congratulate a distinguished representative of
a Member State with which my country has excellent
relations of co-operation based on mutual respect and
friendship. Our pleasure is all the greater when it is a
fraternal African country that is involved. We are sure that
YOU will dischargethe responsibilitiesof your lofty task
with competenceand sincerity.

7. Finally, Mr. President, I wish, through you, to thank
the Commissionerfor External Affairs of Nigeria very
sincerely for the kind words of welcome he addressedto
my country and to my delegation asa new memberof the
Council.

2. My delegationwould like also to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the representative of Mauritius, Ambassador
Ramphul,for the zealousand competent mannerin which
he presidedover the Council’swork in December.

8. Concerning the question on our agenda, I wish to
analyse it not only as a Council member but also as
representativeof the current President of the Organization
of African Unity.
1

-.

9. The international COmmUIlity
aS a whole LlllaIlhIlOLlSly
condemns the policy
of apartheid of the white minority
Government of South Africa. Despite that unanimity,
today we find ourselves forced to re-examine this subject, a
re-examination that has become traditional, given Vorster’s
indifference to tlte wishes of the illternatiOd community.
Our consideration of the subject will form part of the
efforts the Crganization has consistently undertaken to end
a scourge that it has designated a crime against mankind. At
Maput and at Lagos, under the aUSpiCeSof the United
Nations, declarations and programmes of world action and
struggle
against apartheid were defined and adopted. This
unanimity was also confirmed in resolution 417 (1977), in
which the Security Council
strongly condemned “the South
African regime for its resort to massive violence and
Epression
against the black people, who constitute the
great
majority of the country, as well as all other opponents
of apartheid”. It was confirmed also by General Assembly
resolution 32/105 B, which proclaimed “the year beginning
on 21 March 1978 International Anti-Apartheid Year”.

delegation believes that the Council should complement the
urovisions of resolution 417 (1977) by adopting other more
effective measures with a view to- bringing the Vorster
regime to end its policy of repression and of violation of
rights and fundamental freedoms based on an anachronistic
ideology which is the very negation of democracy and of
human rights.
14. It is not through resolutions of condemnation,
through non-violence or through innocuous sanctions that
the international community will be able to break down the
resistance of the horrible regime which exists in Pretoria
and which reflects honour on neither the Council, the
Organization nor our century. Those who think that
matters will improve considerably of their own accord are
mistaken. Those who yield to such illusions will have a
brutal awakening, as is demonstrated by the massacre of the
patriot Steve Biko.
15. Today, South Africa finds itself faced with the worst
political crisis it has ever known, a political crisis which 30
years of intimidation and savage repression have not been
able to eliminate and which endangers the very foundations
of the apartheid regime. The many trials taking place in
South Africa are the best example of this and, in my view,
they will result in a strengthening of the courage, boldness,
dedication and determination of the freedom fighters,
Nevertheless, we must remain vigilant at all times. We must
not foster the illusion that, in the absence of a true political
will and appropriate measures in all fields on the part of the
main partners-of Pretoria, it will be possible to eliminate
easily the odious and ignoble apartheid regime. The many
vetoes which have been cast here against Council decisions
by the friends of Vorster are a source of comfort to him in
his arrogance and in his disdain of the decisions of the
international community and give him free rein to carry out
political assassinations, mass detentions and the deportation
of innocent people.

10. Given those decisions, the South African Government,
which has made of apartheid a political system, has merely
reacted with a further’intensification of its repression and
an all-out application of that shameful policy, a reaction
that is no more, no less than a challenge to the international
community. In that regard, the entire world knows that,
less than one week after adoption of resolution 417 (1977),
the South African Government did not hesitate to reject it.
It preferred to set up false institutions which make no
provision for the overwhelming majority of the population.
11. Furthermore, in a desperate attempt to put the
internal opponents of apartheid out of action, Vorster’s
racist regime continues to accumulate a wealth of documents, wrongly called laws, that are inhuman and negate
elementary human rights. Thus, on 19 October, the South
African regime adopted a series of repressive measures of
which the banning of 18 apolitical organizations, the arrest
and trial of a large number of important persons and the
issuance of several banning orders appear the most excessive. Today in South African gaols there are more than
2,500 blacks, arrested under the Terrorism Act, among
them militants of the two main movements of national
liberation of South Africa: the African National Congress
and tire Pan Africanist Congress. To this systematic
camPa@ to eliminate the leaders of the black people of
Africa undertaken by Pretoria’s Fascist regime should be
added the pursuit of the bantustanization policy, which the
General Assembly has always condemned and which, in the
view of my delegation, is another means through which
Vorster weakens the black resistance movement.

16. Those acts of brutal repression on the part of Pretoria
clearly show that the international community cannot
expect the racist regime of the white minority voluntarily
to renounce its diabolical ideology and its sinister practices
without external pressure. That is why, on the threshold of
this International Anti-Apartheid Year, the Security Court.
cil should adopt appropriate measures calling on all Member
States, those which are not yet Members and all the
international organizations to cease treating with the racist
regime of South Africa, to discontinue any economic
co-operation with that regime and to adopt effective
measures to prevent such collaboration with Pretoria on the
part of credit and other institutions under their jurisdiction.
In this connexion, my delegation deeply regrets the latest
loan in the amount of $463 million recently granted by the
International Monetary Fund to South Africa. Such loans
can only strengthen apartheid., All indications noted in
recent years show that foreign firms operating in Soutlr
Africa and the credit institutions which have approved
loans to Pretoria are not only accomplices of the shameful
system of apartheid, but also create a whole gamut of
relationships that contribute to the strengthening of that
regime. My delegation therefore advocates the total isolation of South Africa in all fields-economic, trade, cultural,
sports, diplomatic and military-and calls upon countries

12. Par from reducing the morale of the freedom fighters,
such measures by the South African Government in fact
stimulate their very determined pursuit of the sacred
struggle to eliminate apartheid. The persistence of this
explosive situation represents a true threat to international
peace and security.
1% Can the Security Council, the supreme organ of the
llnited Nations which has specific responsibilities in the
marmenance ot international peace and security, remain
indifferent in the face of this state of affairs? My
2

--

which collaborate with that regime to follow a policy of
disengagement in all fields,

domestic jurisdiction and that, under the terms of Article 2,
paragraph 7, of the Charter, the United Nations is not
authorized to consider it. South Africa, then, did not
realize that this is the classic case of a country whose
foreign relations are determined largely by its domestic,
political and social structure. It is the domestic policy of
apartheid that ultimately determines South Africa’s relations with the rest of Africa and the world.

17. The Security Council, for its part, must go beyond the
selfish interests of some of its members and act in
accordance with its responsibilities by taking into consideration the security of millions of human beings whose only
crime is that of being black. By acting in this way, the
Council would be responding to the challenge which has
been continuously posed by the repressive Vorster regime
and would bc effectively assuming its responsibilities. The
Council must act in this way to preserve its prestige, its
authority and its credibility, for merely to speak out against
the atrocities of apart/z&d may be good, but to apply
effectively the decisions of the United Nations would be
even better. The Council must not endorse the popular idea
which has been expressed that many defenders of what is
right are only concerned over violations when they are
committed by their adversaries.

24. Apartheid is a unique system of government which
requires that skin colour shall be the crucial factor in the
daily lives of the nation’s 26 million people. All the evils in
South Africa have their roots in apartheid and are a
manifestation of it. Apnrtheid is unique among inhuman
practices because it brands a person right from birth
according to the colour of his skin. From the very moment
of conception, the non-white child is doomed to misery,
deprivation of rights and a lifetime of degradation. Apartheid, then, is not only an odious institution but is also
justly branded as a crime against humanity.

18. In conclusion, I should like to state that my delegation, as always, strongly condemns the ignoble system of
apartheid as well as all its practical manifestations, such as
political trials, arbitrary arrests and detentions, and bantustanization, which destroys the territorial integrity of the
country and its national unity and tends to perpetuate the
domination of the white racist minority and deprive the
black African majority of South Africa of its inalienable
rights.

25. The Government of South Africa has institutionalized
apartheid and transformed
it into an elitist ideology
requiring racial discrimination and the entrenchment of
white domination. The application of the concept of
apartheid has led to the fragmentation of South Africa into
racial and ethnic groups. It has also implied the establiahment of an authoritarian racial hierarchy which permeates
all aspects of society. The Government of South Africa is
actively fragmenting the people of South Africa into racial
and ethnic groups and effectively segregating them from
one another. Legislation, which is normally used to correct
inequities and injustice, is employed in South Africa as a
tool to make separation permanent and irrevocable. Intermarriage, for instance, is prohibited by the Immorality Act,
so that progeny of mixed race may not eventually bring the
ethnic groups closer together. Skilled work by blacks in
extractive industries was prohibited by the 1911 Colour Bar
Act. The Natives Land Act of 1913 restricted freehold
ownership of land to -whites. The Group Areas Act enacted
in 1950 established separate areas for racial groups. All
social amenities, such as buses, trains, cinemas, places of
public entertainment, beaches, restaurants and all residential areas are segregated on the basis of ethnic categories.

19. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, the delegation
of Kuwait was very happy to see in New York your
Commissioner for External Affairs, who took the trouble to
come to this city to preside over the first meeting of the
Security Council in 1978.
20. At the same time, I should like to convey to you our
sincerest and most profound congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, at a time when this body is once again examining
such an urgent problem as that of South Africa. Nigeria is
not only the largest country in Africa, but it has been
among those which have been actively seeking to eliminate
from the world the remnants of colonialism and apartheid
and to build a new world order based on the principles of
equality, justice and freedom for all nations regardless of
race, colour or any of the barriers that have been erected to
separate man from his fellow man.

26. The consolidation of apartheid culminated in South
Africa’s bantustan or homelands policy. As a result, only 13
per cent of South Africa’s territory nominally belongs to
the 18.6 million blacks, while 87 per cent is reserved for the
4.3 million whites. In the major cities, residential areas are
being razed and families displaced to complete the separation of the races.

21. I should like to express our thanks and appreciation to
all the members of the Council for the kind words of
welcome which they extended to the delegation of Kuwait
as it assumes its duty as a new member of the Council. Our
response to that sincere and genuine welcome is our pledge
for co-operation with them in the search for a better world.

27. The most ingenious device which South Africa has
invented for continuing the usurpation of power by the
minority is the system of bantustanization, which denies
the black man citizenship in his own country. The black
people are herded into the bantustans, which are empty
tracts of the veldt, as a reserve army of cheap labour. The
international community has rightly viewed the homelands
policy as a cruel hoax depriving the black people of South
Africa of their birthright. The homelands policy is one of
divide and rule. It is a deliberate attempt by the white

22. The question of South Africa has always had a
prominent place in the deliberations of the Security
Council. The same is true of the General Assembly, which
has been grappling with this problem since the world
Organization was founded.
23. The Pretoria regime has taken the position that the
policy of apartheid is essentially a matter within its
3

cessationof indiscriminateviolence againstpeacefuldemonstrators against apartheid and the murder and torture of
political prisonerswhile in detention.

Government to weaken the forces of black unity, which it
so much fears, and to reduce the possibility of black
majority rule in the country. It is significant that no single
memberof the internationalcommunity hasbeen willing to
recognhe either the Transkeior Bophuthatswana.

34. South Africa is the supremeand paramount adversary
of human rights. Its policy is in clear violation of the
principles enunciated in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which, in article 1, proclaims that “all
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and
rights”.

28. The Security COUIIC~I meetstoday to consider the
question of adoptingfurther measures
againstSouth Africa.
The GeneralAssemblyhasconsistently taken the initiative
by adopting a seriesof bold measuresto deal with the
problem. It was as early as 1962 that it adopted a
35. Therefore, South Africa is a garrisonState with a huge
resolution requestingMember States to break off diplomatic relationswith South Africa, close all ports to vessels war machine. It hasbecome increasinglymilitant in recent
years. The more it loses ground, the more militant and
flying the South African flag and prohibit their shipsfrom
aggressiveit becomes. A historic event of enormous
entering South African ports, boycott all South African
magnitude took place in April 1974 and had a decisive
goodsandrefrain from exporting goods,including armsand
impact on the conduct of South Africa, when the Porammunition, to South Africa, and refuse landing and
tugueseGovernmentat Lisbon wasoverthrown in a military
passagefacilities t0 South African aircraft [resohtion
coup that shattered one of the strongholdsof colonialism
1761 (XVII)].
and apartheid in Africa. The decolonization of Portugal’s
29. My Governmentdid not draw any distinction between
African colonies followed, resulting in the removal of
sympathetic white rulers from the buffer States of Mozama recommendationof the GeneralAssembly and a binding
bique and Angola and the exposure of the white Governresolutionor decisionof the Security Council, The Council
ments of Rhodesiaand South Africa to the chill wind of
of Ministers of Kuwait took immediate action to embody
African revolutionary nationalism. The causeof freedomis
within the domesticlaw of our country provisions of that
indivisible everywhere. Naturally, the downfall of the
resolutionassoonasit wasadopted.
Portuguesecolonial regimegave additional aid and support
to an African upheaval of unprecedented proportions
30. As early as 1962, the General Assembly askedthe
within South Africa itself. The dramatic shift in Portugal
Security Council to take appropriate measures,including
removed the buffers againstthe upsurgein African nationalsanctions,to secureSouth Africa’s compliance with the
ism. Portuguese protection of South Africa’s flanks was
resolutionsof the Assemblyand the Council[ibid.]. It can
gone and, in its place, movements dedicated to African
be clearly seennow that the rehrctance of the Council
effectively to apply economic sanctions encouragedthe
nationalismwere coming to power. South Africa sawin the
South African Governmentin its independent course and
Portuguesechangesa reflection of its own destiny. This
defianceof the UnitedNations.
would account for South Africa’s unsuccessfulmilitary
intervention in Angola, the escalatingguerrilla wars on the
31. South Africa’s foreign policy and conduct have many
Rhodesian and Namibian borders and South Africa’s
aspectswhich call for a diversity of reactions.
repeatedattacks on its African neighbours.
32. South Africa is, in our view, essentially a colonial
Power. Its policies are at variance with the anti-colonial
movementasexpressed
in the achievementof independence
throughout Africa. The basicinternal racial features of the
country, including the denial of political rights to blacks
andeconomicexploitation, date back to colonial times.

36. It can thus be seen that these endemic problems,
which have agitated the international community for the
past three decades,are all the outcomeof the immutability
of South Africa’s racial policies, aroundwhich all the other
problemsultimately turn.
37. The Security Council is in duty bound to meet
periodically to review the situation in South Africa and to
seewhat further measuresshould be adopted against the
racist regimeat Pretoria. The Council hasbefore it today a
review of developmentsin South Africa sincethe adoption
of resolution 4 17 (1977) [see S/12536]. The review clearly
statesthat South Africa has rejected the saidresolution, as
usual on the grounds that the subject falls within the
purview of its domesticpolicies.

33. South Africa is a reactionary Power that employs the
most oppressivemeasures
to repressthe national movement
within its territory. The massacre
at SharpevilIewas a clear
indication of what the Government of South Africa
intendedto do wheneverits policiesmet with a measureof
domestic resistancefrom the black majority. That unfortunate incident wasa forewarning of what would follow in
the form of an organized and steadfast policy of terror
employed by the State to crushopposition and overcome
resistance.It shouldalsohaveput an end to any prospectof
a peaceful evolution towards majority rule. Thenceforth,
South Africa deniedthe most elementary human rights to
the vast majority of its citizens. Resolutionsof the General
Assembly abound in exhortations for an end to violence
against and repressionof the black population and other
opponents of apartheid, for the releaseof all persons
imprisoned under arbitrary security laws and all those
detained for their opposition to apnrtheid, and for thf

38. SO long as South Africa refusesto abolishthe policy
of bantustanization, to abandonthe policy of apartheid and
to ensuremajority rule basedon justice and equality, it will
continue to wage a war of terror againstthe African people
and the nationalistmovement.
39. South Africa’s oppressive measuresare now applied
against white personswho, on humane, moral and other
grounds, object to its apartheid policy. One of the victims
4

who received a great deal of publicity lately is Mr. Donald
Woods, editor of the East London Daily Dispatch, who
volunteered to appear before the Council yesterday
[2056t?z meeting] as a witness to describe from first-hand
knowledge the evils of apartheid in South Africa, My
delegation would, indeed, like to commend Mr. Woods for
his courage and the strength of his moral and political
convictions. It is heartening to note that not only African
people, but even white persons who are supposed to be the
main beneficiaries of the policy of apartheid, are now
prepared to condemn that policy openly and extend the
hand of friendship, coexistence and support to the nationalists in South Africa.

45. While we all share in the pleasure of welcoming new
members, we know that we have also Iost good friends and
collaborators with the departure from the Council of Benin,
Libya, Pakistan, Panama and Romania. Their representatives all made important contributions to the work of the
Council and they will be greatly missed. I especially regret,
of course, the departure of my two African brothers,
Mr. Boya of Benin and Mr. Kikhia of Libya. Their hard
work, clarity and firmness of purpose helped to ensure that
the voice of the African Group was heard in the Council
during last year.
46. There is no point in our discussing here the evils of
apartheid. We are all aware of the nature of the racist
regime that exists in South Africa today. The matter has
been discussed at the United Nations again and again, in all
its details and in all its horror. One might even say that we
have become too familiar with the history of inhumanity,
terror, violence and oppression in South Africa. I say “too
familiar” because we have heard the same stories and the
same words so many times that we seem to have become
inured to their meaning. We seem unable to comprehend
and to feel the cries of pain and suffering.

40. The review contained in document S/12536 gives a
lucid account of developments in South Africa that must
prompt the Council to take further action. The Council has
already taken a bold step in adopting resolution 418 (1977)
which imposed an arms embargo on South Africa. As a new
member of the Council, my delegation does not wish to
start by charting a whole course of action for the Council,
especially as it is meeting now to review recent developments and to listen to witnesses. However, I should like to
assure the Council that my Government supports drastic
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter against the
Pretoria rhgirne to compel it to abolish its policy of
bantustanization, to abandon its policy of apartheid and to
ensure majority rule based on justice and equality.

47. Why do I say that? For the simple reason that, when
we come down to it, we do very little to help those who are
brutalized and oppressed, the vast majority of the South
African people. Cynics will say that this is nai’ve, that in a
world of nation States and modern power one cannot
expect anything else. This is, of course, nothing but
cynicism, a defence against the tension between the
knowledge of what is right and the feeling of impotence.
Feelings of impotence are exactly that. They arc subjective.
They do not, in these matters, measure objective facts but
rather moral sensitivity, humanity, courage and individual
resolve. Cynicism, therefore, is not really worth taking
seriously. It cannot, by its nature, be a philosophy of life. It
is a philosophy of surrender.

41. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, let me
congratulate you, first of all, on the election of Nigeria to
the Security Council and on your own assumption of the
important office of President for this month. Nigeria has
been one of the foremost supporters of the cause of
liberation on our continent, and it is therefore particularly
fitting that its representative should be presiding over our
deliberations as we take up the item of South Africa once
again. As a brother African, I look forward to working with
you during the coming year, and I know that your qualities
of leadership, patience and wisdom will help us greatly in
carrying out our responsibilities in conformity with the
requirements of the Charter.

48. I am not at all ashamed to say, therefore, that the
Charter of the United Nations means something. The ideals
enshrined in it are not mere verbiage, It is proof enough to
point out that the cynics refer to it whenever it suits their
own narrow purposes, The world community has been
using the principles of the Charter for 32 years in an effort
to build a more just and rational international order.
Progress has been very slow, but progress there has been.
The Charter is alive, and, under the Charter, the United
Nations has accumulated a unique set of obligations to the
people of South Africa. It is obligated to take action that
will help to end the system of apartheid and not to make
speeches as an end in itself. The Security Council recognized this fact when it instituted a mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa a few weeks ago under
Chapter VII of the Charter.

42. I should also like to welcome the other new members-Gabon, Kuwait, Bolivia and Czechoslovakia-who
are
joining us now. Their representatives all have distinguished
records of service to their countries, and I am sure that they
will make an important contribution to the work of the
Council.
43. I should like to add that my Government is particularly happy to welcome the representative of Gabon to
the Council. At the time it was elected to the Council,
Gabon also assumed the presidency of the Organization of
African Unity, and Ambassador N’Dong will therefore
speak with added authority here. His presence in the
Council will help us immeasurably with our work.

49. The difficulty we confront here today, the difficulty
we have confronted repeatedly in the Council, is that as a
collective entity we are unwilling to take the action that is
obviously called for by circumstances. Consequently we go
round and round in circles when the question of South
Africa comes up. We make the same speeches and utter the
same denunciations of apartheid. By doing this, we make
this Council inhuman. We show that, although we hear the

44. I am particularly happy that the seat on my right,
which was occupied last year by my beloved African
brother, Mr, Kikhia of Libya, is now occupied by my
brother, Mr. Bishara of Kuwait, with whom I have had a
very long and friendly personal relationship.
5

cries of pati and suffering, we do not relate words to
action, we do not react as our humanity dictates, as we
must.

investment. Long-term net capital inflow in recent years has
been in excess of 20 per cent of domestic capital formation.
New bank lending has been running at unprecedented rates.
Foreign capital is helping to cover South Africa’s large trade
deficit, to ensure the transfer of modern technology and to
maintain the growth of the economy as a whole. Bank
loans, in many instances, are being used to fiance South
Africa’s strategic growth programme. In a report on United
States corporate interests in Africa released two days ago
by the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Senator
Dick Clark concluded: “The net effect of American
investment has been to strengthen the economic and
military self-sufficiency
of South Africa’s apartheid
regime”. When, in addition, one considers the volume of
capital moving to South Africa from Europe, it becomes
clear that foreign investment and loans are of crucial
importance to the Pretoria regime.

50. I emphasize the word “dictates” here because a whole
series of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
has carried us to the point where we must take action.
These resolutions, based upon the principles Of the Charter,
express the considered judgement of the world community
on the remedies to be taken against apartheid. Their
evolution has a logic which carries US ineluctably to the
point we have now reached. If these resolutions have no
force, then the Organization cannot be what it is supposed
to be and what the world needs.
5 1, Our obligations are, therefore, very clear. The problem
now is to determine what kinds of action the United
Nations can take at this juncture which will put significant
pressure on the Vorster regime. In the view of my
delegation, four things need to be done in the near future.

55. Foreign trade is also of great importance to South
Africa. That country now imports some $8 billion or
$9 billion worth of goods each year. This is the equivalent
of roughly 25 per cent of the gross domestic product. It is
clear, therefore, that economic sanctions, even if they were
imposed by stages, would have devastating consequences
for South Africa. Economic sanctions are now the single
most important lever available to the outside world for
exerting pressure on the Pretoria regime.

52. First, effective machinery must be created to ensure
that the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa will
be properly implemented. A first step has been taken in this
direction, but much more needs to be done. At the present
moment, the “policing” of the embargo is really in the
hands of individual States. This is not a satisfactory
situation, A number of separate investigations have now
shown that the voluntary arms embargo called for by the
Council in 1963 was never effective. It was systematically
violated by a number of States, with the consequence that
South Africa was able to acquire large quantities of modem
weapons and military equipment even after 1963. The
Council must take measures to ensure that the United
Nations will be able to carry out this task independently.
The Secretariat must be given adequate staff and funds to
comiuct its own investigations, to study the organization of
the world arms trade and to alert world opinion to
viclations of the embargo. If proper machinery to do these
things is not created within the Organization, then resolution 418 (1977) could become practically meaningless.

56. Fourthly,
the Council must make certain that
adequate machinery is created in the Secretariat to ensure
the implementation of economic sanctions. That would be
an enormous and complex task, requiring a significant
expansion of staff in the Secretariat. It might be necessary
to create something like an entirely new division, responsible to the Council. Procedures would have to be devised
to ensure that the work of gathering and analysing
information would be able to proceed without hindrance.
57. I think that many delegations-and not just those of
the African Group-agree that those things need to be done
and that they need to be done in the very near future. We
all know, however, that there is one seemingly insuperable
obstacle to our taking decisions of that kind. The major
Western Powers do not believe that the time is ripe for such
measures. Furthermore, they have the power of veto in the
Council. They have exercised it in the past and they can be
expected to exercise it in the future.

53. Secondly, it is clear that the Council can and should
proceed to order an oil embargo against South Africa.
Extensive research in the past two years has shown that
South Africa has failed to implement the mandatory
sanctions ordered a decade ago against Southern Rhodesia.
The five major oil companies operating in South Africa
have been allowed to ship oil and oil products steadily to
the Smith regime. In fact, supplies seem to have suffered
only minor interruptions over the 12 years since the
unilateral declaration of independence. Thus South Africa
has conspired to frustrate United Nations efforts to impose
sanctions on the renegade Smith regime in an almost
blatant way. Now that the facts have come to light,
something must be done about it. The next logical step is to
impose oil sanctions against South Africa as long as it
refuses to ensure the cessation of shipments to Southern
Rhodesia.

58. In passing, in this context I wish to express my
appreciation for some measures being taken by Canada. It is
withdrawing all Canadian trade commissioners from South
Africa, which wiII lead, inter alia, to the closing of the
Consulate General at Johannesburg. Under the Export and
Development Corporation-which
is something like the
United States Export-Import Bank-Canada is terminating
government-supported commercial activities in terms of
export credits, investments and insurances. Canada will
soon require visas of all South Africans for entry into
Canada. Canada is examining its capacity to renounce the
Commonwealth Tariff Preference for South Africa. Canada
is considering further measures in relation to developments
in South Africa and the region. Those measures are very
encouraging and we cannot but appreciate them.

54. Thirdly, the Council should proceed to invoke economic sarMions against South Africa under Chapter VII of
the Charter. It is well known that South Africa is now more
dependent than ever on foreign loans and foreign direct
6

59. Of course, the major Western Powers could not
exercise the veto without giving reasons. It is therefore
worth devoting some time to considering the arguments
which are now offered to justify further delay,

would not take place in South Africa for 10 years. That
may or may not be true-let us hope it is true. I myself am
doubtful of that. However, let us for the moment grant the
point. Does it follow for a moment from such an
assumption that one should be willing to wait for 10 years
while outsiders seek to rearrange the South African social
order to suit their own interests? It is clear that the losers
in such a situation would be the South African people. Will
they have to endure 10 more years of what they have been
enduring and worse, in order to placate the average investor
in certain distant countries? That is a strange, twisted logic
which is incomprehensible to most of us.

60. The main argument which is being used these days is
that change in South Africa can be brought about peacefully. We all hope so. C. L. Sulzberger quoted the views of a
prominent Western ambassador on the matter in The New
York Times of 16 November 1977. The ambassador was
quoted as saying:
“Large-scale fighting [in. South Africa] is not in the
cards for at least ten years. It is important for us to use
this coming decade to promote peaceful changes there.
We must use our diplomatic and economic power to
accomplish this.”

65. I feel bound to say that that kind of argument, which
we hear so often today, seems to be nothing more than a
rationalization for delay in taking effective action against
the present regime in South Africa. There is no rhyme or
reason to those arguments. When one probes their meaning,
one finds one contradiction after another.

The ambassador later added in his interview: ‘&We must
serve our own interests. . . by insisting on stability, order
and progress”.

66. There is however no mystery about the reason for
those empty pronouncements. They are made by Powers
which take the view that they have vital interests in South
Africa which will be threatened if the present social order is
destroyed. They take the view that they must protect their
investments, that they must have access to adequate
supplies of raw materials and cheap labour, and that they
must be sure that a “friendly Power” is in control to ensure
the “freedom of the sea lanes around the Cape”. These
Powers no longer hesitate to say that they are “concerned”
about the intentions of those who will eventually take
power in South Africa. They fear that the liberation
movement, which has struggled for decades to win freedom
for the South African people, will prove “immoderate” in
the future. And they therefore state clearly that they will
not apologize for serving “their own interests” in a distant
land, even if “serving” them implies the “stability” of
apartheid.

61. Frankly, it is difficult to see any historical, political or
human logic in that argument. First, it is clear that such a
view of the possibilities in the present situation is entirely
unrealistic. We have been hearing about “peaceful changes”
in South Africa for years. The Pretoria regime is, however,
clearly not interested in changes of any kind. Everything
that has happened in recent months indicates that the
South African regime is becoming more and more intransigent: it is arming to the teeth, it is eliminating almost
every imaginable semblance of free speech, and political
dissidents are being gaoled and tortured. In short, the South
African State is exerting ever tighter control. Where is the
political space in South Africa within which people can
work for real change? It is apparent to most of us that
there is none.
62. Furthermore, what kind of “changes” is the ambassador talking about? The people of South Africa are clear
that they want an end to apartheid. They know, and most
of us know, that that inevitably means the dismantling of
the economic and social system which now exists in South
Africa. It is that system that we have all been working to
end. “Stability and order” in South Africa may be in the
interests of certain Powers; they are not what South
Africans want now, “Stability and order” to the great
majority of South Africans mean oppression and violence.
“Progress” for them means breaking up the “order” which
currently exists. To link all those words together in the
South African context is to engage in the most cynical
word play. It makes those words meaningless.

67. My delegation feels that the time has come to cut
through the verbiage which has so frequently obscured the
real issues in our deliberations over South Africa. We feel
obliged to say that we can no longer take seriously or
accept at face value the kinds of facile and even occasionally nonsensical theories of progress and change which
we have heard from certain quarters for some time. We
regard these arguments as a diversion and a trap.
68. I should like, then, to ask that the Council should take
a further and important step in the direction of the goals I
have outlined in this statement. With that understanding,
the African members of the Council will submit two draft
resolutions which are being prepared by the African Group.
The first will, I believe, essentially recapitulate things which
have been said before and condemn South Africa for the
violence and repression which are becoming increasingly the
norm in that tragic country. The second, however, will
probably go much further. It will probably call upon all
States to cease loans and investments to South Africa, to
prevent corporations or institutions under their control
from investing in or lending money to South Africa, to
terminate investment and trade incentives now applicable
to that country and, finally, to review their economic and
other relations with South Africa. The African Group

63. In addition, by what right do outside Powers assert
that they “must use” their diplomatic and economic power
to preserve or construct a particular kind of social order in
a country like South Africa? Is that not the height of
arrogance? Surely, the task of reconstructing South Africa
when apartheid has been dismantled is something which
must be left to the people of that country. Has the
principle of sovereignty been thrown out of the window
with the growth of transnational corporations?
64. Finally, one must note a strange implication in that
argument. The ambassador stated that large-scale fighting
7

regards the adoption of the second draft resolution as an
important, indeed necessary, step at this time.

gratitude to all States Members of the United Nations
which, by such a convincing majority of votes, showedso
much confidence in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
and entrusted such an honourable responsibility to our
country.

69. I am tempted to say that the African Group may not
feel obliged to accept the rules of the game in the Security
Council too much longer. The veto has been used too
frequently, and its use has hurt Africa. It may well be that,
in the event of further vetoes, the African Group may
decide to ask all African delegations to cease participating
in the deliberations of the Council until such time as the
Council meets its unique obligations to the people of South
Africa. We realize that there may be some disadvantages in
such a course. However, it is widely recognized that the
rules of the game at this time are antiquated and inadequate. We do not propose to say now how they should be
changed. None the less, we feel it necessary to put members
on notice that if the rules are used again to prolong the
suffering of the South African people, we shall have to seek
remedies not foreseen in the rules.

72. The CzechoslovakSocialist Republic has come to the
Security Council fully determined to co-operateconstructively with all its memberstowards the attainment of the
goalsof the United Nations aslaid down in the Charter.
73. The fundamental policy of the CzechoslovakSocialist
Republic in the United Nations has always been and
remains the wish to strive, along with all the other
Members, to make the further deepeningof the principles
of coexistence between States having different social
systems and the principles of comprehensiveconstructive
and mutually advantageousco-operation an integral part of
the daily work of all organsof the United Nations. In our
view, what we have to do, with the assistance
of the United
Nations and the means available to it, is to work for the
stabilization of the processof international detente which is
already under way and to make that processuniversal,
generaland irreversible.

70. Mr. HULINSK$! (Czechoslovakia) (irzterpretution from
Russian): I should like first to express my particular
satisfaction at the fact that you, Mr. President, the representative of an African country, are conducting the
proceedingsof the Security Council during the first month
of 1978. As we seeit, the questionsconnected with the
total liberation of southernAfrica will be kept under the
constant considerationof the Council throughout the year.
CzechoslovakiaandNigeriahave identical positionq qn the
question of the struggleagainstcolonialism, racism and
apartheid, as was confirmed once again during the highly
successfulvisit to the CzechoslovakSocialist Republic in
April last year by the Commissioner
for External Affairs of
Nigeria. In a joint communiquepublished in that connexion, the following is stated:

74. After only a short interval, the Security Council is
once againcompelled to take up the questionof the policy
of apartheid pursuedby the racist regimeat Pretoria. Such
close attention to this question is to be explained by the
fact that the situation in South Africa representsa direct
threat to the security.of peoples.Not a singleday goesby
without world public opinion learning of tragic events in
South Africa. In its desire to suppressinternal resistance,
the Pretoria regime is waging a veritable war againstthe
oppressed population. The illegal apartkeid regime has
raisedthe systemof violence and,repressionto the level of
State policy-a policy that is being consolidatedby further
legislative, administrative and other measuresbased on
racial discrimination. All these actions on the part of the
South African racists and their acts of aggressionagainst
independent African States clearly indicate the determination of the apartheid regime at all costs to preserve its
colonial domination over the indigenousAfrican population.

“On African affairs the Commissionerfor External
Affairs and his Czechoslovakcounterpart reaffirmed their
support for the peoplesof Namibia,Zimbabwe and South
Africa in their just struggleagainstcolonialism, racism
and apartheid. They condemnedthe racist policies being
practised in southern Africa as an affront to the conscienceof mankind and a defianceof the resolutions of
the United Nations. Convinced that the liquidation of
theseevilsin southernAfrica would facilitate the relaxation of tensionandthe solution of conflicts in other parts
of the world, they calledon all peace-lovingnations to act
firmly in support of the oppressedpeoples of southern
Africa for the final liquidation of colonialist and neocolonialistpoliciesof racismand apartheid.“’

75. An objective analysisof the current situation in South
Africa compels the conclusion that the apartheid regime
would have long ago ceasedto exist, and that the sourceof
constant danger in that part of the world would long ago
have been removed if aII Member Stateshad compiled with
the decisionsof the Organization and ceasedto afford any
support whatsoever to the South African racists. Preservation of the apartheid regimedependsupon the constant
influx of foreign capital and the comprehensivesupport
afforded it, however overtly or covertly, by Western
countries in their attempts to preservetlieir own military
strategic interestsin that part of the world aswell as the
economic and financial interests of the transnational
corporations.

71. Speakingfor the first time in the Security Council
since Czechoslovakiabecamea member, I should like to
join in the congratulationsthat have been expressedto the
delegationsof your country, Mr. President, and Gabon,
Bolivia and Kuwait, which, together with us, have just
begun their work here. In my turn, I should like to thank
you for your words of welcome to my delegation. We
should like also to thank the representativesof all the
members of the Council who have congratulated our
country on its assumptionof its functions in the Council.
Last, but by no meansleast, I would express my deep

76. The Organization has in its possession
a great deal of
evidence of this comprehensiveco-operationand assistance.
Permit me to mention merely the fact that, since1960, the
total amount of foreign capital investment in the South

1 Quoted in English by the speaker.

8

African economy has increased more than five-fold and has
now reached the sum of $20 billion. In spite of all the
appeals of the United Nations, South Africa continues to
import from Western countries all the modern technology
and new techniques necessary for its economy to continue
to grow. It is only becauseof this support and co-operation
that the South African racists can avoid the consequences
of the ever increasing determination of the indigenous
population to eliminate forthwith the repugnant phenomenon of racial repression.
77. In the struggle against apartheid, general condemnations have long proved inadequate. What are necessary are
immediate and effective international measures that could
bring about the early elimination of this inhuman policy.
The adoption of urgent and effective measures against
South Africa is necessary also because the South African
Republic is the main obstacle to progress in the attainment
of a just solution to the problem of the transfer of power to
the African majority in Zimbabwe and Namibia.

78. The adoption of the mandatory arms embargo against
South Africa was a definite step in this direction. However,
the arms embargo against South Africa, which is in any case
sufficiently well armed and able to produce nuclear
weapons, cannot bring about the necessary results unless
further effective measures are taken, measures designed
totally to isolate the apartheid regime and to deprive it of
any support whatsoever from outside.

79. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic vigorously supports the demands of African and other States for the
adoption of economic and other sanctions against the
apartheid rkgime. We whole-heartedly endorse the view on
the question of the policy of apartheid expressed in the
course of the last session of the General Assembly by the
Commissioner for External Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Garba,
who said:
“The time has come for a total arms embargo against
the racist rbgimes, a total embargo on all strategic
materials which oil their war machines, and total economic sanctions. The Western Powers, which have fuelled
the crisis by all their past pampering of the racist rigirnes,
must be called upon to act, even at this late stage.“*
80. In conclusion, I should like to reassure those fighting
against racism and apartheid that, in accordance with the
principles of its socialist foreign policy, the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic will continue to afford them full
political, material and moral assistanceand support in their
just struggle for freedom and independence.
The meetingroseat 12.50 p.m.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 67th meeting, para. 37.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Uniter1
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.

MqqaHm
Opranuaaqun
06zenaaeanblx
HaqwR
MOX~O IQTIWT~ a KI~WICHLIX MaraJNH~X w areaTcTaax
80 Bcex pafioxax
Mupa. Haao~ure
cnpanxa
06 U3AaHAHX
B
BarneM KHUXHOM ieara3me
mu nm.u~~e no aapecy : Opran~saqnn
06zenm4enHblx
Ha&%,
CeKuua no npofla>rte HJA&HNC~,
HLM-MOPK
wnu Xeneaa.
COMO

Litho

in United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

7&700&j-December

19’
