A /71/PV.80

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

80th plenary meeting

Thursday, 4 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Bin Momen
(Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/71/764/Add.6 and
A/71/764/Add.7)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping
with established practice, to draw the attention of
the General Assembly to documents A/71/764/Add.6
and Add.7, in which the Secretary-General informs
the President of the General Assembly that, since the
issuance of his communication contained in document
A/71/764/Add.5, the Sudan and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela have made the payments necessary to
reduce their arrears below the amounts specified in
Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in documents
A/71/764/Add.6 and Add. 7?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at, its 65th plenary meeting, on 19 December 2016,
the General Assembly concluded its consideration of

agenda item 106. In order for the Assembly to take
action on the draft resolution before it today, it will be
necessary to reopen the Assembly’s consideration of
that item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of agenda
item 106?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 106
to the Third Committee. In order to enable the General
Assembly to take action expeditiously on the document,
may I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to consider agenda item 106 directly in plenary meeting
and to proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 106 (continued)
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Draft resolution (A/71/L.65)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.65, entitled
“Modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/71/L.65?

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-12522 (E)

*1712522*

A/71/PV.80

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
71/287).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position following the
adoption of the resolution, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I have the honour to deliver
this joint explanation of position on behalf of Australia,
Iceland, Liechtenstein, New Zealand and my own
country, Canada.
Let me begin by thanking the co-facilitators for
their work in bringing resolution 71/287 forward. We
appreciate their efforts.
Our delegations joined the consensus on this
resolution in order to allow the substantive work on
an important event to commence as soon as possible.
However, we wish to express our disappointment with
the substance of the resolution and the process leading
to its adoption, in four areas in particular.
First, the text falls short of our expectations in
that it does not reflect key developments that have
taken place since the adoption of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
in 2010 — most prominently the 2030 Agenda, which
references human trafficking and modern slavery in
three of its 17 goals. In our view, that constitutes an
important and carefully negotiated shift to a broader and
more comprehensive approach than the one reflected in
the Global Plan of Action. In not reflecting the fact that
new challenges have emerged since the adoption of the
Globan Plan of Action, it runs the risk of adopting and
outdated approach instead of taking the opportunity
to move a key aspect of the 2030 Agenda forward in
its human rights, development and law enforcement
dimensions. This concern was expressed clearly by
our delegations in the negotiating process. We regret
that the text does not reflect our suggestions. Our
expectation is that the political declaration will remedy
this deficiency, as discussed with the co-facilitators in
our bilateral consultations.
Secondly, while we appreciate the efforts of the
co-facilitators to deliver a consensus outcome, the
text does not enable the engagement of the full range
of stakeholders working on trafficking at national and
international levels. We recognize the importance of
national human rights institutions being invited to engage
2/3

04/05/2017

in the preparatory one-day meeting. It is regrettable,
however, that they will not be able to participate in the
high-level meeting itself in an independent capacity. As
our delegations noted throughout the negotiations, the
participation of national human rights institutions in
any other form, including on Government delegations,
can compromise their purpose and objectives and might
also mean that many are not invited to participate at all.
As recognized by a growing number of United Nations
bodies and processes, including recent modalities
discussions, national human rights institutions have
significant contributions to make to our deliberations
at the United Nations. We will certainly be looking
to ensure that this is recognized in our substantive
discussions on this issue moving forward.
Thirdly, we also regret that the resolution does not
invite special procedures mandate-holders to attend the
high-level meeting, other than the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons. This is in direct contradiction
to the Global Plan of Action, in which we supported the
role and mandates of a range of special mandate-holders.
It also contradicts the shift, as expressed in the 2030
Agenda, to a broader and more comprehensive approach
to combat trafficking in persons and modern slavery.
Finally, we would like to underline that any
outcome must complement what was agreed upon in the
Global Plan of Action, in order to assist us in achieving
our common goal to combat and eradicate trafficking
in persons and modern slavery. This document should
also reflect the important developments that have taken
place since the adoption of the Global Plan of Action,
including by identifying gaps and areas where greater
or new focus may be required to implement the different
elements of the Global Plan of Action.
Mr. Inguanez (Malta): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its 28 member States.
The European Union would like to thank the
co-facilitators for all their work on resolution 71/287. We
participated in the three rounds of informal negotiations
and we recognize the difficulty of reaching consensus.
We also thank all delegations for their constructive
engagement on the text.
However, we regret that several proposals, which
are important to the European Union and which we
believe would have strengthened key elements of the
resolution, were not accepted during the negotiations.
Given the crucial contribution of civil society to the
fight against trafficking, we would have preferred
17-12522

04/05/2017

a more inclusive and transparent approach to civil
society participation.
While we appreciate the inclusion of national human
rights institutions in the resolution adopted, it would
have been preferable to invite such bodies to participate
in the high-level meeting independently of their
respective national delegations, not least because of the
importance of safeguarding their autonomous status.
Furthermore, while we welcome the inclusion
of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, in the opening plenary
meeting, we believe that all United Nations special
procedures mandate-holders and treaty bodies working
on trafficking and related issues should have been
invited to participate in the high-level meeting.
In the light of the important developments over the
years since the adoption of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
we believe it would have been appropriate for one of
the panels to focus on emerging issues in the field
of trafficking.

A/71/PV.80

Once again, we would like to express our
appreciation to the co-facilitators. We look forward
to constructive and transparent negotiations towards
agreement on the political declaration. The European
Union is strongly committed to the fight against
trafficking in persons. We look forward to the high-level
meeting as an opportunity to discuss this important
issue in the United Nations and further enhance our
joint efforts to eradicate trafficking in persons.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Catherine Boura of Greece and Ambassador
Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani of Qatar, co-facilitators of
the informal consultations, who demonstrated great
ability and patience in their conduct of the discussions
and complex negotiations on resolution 71/287. I also
thank members for their valuable contributions to
reaching agreement on the resolution.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 106.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.

17-125223/3
