UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/632
12 August 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 12 AUGUST 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached letter, dated 11 August 1997,
which I have received from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of Italy to the United Nations (see annex). Attached to the letter is the
eleventh and final biweekly report on the multinational protection force for
Albania requested by the Security Council in its resolutions 1101 (1997) of
28 March and 1114 (1997) of 19 June 1997.
I should appreciate your bringing the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-21525 (E)

120897

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/632
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 11 August 1997 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to submit the eleventh and final report on the
multinational protection force for Albania (see appendix). The report is
submitted pursuant to the requirement set out in paragraph 9 of Security Council
resolution 1114 (1997) of 19 June 1997, in which the Council requested the
Member States participating in the multinational protection force to provide
reports, at least every two weeks, through the Secretary-General, to the
Council. The tenth such report was conveyed to you on 30 July 1997 (see
S/1997/601).
I should be grateful if you could have the text of the present letter and
the eleventh report circulated as a document of the Security Council.

(Signed) Paolo CASARDI
Chargé d'affaires a.i.

/...

S/1997/632
English
Page 3

Appendix
Eleventh and final report to the Security Council on
the operation of the multinational protection force
in Albania

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
On 28 March 1997, the Security Council adopted resolution 1101 (1997), in
paragraph 2 of which it welcomed the offer made by certain Member States to
establish a temporary and limited multinational protection force to facilitate
the safe and prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance and to help create a
secure environment for the missions of international organizations in Albania,
including those providing humanitarian assistance.
2.
On 19 June 1997, the Security Council adopted resolution 1114 (1997), in
paragraph 2 of which it welcomed the readiness of the countries contributing to
the multinational protection force to maintain their military contingents in
Albania for a limited time. In paragraph 3 of the resolution, the Council
welcomed the intention of the countries contributing to the force to continue to
facilitate the safe and prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance and to help
create a secure environment for the missions of international organizations in
Albania, including those providing humanitarian assistance. It also took note
of all the elements contained in the sixth report on the operation of the
multinational protection force in Albania (see S/1997/460), concerning,
inter alia, the electoral monitoring mission of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and decided that the operation would be limited to
a period of 45 days from 28 June 1997.
3.
In both resolutions, the Security Council requested the Member States
participating in the multinational protection force to provide periodic reports
to the Council through the Secretary-General, at least every two weeks. The
first 10 reports on the operation of the force were provided on 9 and 25 April,
9 and 23 May, 6, 13 and 26 June and 2, 16 and 30 July 1997.
4.
This is the eleventh and last report to the Security Council on the
operation of the multinational protection force in Albania and is submitted to
the Council at the conclusion of the operation for a final assessment of the
situation.

II.

MULTINATIONAL PROTECTION FORCE
A.

Political guidance

5.
The Steering Committee, consisting of the political directors of the 11
troop-contributing countries and the Commander of the operation, followed the
overall situation on the ground and the full compliance of the activities of the
Force with the Security Council mandate. It had held meetings on 4, 9, 14, 23

/...

S/1997/632
English
Page 4

and 30 April, 6, 13, 14 and 22 May, 4, 10, 20, 25 and 29 June and 2, 15, 23 and
30 July.
6.
Representatives of the following international organizations attended the
meetings of the Steering Committee as observers, as appropriate: the United
Nations and its related agencies, the OSCE, the European Union (EU), the Western
European Union (WEU) and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

B.

Cooperation with Albanian authorities and with
international organizations

7.
Albanian representatives attended several meetings of the Steering
Committee when appropriate and provided information on developments in the
political situation in Albania.
8.
The force facilitated the safe and prompt delivery of humanitarian
assistance and helped create a secure environment for the missions of
international organizations in Albania, including those providing humanitarian
assistance, in accordance with the mandate defined in resolutions 1101 (1997)
and 1114 (1997).
9.
The force has helped to create a secure environment during the electoral
process, in particular for the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights/Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe missions, in the
framework of the Security Council mandate.
10. Two international meetings on Albania were convened at Rome, on 26 May and
31 July 1997, under the chairmanship of the Italian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Lambarto Dini. All the troop-contributing countries and Finland,
Germany, Japan, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, the Russian Federation,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America attended the meetings. The following
international organizations were also present: the United Nations and its
related agencies, EU, OSCE, the Council of Europe, WEU, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World
Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the European
Investment Bank (EIB) and ICRC. Albania participated in the meetings at a
political level.

C.

Force deployment

11. The multinational protection force was formed through the contributions of
11 countries, with Italy as the leading nation. During the electoral process
the force reached its maximum deployment, with the following national units
present in Albania:

/...

S/1997/632
English
Page 5

Country

Number and type of unit
(total strength)

Austria

1 company (110)

Belgium

1 medical unit (14)

Denmark

1 company (56)

France

1 navy infantry regiment (938)

Greece

1 infantry regiment (797)

Italy

1 infantry regiment
1 para regiment
1 logistic regiment
2 mechanized infantry regiments
2 aviation battalions
1 assault para regiment
1 signal regiment
1 military police regiment
1 navy infantry battalion
1 field hospital (3,778)

Portugal

1 C-130 aircraft and crew

Romania

1 mixed infantry battalion (398)

Slovenia

1 medical unit (24)

Spain

1 infantry battalion (342)

Turkey

1 navy infantry regiment (758)

A total of 7,215 units were deployed.
on 11 August.

The withdrawal of the force was completed

12. In order to fulfil its mandate, the multinational protection force carried
out 1,598 missions, covering a total of 2,735,764 kilometres. The following
activities were performed: 1,397 daily escorts, 65 route security missions, 27
dedicated escorts for long humanitarian missions, 151 reconnaissance missions
and 37 sanitary missions. During the political elections the multinational
protection force provided security to 238 OSCE teams, covering a total of 12,000
kilometres. Within the security framework provided by the force, the following
humanitarian aid was distributed to 73 different locations: 5,168.3 tons of
food, 176 tons of seed, 339 tons of medicines, 63 tons of clothes, 10 tons of
building materials, 4 tons of school supplies and various vehicles and machinery
for rubbish collection and water purification. In order to provide the
necessary logistic support to the operation, 59 sea-lift missions were
performed, covering 3,193 nautical miles, with 3,722 navigation hours; 943 airlift sorties were performed with 1,311 flying hours.
/...

S/1997/632
English
Page 6

III.

CONCLUSIONS

13. Operation Alba has been a good example of how a political and military
operation of international stabilization can be undertaken with responsibility
and solidarity. What has been in place in Albania for the last four and a half
months was not in fact a traditional peacekeeping or a peacemaking operation but
rather one of complex nature, involving assistance from the international
community within a multinational security framework provided by the
multinational protection force and specifically geared to protect such
assistance. There is no doubt that without security, assistance would not have
been productive or even possible. The presence of the multinational protection
force affectively blocked the risk of Albania sliding towards anarchy or even
internal political conflict and allowed the various international organizations
and individual States willing to provide practical help to Albania to organize
assistance in a secure environment. Thus a notable improvement in the situation
in the country was brought about in a short period of time, restoring confidence
in national prospects.
14. The safe and prompt delivery of humanitarian assistance was possible from
the beginning of the deployment of the force and throughout the operation.
Adequate and acceptable elections - as described in the final report of OSCE on
the parliamentary elections in Albania - were made possible, not only thanks to
the security framework provided by the force but also through the logistic
assistance it gave to OSCE.
15. The force has been temporary and limited: during the electoral process its
strength was increased for the specific purpose of providing security for the
OSCE monitoring teams and parliamentary observers.
16. The operation was affected by strict time constraints, mainly because of
its very rapid activation. Nevertheless, Operation Alba was successful thanks
to the efforts of the multinational contingents deployed as well as to the
professionalism of its commanders. The force achieved its goals also thanks to
the ability of the multinational command to implement its mandate through
harmonious and consistent use of the various assets and capabilities of the
units provided by the 11 contributing countries.
17. For the purpose of providing political guidance to the multinational
protection force, a Steering Committee was established with Italy as Chairman
and France Vice-Chairman. The Steering Committee drafted its own decisionmaking and procedural rules, which proved to be effective. In addition to
giving political guidance to the force, it reported regularly to the Security
Council on the progress of the operation and was a useful forum for consultation
on the international effort for Albania. The Steering Committee operated by
consensus. This mechanism proved to be a political asset, since all countries
shared responsibility for the Committee's decisions, reinforcing cohesion and
solidarity.
18. At one point, the Steering Committee recommended that the mandate to the
force provided by resolution 1104 (1997) be extended by the Security Council
until the completion of the electoral process. Since the beginning of the
operation the Steering Committee identified security priorities as areas of
/...

S/1997/632
English
Page 7

possible international action. At the end of the operation, on the basis also
of the experience of the force, the Steering Committee suggested further
possible initiatives in support of the Government of Albania in the field of
security to take place after the departure of the force.
19. The Secretariat of the Steering Committee remained active for the duration
of the operation, keeping in constant contact with the Command of the force
through the operational headquarters established in Rome. It provided
information as appropriate to participating countries and international
organizations involved.
20. All members shared the understanding that consultations at the policy level
should be as intense as possible, with particular emphasis on analysis and
information-sharing, in a spirit of full transparency. Great attention was
given to facilitating coordination between the multinational protection force
and the various international organizations involved. In this respect the
Steering Committee dedicated a significant part of its meetings to interacting
with representatives of international organizations who made known to the force,
through the Committee, their requirements and provided relevant information. In
this framework, dialogue with OSCE, the EU Presidency and Commission, WEU, the
World Food Programme (WFP) and ICRC was particularly intense. At the local
level a special coordination unit was established in Tirana.
21. Cooperation with the Albanian authorities was assured, as appropriate,
through constant contact both at the political and operational levels. The
participation of Albanian representatives in the Steering Committee meetings
allowed an exchange of useful information, in a spirit of cooperation and trust.
It also allowed prompt and resolute action whenever necessary.
22. As a result of Operation Alba, it is hoped that a dramatic page of Albanian
history has now been turned. A new phase must start without delay, focusing on
the rehabilitation of state institutions and the return of the country to an
orderly social, political and economic condition, within a restored climate of
confidence on the part of the Albanian people in their own future with the
active support of the international community. The international conference
held at Rome on 31 July 1997 was a milestone in this process in preparation for
a ministerial conference and a donors' conference in the autumn.

-----
