TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

12 DECEMBER

197 1

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption

of the agenda

611)

. , .. . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .

1

.. .. . . . . . ,. . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .

1

Letter dated 12 December 1971 from the Permsnenr: Representative
of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/10444)
. .. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .

1

S/PV.1611

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York
President: Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

AND

ELEVENTH

ou Sunday, 12 December

(Sierra Leone),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

MEETING
1971, at 4 P.m.

4. The PRESIDENT: The Council also decided at a
previous meeting[1607th meeting] to extend invitations to
the representativesof Tunisiaand SaudiaArabia to take the
places reserved for them in the Council chamber,on the
understandingthat they would be invited to take a placeat
the Council table when it was their turn to addressthe
Council. Accordingly, I shall, with the consent of the
Council, invite the representativesof Tunisia and Saudi
Arabia to take the seatsreservedfor them in the Council
chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 611)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda.

Letter dated 12 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/10444).
Adoption of the agenda

I. The PRESIDENT: Today I received a letter from the
Permanent Representative of the United States requesting
the President of the Council to convene a meeting of the
Security Council immediately. That request is contained in ’
document
S/10444, which has been circulated to the
members of the Council.
2. The provisional agenda of this meeting is before the
Council in document S/Agenda/l611. If I hear no objection, I shall consider the agenda adopted.
The agenda was adopted.
Letter
dated 12 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representative
of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10444)
3. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council will recall
tllat at a previous meeting [1606th meeting] the Council
decided to invite the representatives of India and Pakistan
to participate in the considerationof the item currently
under discussionbefore the Council without the right to
vote. In accordance with that decision, and with the
consent of the Council, I shallinvite the representatives
of
Indie and Pakistan to take placesat the Counciltable.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Swaran Sin&
(India) and Mr. 2. A. Bhutto (Pakistan)took placesat the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. R. Driss(Tunisia)
and Mr. 1. M, Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took placesi?z the
Council chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.The first nameon
the list of speakersis that of the representativeof the
United States.
6. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): First, I have an
inquiry that I should like to make of the President.The
resolution of the General Assembly [resolution
2793 (xXVri/ requeststhe Secretary-Generalto inform the
Security Council of the replies which he hasreceived on
this matter. Has the Security Council beeninformed of any
replies elicited following the resolution of the General
Assembly?
7. The PRESIDENT: I shall ask the Under-SecretaryGeneral to reply on behalf of the Secretary-General.
8. Mr. KUTAKOV (Under-Secretary-Generalfor Political
and Security Council Affairs) (translation from Russian):
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I wish to inform the
membersof the Security Council that immediatelyafter the
adoption of resolution 2793 (XXVI) by the GeneralAssembly on 7 December 1971, the Secretary-Generalcommunicated the text of the resolution to the Governmentsof
India and Pakistan. The Government of Pakistanreplied in
a letter dated 9 September 1971, which is published in
document S/10440. The Government of India replied in a
letter dated 12 December 1971, which is published in
document S/10445. The documentsare beingpreparedand
will be distributed at approximately 9 p.m.
9. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
10. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian):Mr. President,I thought we had
agreedthat you would inform the membersof the Security

Council that, in view of the urgency with which the Council
meeting was convened and the need for the members of the
Security Council to study the problem which the United
States representative will put before us, today’s meeting
would be limited to hearing his statement and that, if the
parties wished to speak, they would be given the opportunity to do so, after which the meeting would be
adjourned. However, there has been no such statement
from you. What does this mean?

Pakistan to institute an immediate cease-fire and to
withdraw troops from each other’s territory. Pakistan has
accepted the resolution. India has refused, In view of
India’s defiance of world opinion, expressed by such.an
overwhelming majority, the [Jnited States is now return.
ing the issue to the Security Council. With East Pa&an
virtually occupied by Indian troops, a continuation of Ihe
war would take on increasingly the character of armed
attack on the very existence of a Member State of the
United Nations. All permanent members of the Security
Council have an obligation to end this threat to world
peace on the most urgent basis. The United States wiu
co-operate fully in this effort.”

11, The PRESIDENT: The representative of the United
States was given the floor because he had submitted the
letter calling for an immediate meeting of the Council.
Therefore, he has the right to explain to the Council why
he felt it necessary that the Council should hold a meeting
immediately. It is my hope that we would then hear the
parties concerned and, depending on the situation, we
could decide on further action at that stage. It is hoped that
the futher action would be in accordance with the line
which the representative of the Soviet Union has stated. I
hope that this will satisfy the representative of the Soviet
Union and that we can proceed.
12. Mr. MALIK

17. This is a war that need never have taken place. Tile
opportunity for progress towards a peaceful accommodation was,in our view, available. It wasrefused by the Indian
Government, just as India has spumed the world Organization by not replying to the resolution of the General
Assembly.
18. Let me first focus on events in March of this year, It
was on 25 March that the central Government of Pakistan
decided to use force in East Pakistan. The United Stateshas
never supported or condoned that action, which was
followed by a tragic series of subsequent events. We
regretted that action, and we took measures promptly to
stop certain military and economic aid that was going to
Pakistan.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation from Russian): I should like to make it clear

that I did not deny the right of the United States
representative to speak; that is the right of every representative. I spoke only of the agreement which I understood
had been reached.
13. The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the representative
of the United States, I would assure the representative of
the Soviet Union that the understanding which wasreached
will be followed, but the decision to follow it will be taken
at a later stage. The understanding is that the representative
of the United States will speak, after which we shall assess
the situation and see what further statements will be made.
14. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
The representative of the Soviet Union has just said that
there was an understanding, The Chinese delegation has had
no part in that understanding.

19. As I said before, the United States has never supported
this action in any way. We have always recognized that the
events of 25 March had a very important impact on India,
and we have always recognized that the influx of refugees
into India broadened the danger of communal strife. We
fully appreciated both .the social and the economic strain
the influx of refugees imposed on India. The fact that the
use of force in East Pakistan in March can be characterized
as a tragic mistake does not, however, justify the actions of
India in intervening militarily and placing in jeopardy the
territorial integrity and political independence of its neighbour Pakistan.
20. I want to describe to the members of this Council in
some detail how we viewed the situation a few weeks
before Prime Minister Gandhi came to Washington on
4 November, and what we did to try to resolve matters
peacefully. We were prepared at that time to take at face
value the Indian statement that India preferred a peaceful
resolution of the matter to war. We asked ourselves how we
could be helpful if in fact India’s intentions were peaceful.
In the context of that visit the Indian Government was
informed of four things. First, the small trickle of military
spare parts which had remained in the pipeline to Pakistan
was terminated. It could no longer be said that this
insignificant fiow could in any way be considered a
continuing irritant in the relations between the United
States and India. We have thereby maintained a climate of
confidence in United States-Pakistan relations. That climate
of confidence in turn helped bring about Pakistan’s
co-operation with the United Nations relief efforts and with
United States proposals which could have moved matters to
the conference table rather than to the battIefield. See
ondly, the United States had pledged additional financial

1.5. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): At the outset,
on behalf of the United States Government, let me say that
we know of no understanding, and 1 shall certainly proceed
on the basis of the ground rules just outlined by the
President. We have a draft resolution we wish to present.
We feel there is much business for the Council to do. We
were not a party to any understanding and if any other
representative here was I would certainly yield to him so
that we may know about it. But on behalf of the United
States Government I can officially say that we were not
approached on any such understanding.
16. I have asked for the Security Council to reconvene
because it is essential that this body promptly and
effectively deals with the threat to international peace and
security which is continuing in the subcontinent. In asking
for this immediate meeting of the Council the United States
Government today made the following statement:
“On 7 December the General Assembly by a vote of
104 to 11, with IO abstentions, called on India and
2

and economic assistance for the care of the refugees,
making it clear that in addition to the $90 million already
contributed to India in this regard the President had asked
for an additional $250 million for relief in the area.
Thirdly, we felt that, important as financial resources were,
some practical step was needed to defuse the situation. We
kney that ‘the Indian Government had, some two weeks
earlier, already rejected a prior United States proposal for
mutual withdrawal of forces. Therefore, after full consultations with President Yahya Khan, we were in a position to
tell the Indian Government in the context of the visit that
the Pakistan Government was willing to make a unilateral
step of withdrawal first, provided it could be assured that
some subsequent reciprocal step would be taken by India. I
would stress that it was a unilateral step of withdrawal
about which we were given assurances. India’s response was
a public call For the Pakistan Government to pull its forces
out of its own territory in East Pakistan. Fourthly, we were
particularly concerned that some practical step also be
taken toward political accommodation. We accepted the
Indian view that a step for military, disengagement in and of
itself was not enough.

good offices, which could have helped in defusing the
crisis, spurning proposals that could have begun the
process of dialogue leading towards a political accommodation.“l
I now reaffirm this judgement categorically on behalf of the
United States Government.
25. Now, India has gone further. With the support of two
Soviet vetoes here, it has previously prevented the Security
Council from adopting resolutions calling for a cease-fire
and a withdrawal of forces. Twice we acted in this Council.
One hundred and four countries in the General Assembly
-104 countries-supported
precisely this course of action.
But in defiance of this expression of world opinion, India
again said no. They continued to prefer the use of force to
peaceful means. India, which over the y:ars has sought to
reflect, inside and outside this chamber, the moral force of
the world, the very precepts for which its great leaders
Gandhi and Nehru stood, is now disregarding the Charter of
the United Nations.
26. And now developments have reached a point in the
area where Indian military actions have not only led to
virtual occupation of East Pakistan, but to a war which is
increasingly taking on the earmarks of an attack on the very
life of a State Member of this Organization. The question
now arises as to India’s further intentions. For example,
does India intend to use the present situation to destroy the
Pakistan army in the West? Does India intend to use the
counter-attacks in the West as a pretext to annex territory
in West Pakistan? Is its aim to take parts of Pakistancontrolled Kashmir, contrary to the Security Council
resolutions of 1948,1949 and 1950?

21. Therefore, during the visit the Indian Government was
informed that after discussions with the United States the
Pakistan Government was prepared to do the following: its
representatives were willing to meet with an appropriate
representative of the Awami League from Dacca; alternatively, the Pakistan Government was prepared to meet with
an appropriate representative from Calcutta of the so-called
Bangla Desh; it was also willing to consider meeting with
representatives designated by Mujibur Rahman.
22. Given the extremely difficult nature of the problem
we had some reason to feel, after the high level United
States-Indian talks in November, that, while all the Indian
conditions
obviously had not been met, this series of
proposals could begin to turn the cycle away from violence
to a peaceflu settlement, taking into account the aspirations
of the people concerned. These proposals also proved to be
an acid test of the intentions of the Government of India.

27. If this is not India’s intention, then a prompt
disavowal is required. The world has a right to know what
the intentions of India are.
28. Pakistan’s aims have become clear. It has indeed
accepted the resolution the General Assembly adopted by a
vote of 104 to 11, My Government has several times in the
last week asked the Indian Government this question
concerning its intentions and I regret to inform the Council
that the replies have been unsatisfactory and not reassuring.
This Council has a responsibility to demand, as a first step,
immediate compliance by India with the resolutions on
cease-fire and withdrawal. It should also insist that India
give the members of the Council a clear and unequivocal
assurance that it does not intend to annex Pakistan
territory and change the status quo in Kashmir contrary to
the United Nations resolutions. Otherwise, India will be
injecting a new and more serious dimension to the risks and
the hostilities in the subcontinent.

23. The Indian response to the first two proposals was
rejection. As to the third proposal, while at first India
seemed very interested, i,t again took a consistent position
that the only step towards political accommodation that
was feasible was the release of Mujibur Rahtnan and
negotiations between him and Yahya Khan.
24. This is one step which President Yahya Khan did not
feel able to make. We believe that it was much more
important for a dialogue to begin without pre-conditions.
Because India was unresponsive to these diplomatic efforts,
I said the following in the General Assembly on 7 December:

29. I am submitting the following draft resolution which I
will read to the Security Council. As the members of the
Council will see, it is in substance essentially the same as
the resolution that was adopted in the General Assembly
with the support of 104 Members. Pakistan has accepted
the resolution and we urge India to end its defiance of this

“We have said before, and we repeat, that the beginning
of the crisis goes back to the use oi’ force by Pakistan in
March of this year, but since the beginning of the crisis it
should also be clear that India bears the major responsibility for broadening the crisis by spurning the efforts of
the United Nations to become involved, even in a
humanitarian
way, in relation to the refugees, spurning
the proposals such as the Secretary-General’s offer of

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2002nd meeting,
para.96.

3

overwhelming world opinion, to support the resolution and
help bring about an immediate end to what the United
Nations overwhelmingly feels is a senseless war.
30. It was in this effort to try again, following the
instructions of Lhe General Assembly, to solve this conflict
through peaceful means that we are submitting the draft
resolution that I should like to read at this point:
[The speaker read out the text of a draft resolutioiz
subsequently circulated as document Sf IO446.]

37. The United Nations had been faced for over nine
m.onths with a most challenging problem and the solution
which it suggested was-if I may say so-unrealistic.
My
country finds it all the more regrettable because India is
totally committed to the objectives and ideals of the
Charter. If the international community had willed and
acted in concert in time we would not have faced today the
clouds of war which have now burst over the Indian
subcontinent.

31. It was almost a week ago that the General Assembly
adopted a resolution by 104 votes to 1 I, Since then the
Security Council has been inactive. There have been, I
expect, some consultations between some parties, but there
have been no intensified consultations; indeed, the Security
Council has almost not been seized of the matter at all.
Before a week has elapsed, it seems to us that the Security
Council should now, here, urgently, address itself once
again to this question of war and peace; address itself to the
question of cease-fire and withdrawal; address itself in the
light of a week of destruction and untold loss of life on
both sides, address itself in a statesmanlike fashion, to this
draft resolution, which was so overwhelmingly adopted by
the rest of the General Assembly and which we feel merits
the sincere and urgent consideration of everyone at this
table.
32. The PRESIDENT:
India.

36. My Government has taken note of the resolution
which the General Assembly adopted at the end of its
discussion on the situation in Bangla Desh and on the
Indian subcontinent [resolution 2793 (XXV.)].
While it
constitutes a testimony to the unimpeachable concern of
the United Nations for the cause of peace and the goed
intentions of most of the world community, it is also, in
our minds, an acknowled.gernent of a fundamental and
unfortunate limitation from which the United Nations
suffers in dealing with such situations.

38. While the General Assembly made an appeal for
cease-fire and withdrawal, there appears to have been no
deliberation on whether such a cease-fire and withdrawal,
by itself, would meet the immediate problems that today
confront the people of India and Bangla Desh, probIems
which we have attempted to meet with restraint, caution
and peaceful means; problems which are not of our creatiorr
and which we have had to face over the last nine months.

I call on the Foreign Minister of

39. The compound tragedy originates in the denial, by
coercive authority and brutality, of the legitimate and
declared aspirations of the people of Bangla Desh. My
country has been accused of having ulterior motives and
subversive intentions against the neighbouring State of
Pakistan. There have been consistent attempts at projecting
the tragedy of Bangla Desh as a creation of India and a
dispute between India and Pakistan. Those attempts have,
to my mind, unfortunately succeeded in adding another
dimension to the struggle of the people of Bangla De&
against the Government of West Pakistan, This new
dimension is the confrontation today between the armed
forces of India and Pakistan.

33. Mr. Swaran SINGH (India): I agree with the representative of the United States of America that this is a war
which need not have occurred. The representative of the
United States of America seemed to have rushed to the
conclusion that India has not yet replied to the Secretary+
General’s communication, and he has chosen to ignore the
Secretary-General’s
intimation, given to the Security
Council, that a reply from India has aheady been received,
34. This is the second time within a fortnight that the
Security Council is meeting to deal with the tragic events in
South Asia. The concern of the international community
regarding this conflagration and its anxiety to stem it as
early as ‘possible are understandable. The deliberations in
the Security Council between 4 and 6 December (1606th
to l608th meetings/ and later in the General Assembly on
7 December [2003rd plenary meeting] under the “Uniting
for Peace” resolution /resolution 377 (V)/ indicated the
common concern of all with the situation which is causing
untold suffering to millions of people in my part of the
world.

40. It is a matter of grief for us that a military
confrontation has come about. We believe that it has
occurred because of the failure of the international community to act upon the realities of the situation as it
developed and to meet it with objectivity and promptness
in a manner which would have prevented it from deteriorating into this present stage.
41. My delegation has endeavoured, since the eruption of
the crisis in what was East Pakistan on 25 March 1971, te
put the problem in perspective in world capitals as we11 I
here at the United Nations. The effort was made by us at
the highest possible ‘level; and though the genesis of the
problem was explained and the prognosis of its impIications
outlined repeatedly, we regret to say that the international
community failed to understand the problem in terms of its
fundamental causation and thus found itself unable te
remedy it at its root,

35. But we should frankly ask ourselves-and I would be
failing in my duty if I did not ask the Council-if this
common concern extends to all aspects of the situation, its
causes and development to the present stage. The situation
today is the culmination of the sufferings brought upon the
people of Bangla Desh because of the unwillingness of the
rulers of Pakistan to respond to the aspirations of the
overwhehning majority of the people who formerly were
part of the State of Pakistan.

42. Since we are meeting today at a moment of deep crisis
on the sub-continent, with violence and war stalking the
4

land, the events which led to the present tragedy bear
repetition. I feel compelled to recount these details as it is
imperative to remove misunderstandings regarding the
reasons for the present crisis, if the problem is to be solved
decisively and in a constructive manner.
43. The immediate origin of the crisis occurred some time
between December 1970 and March 1971. After 23 years
of unrepresentative rule and 13 years of military dictatorship which were matched by continuous economic exploitation and political discrimination by the vested interests of
Pakistan against the East, the first ever free general
elections were organized in Pakistan by the Government of
President Yahya Khan in December 1970.
44. We welcomed the elections in the hope that apart
from restoring the long-suppressed rights of the people of
Pakistan, they would also open a new chapter of improved
relations with this important neighbour of ours.
45. Our hope found further confirmation in the electoral
victory of political parties, both in the eastern and western
wings of Pakistan, that really embodied the aspirations of
the people of those regions.
46. This positive political development in Pakistan was,
however, prevented from evolving to its logical, legal and
political conclusion by the decision of the military r&me
of Pakistan to reject callously the clearly expressed demand
of the East Bengali people for autonomy. This deep-seated
urge found incontrovertible expression in the massive
victory of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman of the Awami League,
not only in elections to the Provincial Assembly, but in
elections to the National Assembly of Pakistan in which the
Awarni
League commanded an absolute majority by
winning 167 seats out of 313 seats, The Awami League won
98 per cent of the seats in the National Assembly allotted
to East Pakistan. It had 167 out of a total of 169 seats.
47. Instead of transferring power to the duly elected
representatives of the people, President Yahya Khan repeatedly postponed the convening of the national and provincial legislatures until mid-March.
48. The final preface to the brutal suppression of the
declared wishes of the people of East Bengal took the form
of a pretended negotiation between President Yahya Khan
and Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in the early part of March
1971, while in fact the Government of West Pakistan was
undertaking
a massive augmentation of its armed forces in
East Bengal to terrorize and suppress the peop1.eof that
area.
49. The climax of the conspiracy against the people of
Bangla Desh occurred on the infamous night of 25 March,
when the West Pakistani army went into action against
them
Events took a catastrophic course and an international problem with explosive potentialities was created
overnight.
Informed international opinion, as reflected in
the media and at least some Governments, recognized this
straight away, But the international community as a whole
responded
to the humanitarian aspects of the problem
sooner than to its political and other implications.

SO. The Secretary-General issued his appeal for relief to
the refugees on 19 May 1971. His memorandum to the
President of the Security Council was sent on 20 July 1971
[SfPO410,2 pa. 3/.
51. In the meanwhile, a massive exodus into India of the
people of Bangla Desh commenced on the night of 25
March, and still continues. This is an exodus unprecedented
in known history across an international frontier. The
threat to our security, stability and economy by what has
been called the massive civilian invasion of refugees into
India cannot be determined in tangible terms.
52. I had explained to the General Assembly the implications of the brutal and continuing suppression of the people
of East Bengal by the West Pakistani army, in terms of its
grave socio-economic-political consequences to India in my
statement on 27 September this year [19#Oth meeting]. I
had underlined that the exodus of East Bengalrefugeesinto
India had created intolerable demographicpressures
on the
most densely populated neighbouring statesand territories
of India. I had pointed out that the entire administrationof
the Indian states in which these refugeescamehad to be
geared to the relief of these refugees. The economic
implications of the number of refugees,which now stands
at 10 million, and the generatedeconomic pressureon India
can be discerned from the fact that our Finance Minister
has made two additional provisions of nearly 330 croresof
rupees, or approximately $500 million, in our annual
budget for the year 1971-72, which ends on 31 March
1972. A smallerState would have collapsedin the face of
suchan influx.
53. Social friction, the fear of epidemicsand the possibilities of communal and other tensionshad to be countered.
The refugees became an incalculable hindrance to our
economic development for the years to come. Their
continuing exodus, without any hopesof their return, wasa
destructive obstacle to the very socio-political fabric of
India.
54. Pakistan’s repressivepolicies, compelling millions t0
Bee in terror into our territory, posed a threat to the
fundamental principles on which we have tried to build our
society and to the hard earned stability that the Indian
people had achieved by the labours of over a quarter of a
century.
55. Our problems were accentuated by a deliberate and
false propagandaoffensive by the Government of Pakistan,
first questioning the existence of the refugeesand then
ultimately describing them as a few miscreantsand secessionists put up by India. When the facts became too
manifest to be questioned, Pakistan then resorted to
questioningtheir numbersasmentioned by India.
56. The people of BanglaDeshresorted to the only course
open to them in the face of the violent and repressivedenial
of their aspirations, accompaniedby unimaginableterror,
brutalization and genocide. They becametotally alienated
from West Pakistan and took the decisionto declaretheir
independenceon 10 April 1971.
.-2 See Ofjicial Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1971.

in its true perspective arld I had appealed to the intc~*tiond community and to the United Nations to l~@n!&ti
the Government of Pakistan to see reason and to evO!ve 5
political
settlement with the already-elected rcpresent%t~*~2?i~
of the people of East Bengal. I had stressed that in SUCKX*
atmosphere of strife and ferment, the United ~@t~~i
remains the only hope for States and peoples; I had ~~~linr~r~
out that it is in such moments that we all CM prove Ihrit 54%:
ideals of the Charter are not static norms to which @*
rededicate ourselves for form’s sake evely Year. ! p%:
forewarned the international community of our apprCir-,:’
sions that if, in spite of our declared commitments
ttl %“se
Charter, we found ourselves unable to face renlitics in f%
face of crisis born of violations of the very principles (of IQ
Charter, violations which were deliberate and cak~l%~~d
AG
they are in the case of Bangla De&, then the C’RIA~!~
Nations would indeed be failing in its fundamental purps:+ti.
that it would be questioning its very existence and 1%
principles.

57. The west Pakistani military r&me continued in its
unimaginative, callous and fatal course. Things went from
bad to worse, Mr. Bhutto, who now leads the Pakistan
delegation, himself acknowledged in July that the military
could not solve Pakistan’s problems. In spite of the counsels
of reason by the international community, in spite Of the
appeals of the Secretary-General to seek a Political reconciliation taking due account of the welfare and fundamental
human rights of the people of East Bengal, in spite of the
humanitarian recponse of the international community to
the refugee problem, in spite of the restrained, non-interfep
ing and humanitarian reaction of the Government of India,
the Government of West Pakistan refused to come to terms
with the people of Bangla Desh and their already elected
representatives led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
58, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was, from the beginning,
imprisoned in West Pakistan and subjected to a secret
military trial carrying, we are told, the penalty of death. We
do not even know whether he is still alive, but we do know
that no one has been able to contact him.

62. It was our earnest hope that the incalculabLy _Plar-’
consequences of the crisis created by West Pakistan in 4%
East would be comprehended by tile nations of tulle wi)rZ,
and that their undoubted influence would bc brought B,;:
bear on the Government of West Pakistan to restore E~C
fundamental rights of the people of East Bengal to thrr:
Our hopes that the counsels of reason would prevtil wept
however, not fulfilled. The consequence is the conflict @z:
we face today.

59. The policy of repression and genocide continued
unabated over the last nine months. In his statements and
pronouncements, President Yahya Khan, since last May,
refused deliberately to deal with the basic problem which
he himself had created; on the contrary, he banned the
Awami League, arbitrarily disqualified a large number of
the elected representatives of the provincial and national
assemblies of East Bengal, and continued to hold the people
of Bangla Deeh to ransom at gunpoint. To confuse the
issue, Pakistan shifted the blame on to India. To confuse
the issue further, Pakistan put out rumours that the popular
Awami League policies and decisions were inspired by the
Government of India. India was accused of encouraging
secession. The widespread resistance movement which
emerged in Bangla Desh in the face of Pakistani repression
was described as a subversive force organized by India. An
attempt was made to counter the mounting international
pressure to recognize the aspirations of the people of
Bangla Desh by declarations of so-called amnesty-which
did not cover the elected representatives of the people-and
bY the imposition of a civilian government in East Bengal
constituted by quislings and unrepresentative politicians
*ho had even lost the elections in December 1970.

63. It is essential that in seeking a solution to the curr<‘s:
conflict, the Security Council take note of the events wl&:
led to this crisis. I shall come a little later to the inunedi~~s
genesis of the problem over the last few days.
64. I would, however, be failing in my duty to the C:~UX:’
if I did not draw its attention to the consistent pattern ,f
antagonism and hostility which has characterizcd Pakistan”:policies towards India since the emergence of India h-1:8-independence. The origins of the present conflict nrc 1%)Fe
found in the psychosis of hatred and war, contirrucaaac”?
whipped up by the rulers of Pakistan, af which Indin ?u;
been repeatedly the victim.
65. We have repeatedly been accused of desirirrg t?c
break-up of Pakistan, of nurturing not merely political by:
social, communal and cultural antagonism against iF%
People of Pakistan, of having been parties to allirp2
subversions against this neighbouring State of ours. I ci!tilZ
resort to an interpretative and even rhetorical rebuttal 4
these allegations, but we all will agree that facts ur\nax,.
takably reveal intentions even better than do arguments.

60. These policies of the Government of Pakistan had the
inevitable consequence of alienating even further the people
of Bangla De& strengthening their determination to break
the colonial yoke of the West Pakistani regime and
channelling the freedom movement in a manner which
would.inevitablY lead to emergence of Bangla Desh as an
independent nation. Pakistan’s military action, the snuffing-out of all human rights and the reign of terror which
continues, have shocked the conscience of mankind. The
Popular revolt against these actions has a hard core of
fighters *ho are former members of the East Bengal
regiment and the East Pakistan Rifles, who took the cause
Of their People to their hearts. They were joined
by
thousands of highly motivated young men determined to
end the tyranny’ once and for all.

66. The leaders and the people of India ncceptcd t:;:
desire of the Muslim majority areas of India to constitutr
themselves into a separate State, the State of Pakistan.
nearly 25 years ago. But India, for its part, refused Uaccept the two-nation theory on which the den3and
for
Pakistan *as thought to be based. The result was that, a?
the time of the partition, India continued to have nearly ti
million Muslim citizens, whose number today is nearly ?%r
million. These are honoured and equa1 citizens of thr
secular, democratic Kepublic of India. The partition of [tar
subcontinent was accepted by us as an irrevocable politici

61. During the general debate in the Assembly
in Sep
tember, I had attempted to explain the developing situation
6

fact essential for the future welfare of the peoples
inhabiting it. If there was any desire to prevent the creation
of Pakistan or to question its separa;e existence, the people
of India had sufficient political means to prevent the
creation of Pal&tan. Students of history will acknowledge
the veracity of this assertion. Hardly had the ink dried on
the agreements arranging for the partition of the country
when we were faced with brazen aggression by our new
neighbour, in Kashmir in 1947-a few months after the
emergence of India and Pakistan as independent countries
---an aggression motivated by a wish for territorial aggrandizement.
67. \Vhiile we tried to stem the aggression, we brought it to
the notice of the United Nations. Though the fact of
aggression was proved and the identity of the aggressor
incontrovertibly
established, the United, Nations, due to
reasons which are incomprehensible, has not yet been able
to arrange for the evacuation of the occupied parts by the
West Pakistani troops, Though an uneasy peace prevailed in
the nrea, India continued its attempts at reconciliation and
a building up of relations with Pakistan on positive and
constructive lines, In spite of the military conflict imposed
upon
US SOOII after partition, we unilaterally honoured our
economic and financial obligations towards the new State
of Pakistan, in glaring contrast to Pakistan’s refusal to
honour its commitments in this regard, regarding assets,
evacuee property and border arrangements. We continued
ollr efforts at increasing economic and cultural relations.
Even at great sacrifice we were willing to share our
resources with our neighbour; an outstanding example of
this was our agreement to share o’ur river water resources
with
Pakistan under the Indus Waters Treaty of 19
September 1960. The provisions of the Treaty constituted a
drain on our own resources. While our policy of reconciliaLion contined, the response from Pakistan remained negative, even abrasive.
68. The Government of Pakistan undertook a deliberate
policy of pushing out its minoriity communities into India.
SubstantiaI
sections of minority population were either
massacred or driven into India from West Pakistan in the
wake of partition. An unending trek of refugees from East
Bengal into Indij started in 1947 where the minority
communities
were more populous. Pakistan made repeated
but unsuccessful
attempts to convert its aggression in
Kashmir into an instrument of harassr,lent of India in the
chnncelleries of the world and in the United Nations. When
those attempts failed it reverted to the naked use of arms
against India in 1965, first, by undertaking armed intrusions into the Rann of Kutch, and indulging in an all-out
lrnprovoked
aggression against India in Kashmir. India again
came to the United Nations in the hope of finding redress.
‘The events of the conflict of August and September 1965
in Kashmir,
and the spirit of reconciliation which the
Government
and people of India showed at Tashkent
following
the conflict, are well known to the international
community.
69. if India at any time had harboured design of territorial
amrandizement
in what is now Bangla Desh, those designs
would
surely have been manifested in the conflicts of
1947-1948
and 1965.

70. Our expectation was that the agreement at Tashkent 3
would open a new chapter of friendship and co-operation
between India and Pakistan. Our hope was that the spirit of
Tashkent would overcome the bitterness of the past. It was
this hope that led the Government of India to send a high
level delegation consisting OF three Cabinet Ministers and
five Principal Secretaries of the Government of India to
Rawalpindi early in 1966 to work out .the details of
implementing the agreement of Tashkent. This delegation
faced an intransigent and unto-operative Government of
Pakistan. India still remained understanding and felt that
some unilateral action on India’s part would persuade that
Government to take the hand of friendship extended by
India. India unilaterally withdrew the trade embargo against
Pakistan after the 1965 conflict. We returned all the goods
and properties. We proposed the signing of a mutual no-war
declaration. Pakistan’s response to each of those gestures
was, unfortunately, negative. The attitude of recrimination
and hostility continued. Not only in bilateral relations, but
every in.ternal crisis in Pakistan born out, of the unwisdom
of the successive Govermnents of Pakistan continued to be
laid at the door of India, holding India responsible by some
curious logic.
71. The picture will not be complete if I do not recount
how the successive rdgimes of Pakistan, dominated by the
western wing, treated the people of East Bengal. To put it
in the words of the acting President and Prime Minister of
Bangla Desh:
“It is well known that the people of Bangla Desh were
subjected to a long period of ruthless colonial domination, systematic exploitation and gross political and
cultural discrimination by Ihe successive rrfgimes.”
72. This pattern of discrimination and exploitation was
evident in the beginning years themselves. Since 1948 the
wish of the people of East Bengal to have their own
language-Bengali-as one of the official and working
languages of Pakistan has been consistently rejected. The
demand for an equal share in the wealth of the country, in
holding responsibility for the administration of the nation,
was rejected. When this intolerance of the West Pakistani
ruling circle resulted in the emergence of regional movements for meeting the legitimate economic and political
aspirations of the people of East Bengal, the movements
were suppressed with police techniques and coercive authority. When political parties, representing the wish of the
people of East Bengal, formed governments on the basis of
local elections, they were dismissed on flimsy political and
legal pretexts and subjected to martial law and military
rule.
73. The history of political developments in East Bengal
and the relations between the two wings of Pakistan from
1952 to 1971 is a sad and intolerable chapter characterized
by intolerance, repression and the ruthless denial of the
fundamental rights and liberties of the majority of the
population of Pakistan, the 75 million people of East
Bengal. The political inequity of this is compounded
further when one realizes, as I said, that the people of East
3 Ibid., Twenty-first
March 1966, docunlent

Yenr, Supplement
S/7221.

for January,

February

nrzu’

J&gal constitute nearly 60 per cent of the total Population
of Pakistan. They earn most of the foreign exchange for
Pakistan, on which economic devehpnmt depends. It was
the ag~cultural and industrial resources of East Bengal that
sustained Pakistan’s economy, and yet the fruits of the
resources of East Bengal were not available to them. They
served only one purpose: the perpetuation in Power of an
unrepresentative business-cum-military ruling circle and the
ensuring of their continued prosperity at the cost of the
sufferings of the millions in Bangla Desh.
74. Not only were their pohtical aspirations denied, their
will thwarted, their liberty suppressed, even the integrity
and bona fides of their intentions were questioned by the
unimaginative rulers of West Pakistan; their patriotism to
their country was questioned. The legitimate expression of
their grievances was characterized as conspiracies hatched
by India. Their political movements were ignored and each
of their protests was perversely described as an Indian
machination.

77, I should like to add that these aspects were noted &
one of the public statements made by no less a person kh&q
the dis~ing&hed leader of the Pakistani delegation.
78. That is the historical background on which the t raI$d>
on the Indian subcontinent has been enacted since !&r&
last; 1 recounted some details of this in the edif%
pati
Oa”
my statement. But the tragedy had to reach greater deprb%
in terms of human sufferings, in terms of death ati
violence. By the middle of October the continuing influX a?’
refugees from East Bengal had swelled their number in
India to nearly 9.5 million. Apart from being a testimw
to the continuing repression and brutality of the %‘e~?
Pakistanarmy, it alsobecamethe CBUSC for a SPOI\~~~@QU~
and strong resistancemovement within Bangla E%Ir its&
79. We were informed by the acting President and Priu~
Minister of Bangla Desh that nearly half the territory d
East Bengal was under their effective military and CM
control at that time. That wasborne out by the pronouns
ments of President Yahya Khan during the month
o;?3‘
October, when he repeated his assertions of July amI
August that any successof the Mukti Bahini, the freedomfighters of East Bengal, would be considered by him a5 afi
act of aggressionwhich would justify his having ‘%Hd and
open war againstIndia”. His pronouncements to the pre%
from that stageon becameprogressivelymore belIico%?ar,J
assumed
a threatening posture against India.

75. This policy of political discrimination and repression
became unbearable not only in East Bengal but also in West
Pakistan. The result was the political upheaval in Pakistan,
led by the present representative of Pakistan, His Excellency Mr, Bhutto, which resulted in the former President
Ayub Khan’s handing over power to President Yahya Khan,
who assumed the direction of the affairs of his country
with a welcome promise of returning power to the people
of the country.

80. On 12 October, in an address to the countrJ7. 1%
blamed India for encouraging what he described as 0~
“secessionist”movement in East Bengal, Within a few diaj5
a massivebuild-up of the Pakistani army, including arwm
and artillery, againstIndia’s western frontiers, incIudin8 abe
areasadjacentto tlie cease-fireline in Jammu and Knshnzia,
was organized by the West Pakistan military re’ginuz. Jr ir
relevant to mention that the inquiries of the Chief MiIilar>
Observerof the United Nations Military Observer Group in
India and Pakistan regarding these troop movements were
met with a blatant falsehood. He was informed that ti:c
troop movementswere purely for training purposes.

76. India watched the developments in Pakistan during the
elections of 1970 with expectations and, I would add, also
hope. When President Yahya Khan announced the decision
to hold free elections and agreed to the Awami League of
East Bengal’s fighting elections on its declared and wellknown manifesto for provincial autonomy within a federal
structure of Pakistan, we had every hope that a new era of
democracy and freedom was due to emerge in Pakistan and
also that relations between India and Pakistan would take a
turn for the better, on more constructive. lines. The
elections were held in December 1970 and what followed is
aptly described in a communication from the acting
President and Prime Minister of Bangla Desh to the Prime
Minister of India dated 15 October 1971. This has been
published and distributed widely:

81. India understandably responded to his irnpondinp
threat to its territorial integrity and security and moved his
troops forward in the western sector more than a rveek:
later. I should here emphasisethat we did this wide
keepingthe United Nations Military Observers in Kashmirfully informed.

“Over the last several years our people had waged a
peaceful and non-violent struggle for the attainment of
our basic rights. Even after the successive postponements
of the convening of the’ National Assembly by the
military regime of Pakistan, we did not resort to violence
but continued our non-violent struggle. The military
rulers of Pakistan took advantage of this to gin time to
emPloY the rules of so-called negotiations till the night of
24 March while they were augmer&g their military
strength. Their plans became visible to the whole world
on the black nieht of 25 March when they let loose their
army under a premeditated plan on the innocent and
defenceless men, women and children of our country,
They made a special target of the intellectuals, the elite of
the youth and the leaders of the workers, peasants and
students. This left us with no alternative but to resort to
arms.”

82. The political propaganda was accompanied by continuing military provocations by Pakistan against us BFCT
the last nine months. From 25 March to 15 November 1971
there were over 60 major border intrusions committed hu
Pakistaniforces on the Indo-East Bengal border. Indin h&
to lodge 66 protests against890 cease-fire violations in tIu
Kashmir sector of our frontier with Pakistan during Ihe
sameperiod. This sabre-rattling was accompanied by wa
hysteria. Important cities of West Pakistan held rallies and
sent Out processionswith “Crush India” and “Conquer
India” slogans.Photographs of this have appeared exten.
sivelY in the international press.Apart from a threatening
deployment of its land forces against In&r, Pakistani air
intrusionsinto Indian territory both in tile east and weti
weresteppedup.
8

83. While these military provocations continued, Pakistan
made suggestions regarding troop withdrawals-and this was
mentioned by the representative of the United States of
America-posting of United Nations observersand so forth,
a series of deliberate gimmicks to hide its real intentions.
The hypocrisy reached new heights in a so-called message of
goodwill and friendship addressed by President Yahya Khan
on 20 November to the Prime Minister of India. The Prime
Minister of India reciprocated the message and made the
suggestion that the tragedy in the subcontinent could be
avoided by means of a political settlement between the
Government of West Pakistan and the already elected
Ieaders of East Bengal. While these messageswere being
exchanged Pakistan wasplanning further aggression.

fictitious and baseless. The truth of the matter was
different and I shall come to it presently.
88. During this period the Mukti Bahlni’s successesinside
East Bengal continued. Being frustrated in East Bengal, the
West Pakistani army stepped up its military activities
against India. We had received two communications, one on
15 October and another on 23 November, from the acting
President and Prime Minister of Bangla Desh, requesting the
Prime Minister of India to acknowledge the increasing
control of the Bangla Desh Government over East Bengal
territory and to give it formal recognition. India, however,
did not wish to exacerbate the deteriorating military
situation by any precipitate political action. We still hoped
at that late stage that the Government of Pakistan would
accept the reality of the situation in East Bengal and
negotiate a settlement with the already elected representatives of the people of East Bengal. This hope of ours was
reflected in the tour of the five West European countries
and the United States, undertaken by the Prime Minister of
India, to persuade the world leaders to exert their undoubted influence on President Yahya Khan to come to a
rational and practical political settlement of the problem.
We are aware of the strenuous efforts made by many of the
world leaders and would like to acknowledge the valuable
efforts that they made in the cause of peace.

84. On 21 November the West Pakistani army mounted a
massive attack against Indian border posts in the Indo-East
Bengal border in the Boyra area. After coming into conflict
with the units of the freedom-fighters of East Bengal, the
West Pakistani troops continued their thrust towards the
Indian border. It was a full-scale attack with armour and
artillery, and when Indian resistance was firm Pakistan
brought its air force into action. Similar incidents took
place on the Assam-East Bengal and Tripura-East Bengal
borders between 15 and 22 November this year. The
Pakistani attacks were successfully resisted by the local
commanders of the Indian army and Pakistan also suffered
losses of its planes while attacking Indian troops over our
territory. Two of the Pakistani pilots who were piloting
these planes were captured on Indian territory after they
had baled out. These incidents were followed by the
declaration of emergency by President Yahya Khan on 23
November, and on the same day in a press interview to the
magazine Newsweek he stated that he expected to be “off
on a war within 10 days”. I would add that he kept the
date.

89. Taking note of the deteriorating situation, the Prime
Minister of India and I myself addressed communications to
various world leaders in the third week of November,
requesting them to do whatever they could to persuade the
Government of Pakistan to avoid further violence in East
BengaI and an aggressive war against us. These efforts were
of no avail, as the events on 3 December revealed when
Pakistan carried out a premeditated and massive aggression
against India.
90. Pakistan has accused us of starting the present
conflict , but the following facts should undoubtedly clarify
the situation.

85. Gravely concerned at the fast-deteriorating situation
and hoping to retrieve it, the Prime Minister of India made
a statement in the lndian Parliament on 24 November, in
which she said:

91, Friday, 3 December, was allotted for unofficial work
and Private Members’ Bills in the Parliament of India. Three
senior members out of five of the Political Affairs Committee of the Indian Cabinet, including the Prime Minister,
were in different parts of the country. The Prime Minister
was in Calcutta addressing a massive public meeting. The
Defence Minister, Mr. Jagjivan Ram, was in Patna, in
eastern India; the Finance Minister, Mr. Chavan, was in
Bombay in western India. Only I was in the capital to deal
with parliamentary work connected with a private resolution moved by a Member of Parliament about relief to the
East BengaI refugees. I had just finished addressing the
Upper House of the Parliament, the Rajya Sabha, on this
bill and was attending a function organized in connexion
with the silver jubilee of the Public Accounts Committee’of
Parliament, which was being presided over by the President
of India, when, a little before 6 p.m., the first air-raid
warnings were sounded over Delhi. We heard over the All
India radio at 6.15 p.m. that the Pakistani Air Force had
carried out an extensive and unprovoked air strike against
our cities and major air bases in northern India, namely,
Amritsar, Pathankot, Srinagar, Avantipur, Uterali, Jodhpur,
Ambala and Agra from 5.47 p.m. We later learned that this

“Even though Pakistan has declared an emergency, we
shall refrain from a similar step unless further aggressive
action by Pakistan compels us to do so in the interest of
national security. In the meantime the country should
remain unruffled. The rulers of Pakistan must realize that
the path of peace, of peaceful negotiations and conciliation is more rewarding than that of war and the
suppression of liberty and democracy .”
86. She also described the military actions between 21 and
22 November as “purely local action”, thereby clearly
indicating India’s intention of doing all that is possible to
de-escalate the situation.
87. The Government of Pakistan, as wasshown later, was,
however, bent on escalating the situation further. The
shelling of villages and armed intrusions on the Indian side
of the border continued, and to hide the reality of the
situation, as well as their aggressive intentions, President
Yahya Khan addressed several communications to the
Secretary-General during the last week of November,
accusing the Indian army of acts which are’ entirely
9

was an air strike carried out by the Pakistani air force in the
hope of destroying our air force asa prelude to launching a
full-scale ground attack against us. It was only one hour
after the air strikes were initiated that Radio Pakistan
announced at 6.30 p.m. on 3 December that India had
started a ground attack against Pakistan in the, western
sector. The air attacks were followed by a massive artillery
barrage from Pakistan on the Indian border posts and
defence positions in Sulaimanki, Khem Karan, Poonch and
other sectors of the Western front by the Pakistani Army.
92. The Prime Minister wasinformed of the Pakistani air
attacks as she finished addressing the meeting in Calcutta,
about 900 miles away from Delhi. We were still anxious not
to get involved in an open war. We limited our instructions
to our armed forces to keeping defensive positions. The
Prime Minister addressed the nation a little after midnight
between 3 and 4 December, and she described the situation
as follows:
“Today the war in Bangla Desh has become a war on
India. This has imposed upon me, my Government and
the people of India a great responsibility. We have no
other option but to put our country on a war footing.
Our brave officers and Jawans are at their posts mobilized
for the defence of the country.”
93. Even in face of this unprovoked aggression India did
not respond with a declaration of war. The President only
declared a state of emergency for the whole of India, and
we awaited further events. But the Pakistani air strikes
continued through the night and their armed forces
attacked US in strength right across India’s western frontiers. Whatever little doubts we had about Pakistan’s
intentions were clarified on the morning of 4 December
when President Yahya Khan stated that “a state of war
exists between India and Pakistan”. It is in this context that
India was compelled to take the necessary steps to defend
its territorial integrity and security.
94. The representative of the United States has posed
certain questions, asking me what our intentions are. I
should like to put across to him my thought that it was
President Yahya Khan who declared war against India. Has
the United States inquired from him as to what his
intentions were when he declared war?
95. It was after Pakistan’s massive attacks on us and its
extensive military provocations against India, both in the
east and in the west, that India decided to move into Bangla
Desh in support of the freedom-fighters of Bangla Desh,
and also to repel Pakistani aggression in the west by all
means and methods available. It is a well-known principle,
recognized by the international community, that an aggressor cannot compel the aggressedto fight at a place of the
aggressor’schoice. Once we were attacked in a massive way
we had to take all defensive action to safeguard our
position and to defend the integrity and sovereignty of our
country.
96. The acting President and Prime Minister of Bangla
Desh addressed a communication to the Prime Minister of
India on 4 December, informing her that in view of the
direct aggression committed by Pakistan against India on
j
j

3 December, the freedom-fighters of Bangla Desh were
ready to fight the aggressive forces of Pakistan in Banda
Desh, in any sector or on any front.
97. He repeated his earlier request that India recognise the
existence of the free Government of Bangla Desh, which
was in control of the majority of the area of East Bengal,
As Pakistan’s blatarrt aggression on 3 December killed the
hope of a political settlement leading to the fulfilment of
the legitimate aspirations of the people of Bangla De&the
normal hesitation on our part to do anything which would
come in the way of a political solution or which might be
construed as intervention lost significance. The people of
Bangal Desh, battling for their very existence, and the
people of India, fighting to defeat aggression, found
themselves partisans in the same cause, and therefore the
Government of India accorded recognition to the People’s
Republic of Bangla Desh on 6 December. We delayed
recognition of the Government of Bangla Desh to avoid ally
precipitation of the crisis, but the emergence of Bangla
Desh was based on the declared and manifest will of the
people of East Bengal. The Government of Bangla Deshis
constituted by the freely elected representatives of the
people of East Bengal, who contested the elections of
December 1970. It was they who took the decision to
declare the independence of their country on 10 April in
the face of Pakistani repression. Still, we stayed our harid
and did not accord any recognition but waited until
6 December.
98. An important consideration in our according recogni.
tion to Bangla Desh was that the brutalities and repression
of the Pakistan Army against the civilian population there
were increasing in proportion to the successesof the Mukti
Bahini. The Government of Bangla Desh conveyed to us the
urgent need to restore normalcy and order in their
territory. They requested us to come to the assistanceof
their freedom forces to re-establish order. Recognition was
therefore necessary to provide a proper basis for our
presencein Bangla Desh.
99. Secondly, we wanted to make it absohrtely clear that
the entry of our armed forces into Bangla Desh wasnot
motivated by any intention of territorial aggrandizement.
That should satisfy the representative of the United States
of America. We recognized Bangla Desh to psovide a proper
juridical and political basis for the presence of our army in
support of the Mukti Bahini and the Bangla Desh Govern.
ment in that country-apart from the fact that our action
wasin exercise of the defence of our country.
100. We have a clear and formal understanding with the
Government of Bangla Desh that the armed forces of India
shall remain in Bangla Desh only as long as the people and
Government of Bangla Desh require and welcome their
presence. The alternative to those arrangements would have
been chaos and repression in East Bengal and a rnisinterpretation of our intentions by interested parties. To sum UP,
therefore, recognition of Bangla Desh, apart from being an
acknowledgement of an inevitable political reality, is also
an imperative requirement for the restoration of peace and
stability in the area and for our own defence and security.
101. That is the perspective in which the Security Council
should deliberate on the situation and devise means tc

10

restore normalcy to the region. The military conflict raging
in the subcontinent, apart from being unfortunate, is
unimaginable in terms of its violence and destruction. We
do not doubt the motives and concern which prompted the
General Assembly to adopt the resolution of 7 December
asking for an immediate cease-fire and withdrawal [resohlion 2 793 (XXVI)/.
102. It is my submissionthat the appeal should be
directed ‘to the Government of Pakistan. It is not India
which declaredwar or started war; it is not India which is
responsiblefor creating the original conditions that led to
the present unfortunate conflict; it is not India which
deliberately and systematically refusedto meet the aspirations of the 7.5million peopleinhabiting the country which
was once part of Pakistan;it is not India which perpetuated
the repression,genocideand bru,tality which provided the
springboard for the freedom movement of BanglaDesh,
which led to the decisionof the people of that region to
create for thetnselvesa free and independentnation; it was
not India which forsook the long period of nine months
during which a reasonablepolitical settlement could have
been evolved with the leadersand peopleof BanglaDesh;it
was not India which refused to listen to the counselsof
reason and the impulses of wisdom generatedby the
internalional community for dealingwith this situation.
103. It is not India which hastried to convert the issueof
East Bengal into an India-Pakistan dispute for narrow
purposes of power and exploitation. It is not India which
has subjected the undisputedleader of the peopleof East
BengaI, She&h Mujibur Rahman,to the unthinkablesuffering of imprisonment andsecrettrial, which might evenlead
to a death sentence.It is not India which hasseta record in
political persecution, the genocide of a people and the
suppression of human rights that inevitably led to the
present conflagration.
104. If India hasbeenguilty of anything, it hasbeenof its
restraint, its willingnessto keep all the options for peace
and reason open for a period of nine long months,while 75
million people in the neighbouringregion underwentuntold
suffering and while nearly 10 million political victims facing
their own tensionsand problemscameto our territory.
10s. The Government of Pakistan did not merely fail to
utilize those intervening monthsto redressthe situationbut
deliberately took decisionafter decisionwhich could have
only one ending, which is the present tragedy. The
continued repressionby the West Pakistani army in East
Bengal over theseintervening months; the deliberateflouting of the popular will in appointing civilian governments
constituted by quislingsandstooges;the repeatedrefusalto
accept the true nature of the freedom movementof the
people of East Bengal and the consistentand repeated
attempts to inveigle India into a military conflict sothat
attention would be diverted from the evil and destructive
policies of West Pakistanin East Bengal-all lead to only
one conclusion: that President Yahya Khan and his
Government did not look upon the nine monthsof restraint
by India and patience by the people of East Bengalas a
period of option to settlethe matter peaceful1.y.
106. As the Government of Pakistan’s policies have
shown, it utilized this time to forecloseeachoption offered

to them by the international community, deliberately and
finally. The present conflict between Pakistan and India,
and Pakistanand BanglaDesh,is the inevitable consequence
of a Government which believesthat the feeble power of
the sword can overcome the will of a people, the forcesof
democracy and the impulseof liberty,
107. It is in this context that I shouldlike to dealwith the
views expressedby some representatives,particularly the
representativeof Pakistan,about India’s so-calledunwilling.
nessto co-operatewith efforts madebv the United Nations
to normalize the situation.
108. The efforts madeby the United Nations fall into two
broad categories: the first dealing with the humanitarian
and relief aspectsof the problem created by the massive
influx of refugees from East Bengal into India, and
unsettled conditions created by the military repressionby
the WestPakistani Army insideEast Bengal,
109. India was prompt in bringing this problem to the
notice of the United Nations and all its relevant forums,
and pointed out at the very outset that a final remedy to
the humanitarian aspect of the problem cannot be found
without a rational political settlement of it, accordingto
the wishesof the people of East Bengal.While m.entioning
this, India assuredfull co-operation to the United Nations
in whatever interim measuresthe United Nationswishedto
take to bring succour and relief to the unfortunate millions
of East Bengal.
110. Indeed, India has shoulderedthe major burden of
taking care of the refugees,though the responseof the
international community has been generous,but from the
very nature of the circumstancesinadequate,if we take into
consideration the colossalsize of the problem, India agreed
to the location of the United Nations focal-point office in
Delhi and rendered full co-operationand all facilitiesto the
representativesof this office in organizing relief operations
for the refugees.India has alsorespondedto the legitimate
wish of the international community to assess
the situation
objectively by allowing free accessto observersfrom all
over the world .to come and study this situation on the
spot.
111. India has given all its resourcesand manpower,to the
maximum extent possible,to alleviate the sufferingsof the
people of the neighbouring region and India remains
committed in this regard until all the refugeesreturn to
their homeland for rehabilitation and resettlement. Although India is doing all this, as a trust on behalf of the
international community, it is the responsibility of the
international community to look after these millions of
refugees.
112. We have appreciated the efforts madeby the Secretary-General in this regard, but we remain convincedthat
the international community wasmistakenin the hopethat
giving relief assistance
to the refugeeswould be sufficient to
overcome the declaredwishesof the people of EastBengal.
The real problem wasthe prevention of the re-impositionof
the tyrannical rule of WestPakistanover them. The validity
of our assessment
has unfortunately but tragically been
confirmed by events.

113. I should now like to come to the second category of
views expressed in regard to the political aspects of the
problem, The SecretaryGeneral, in his aide-m&moire of 19
July addressed to the Government of India, and in his
memorandum addressed to the President of the Security
Council, on 2ci July, had acknowled.ged that one of the
important reasons for the continuing stalemate in East
Bengal was the breakdown of civilian administration in East
Bengal and the lack of progress in achieving a political
reconciliation. He had again rightly pointed out, in the
introduction to his report on the Work of the Organization
to the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly,4 that
a disaster of such vast proportions can be solved and
remedied only with due respect to the humanitarian and
political principles.
114. At the beginning of the current session of the
General Assembly, the outgoing President, Ambassador
Hambro, as well as several representatives, including the
Foreign Ministers of Fmnce, the United Kingdom, the
USSR and Sweden, had drawn attention to the root cause
of the problem. It was the denial of the wishes of the
people of East Bengal which led to the evolving crisis. In
spite of this correct appreciation of the problem, the
international community and the United Nations found
themselves unable to exert effective influence on the
Government of Pakistan to bring about a political settlement of the problem according to the wishes of the people
of East Bengal.
115. We in India, as well as,people all over the world,
noted with regret that this inability of the United Nations
to deal with the root causeof the problem was compounded by the tactics adoptedby Pakistan.Pakistanmade
proposals for locating United Nations observerson both
sidesof the India-Pakistanborder, for the deployment of
contact groups. None of theseproposals,even by implicat.ion, dealt with the political situation in East Bengal
resulting from the repressioncarried out by the Government of West Pakistan in that region. It was deliberately
sought to convert an issuewhich wasprimarily between the
peaple of East Bengaland the Government of Pakistaninto
an India-Pakistan issue which would not in any mannex
have achievedthe imperative requirement for a solution to
the problem: namely, the restoration of the freedom,
liberty and fundamentalhumanrights of the peopleof East
Bengal to them, and the creation of a political systemin
East Bengalaccordingto their wishes,

munity could not act in the matter, owing to some
limitations born of its commitments to the doctrine of
domestic jurisdict.ion. In face of a direct and consistent
violation of the UniversalDeclaration of Hulnan Rightsand
the provisions of Articles 55 and 56 of the Charterhy
Pakistan, the Security Council and the Uniied Natious
shouldhave found themselvesin a position to interveneia
the matter and persuadePakistan to return to the pathof
reason.This did not happen.While developmentsproceeded
on their inexorable coursetowards the presenttragedy, the
United Nations continued to be inhibited by considerations
of domesticjurisdiction. When Pakistan initiated its massive
military build-up againstus in October and wishedto stenl
the tide of freedom in East Bengal by a direct anned
confrontation with India, the Secretary-General madea
last, much appreciated, hut unfortunately fruitless attelnpl
to prevent the situation from deteriorating any further. I-Ie
offered his good offices to both India and Pakistanin a
communicationaddressedto President Yahya Khan andthe
Prime Minister of India on 20 October [see S/10410,
pura. .5]. But even this offer of good offices wasnot aimed
at the root causeof the problem. The Secretary-General
offered his good offices to mediate between India and
Pakistan to de-escalatethe mili.tary situation. But the fact
of the matter wasthat the military situation wascreatedby
Pakistanin direct responseto the increasingsuccessof the
freeclornmovement in East Bengal.
1IS. Pakistanaccept,edthe Secretary-General’soffer in the
hope that the dignity of his office could be utilized, not
only to prevent India from taking effective defensive
action, but alsoto bolster the strength of the WestPakistani
army againstthe freedom movement in Bast Bengal,
119. PresidentYahya Khan is on record asstating that he
would considerthe successof the Mukti Bahini a sufficient
justification .to launch a war on India. Sincehe himselfhad
linked the military situation inside East Bengal-which was
primarly a matter betweenthe West Pakistaniarmy andthe
people of East Bengal-with the military situation on
India’s westernborder, India could not but take note of the
situation and react accordingly.

120. India was aware of Pakistan’s motives in accepting
the Secretary-General’soffer and, therefore, while replying
to the Secretary-General’scommunication of 20 October,
the Prime Minister of India stated in a letter of 16
November/ibid., para. 71 that the offer of good offices by
116. The voluntary return of the refugeesto their home- the Secretary-Generalcould be a constructive stepprovided
landunder conditionsof dignity and honour, with guarantees it wasdirected towards bringing about a political settlemerlt
of.rehabilitation and resettlementin their homeland, and between the Government of Pakistan and the peopleof
the discontinuation of the military repressionof East East Bengal, according to the declared aspirationsof the
Bengal by the Government of Pakistan are directly interlatter.
linked. Wehad mentioned this apprehensionof oursto the
Secretary-Generalin our reply to his aide-m&moireof 19
121. India assuredits full co-operatipn to the SecretaryJuly, on 2 August 1971, We have reiterated this point of
Generalif he undertook such an initiative to deal with the
view in our statements in the General Assembly, its
basicproblem. India alsoassuredthe Secretary-General,and
Committeesand the SeFurity Council as well asin various through him the United Nations, that it had no aggressive
other relevant forums.
intentions against Pakistan and that it would not start a
military conflict.
117. Informal consultations in the Security Council in
July and August indicated that the international com122. The Presidentof Pakistanmade a last and desperate
attempt t.o involve the prestige of the United Nations ifi
4 Official Records of the Generd Assembly, Twenty-s&h Session,
Supplement No. IA.
perpetuating his policy of repressionin East Bengalwhen
12

he made a suggestion in his communication of 23 November to the Secretary-General that he would be willing to
locate United Nations observers on the East Bengal side of
the India-East Bengal border ta verify the facts of so-called
Indian aggression. This was, to our mind, a deliberate
attempt at tarnishing the image of the United Nations by
making it a party to the repression of the people. Pakistan’s
repeated assertions of co-operation with the United Nations
in dealing with the problem have no meaning whatsoever in
the context of President Yahya Khan’s intransigence till
today in coming to terms with the already elect&l
representatives of the people of Bangla Des.11and their
undisputed leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

West Pakistan. India would be willing to discuss any
cease-fire or withdrawal which would ensure the freedom
and aspirations of the people of Bangla Desh, and which
would ensure the vacation of aggression by Pakistani troops
from Indian territory.
I29. During the conflict India stands committed in dealing
with ,the enemy forces according to the Geneva Conventions. India’s Chief of Staff assured his Pakistani counterparts of this commitment of the Government and the
people of India on 7 December. He went one step further in
assuring the West Pakistani troops in East Bengal of their
safe evacuation to West Pakistan if they would surrender
and discontinue their repression of the civilian population
of Bangla Desh.

123. It would indeed be unfortunate if Pakistan’s calculated policy to get the United Nations involved as a party
to its oppression in Bangla Desh were passed off as
adherence to certain stipulations of the Charter.

130. We are meeting today to deal with a crisis unprecedented in the annals of the IJnited Nations. India’s record
of co-operation with the United Nations over the last 25
years and its unqualified commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter are well known and there for all -to
see. While repeating the Government of India’s assurance
that it will co-operate with the United Nations in any
realistic effort that it may make to deal with the root cause
of the problem, I should like to add that India will not be
deflected from the vital task of ensuring its own territorial
integrity and security by any attempts undertaken from
any quarter.

124. There is one other consideration of fundamental
importance which I would like to raise. International law
recognizes that where a mother State has irrevocably lost
the allegiance of such a large section of its people as
represented by Bangla Desh and cannot bring them under
its sway, conditions are suitable for that section to come
into being as a separate state. It is India’; assessment that
this is precisely what has happened in Bangla Desh.
125. The overwhelming majority of the elected representatives of Bangla Desh have declared themselves in favour of
separation from the mother State of Pakistan and have set
up a new state of Bangla Desh. India has recognized this
new State. The armed forces of the new State have long
been engaged in a struggle against the forces of West
Pakistan in Bangla Desh. In these circumstances, is it
realistic to call upon India to cease fire without at the same
time giving even a hearing to the representatives of Bangla
Desh, whose armed forces-numbering about 1.50,000-are
engaged against the forces of West Pakistan?

13 1. I would also be remiss in defining the realities of the
situation if I did not reiterate that any solution to the
present conflict will have to take into account the views of
the Government and people of Bangla Desh. Initiatives by
the United Nations or from other quarters which ignore the
existence of a nation of 75 million people with a
Government of their own choice, who are the main party
affected by this crisis, cannot succeed.
132. I cannot but affirm our determination in this regard,
because India is fighting today for the preservation of the
basic principles on which its people and its Government
have sought to build a future. When our very survival is in
question we cannot but commit our total mental, moral
and material resources for its sake.

126. India earnestly hopes that, in the light of the facts set
out above, the United Nations will consider once again the
reaiities of the situation, so that the basic causes of the
conflict
are removed and peace is restored. Given an
assurance of a desire to examine these basic causes with
objectivity,
India will not be found wanting in offering its
utmost co-operation.

133. It is our earnest hope that the international community will appreciate the realities of the situation, as the
future stability and peace of South-East Asia perhaps
depend on the resolution of this conflict on a rational and
realistic basis, ensuring peace, prosperity and justice. I
should like to assure the Council that India will do its
utmost to meet this objective.

127. The struggle that the people of India and the people
of Rangla Desh are engaged in today is a struggle for their
territorial
integrity and security; for their fundamental
liberties; for the preservation of the ideals of democracy,
secularism and non-alignment; for the strengthening of the
forces of peace; for upholding the very principles of the
Charter
which Pakistan is guilty of violating. This is a
struggle not merely for survival in dignity and freedom of
nearly ‘one-sixth of mankind, but for survival of the
international
community within the framework of international covenants and agreements which the peoples of the
world have so laboriously built up after two holocausts
during this century.

134. The Council is the instrument of the United Nations
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Security Council is bound by the noble
principles (and purposes of the Charter. These principles and
purposes have to be applied to each concrete situation. The
Security Council has failed in many cases in the past to
ensure international peace and security, because it has
failed to take note of the realities of each concrete
situation. If the Security Council wants to ensure peace and
security in the present crisis-and I presume it does want to
do this-it would be failing in its duty if it did not take note

128. In this context I should like to assure the Council
that India has no territorial ambitions in Bangla Des11or in
13

of the glaring fact that is there for everyone to see, namely,
the successful struggle of the 75 million people of Bangla
Desh to assert their birthright of freedom and independence. Any proposal or resolution of the Security Council
that does not take note of the existence of the Government
of Bangla Desh, established by the democratic will of the
people, and of the fact that it is in effective control of its
territory, would be a holIow and empty resolution devoid
of any effect.

crucial and dire importance not only to Pakistanbut to tile
world community and the United Nations.

135. I would therefore submit most earnestly and with
due respect that the participation of the representatives of
Bangla Desh, and their being given a hearing to state their
case, is imperative for the success of any proposal for a
cease-fire, not only in Bangla De& but also in the West.
The situation in the \r’est has been created by Pakistan in
order to cover up its failure in the East. The Security
Council must recognize this link between the situation in
the East and the West, and the fact that no cease-fire can be
effective on the ground unless it has the consent of the
Government of Bangla Desh. Without this there can be no
durable peace, there can be no just peaceor security in the
Indian subcontinent. I amgladthat this questionwasraised
in the earlier discussionsand it is my earnesthope and
appealthat it will not be shelvedagain,
136. Before I conclude, I should like to read out the
communication addressedby my Prime Minister to the
Secretary-General,asit sumsup our basic approachto this
problem:
[The speakerread out the text of document S/l 0445.1
137. The representativeof the United Statesof America
has raisedcertain points. Someof theseare coveredin what
I have already stated, but I would like to examine and
consider very carefully all his points. With these observations at this stage, I should like to reserve my right of
further comment upon certain specific points that have
been raised by the representativeof the United Statesof
America.
138. The PRESIDENT: The next nameinscribed on the
list of speakersis that of the Deputy Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Pakistan.However,he hasinformed me
that he would requestthat the Councilgrant a recessof 15
minutes before he speaks,as he has received important
messagesfrom his Government which he would like to
study much more closely before addressingthe Council.
Therefore, if there is no objection, it would be my
intention to suspendthe meetingfor 15 minutesand, after
resumingit, to call immediatelyupon the representativeof
Pakistan.

142. I am aware of the urgency of the situation, and1
would not like unnecessarilyto waste either your tie,
Mr. President, or that of this august body, which is
primarily responsiblefor the maintenanceof internatieasl
peaceand security. Time is running out. I too could gointo
the genesisof the Indo-Pakistan dispute, I could start from
the time of the Emperor Ashoka and go down the lanesef
history to the conquest of the Indian subcontinent by
MohammedBin Qasim andthe thousandyearswe havehad
of most unfortunate and tragic conflict in our subcontineat
betweenits two predominant, profound cultures. Wehave
soughtto resolve them in the spirit of contemporary times.
143. At the present moment I cannot make an elaborate
comment on all the issuesthat have been raised by tlrc
Foreign Minister of India, Sardar Swaran Sir@., whoruI
know very well, and with whom I have worked in the past
on these very disputes. In 1962 we had six months of
negotiations for the settlement of lndo-Pakistan disputes,
SardarSwaranSin& was,1 think, then Minister of Railways
and I was the Foreign Minister of Pakistan.We had six
months of painstaking and sincerediscussions
for bringing
about a settlement of Indo-Pakistan disputes basedon
equity and justice. We madean effort; we endeavouredand
we tried hard. As far aswe are concerned,I can assureyou
that it wasa sincereeffort, and I assumeit wasan equally
sincereeffort on the part of India. But unfortunately we
alwaysseemedto reach an impasse.And soI shall not aow
go back to the past. The past is known to India; the pastis
known to Pakistan. We are part of the samesubcontinent.
The past is in part known to the membersof the Securitp
Council because it is their problem also, It is their
responsibility to know of these grave issues,so from that
point of view we expect them to know of the basiccauses
of the differencesthat divide India and Pakistan.
144. I am not going to indulgein glib rhetoric or draw any
semanticblanks, becausethe situation is far too serious.
The fat is in the fire, and the time has come for us to act
either individually as separateStates defending their S[IV
ereign integrity and national unity, or collectively for
restraint as membersof the United Nations acting iu aad
through the Security Council, which is chargedwith the
primary responsibility of maintaining peaceand securityin
the world. Either we act individually or we act collectiveiy.
Thoseare the two basicoptions open to us.
145. Secondly, I do not attempt-and I never will-- te
speakin a spirit of recrimination or to put the blameon
oneparty or the other. My effort will be to invoke the basic
objective principles and point to the basicobjective realities
involved in the situation, rather than to inject a subjective
character into the dispute th.at today is burning the
subcontinentandhasled to frdtricidal warfare.

139. As there is no objection, the meeting will be
supendedfor 15 minutes.
The meeting wassuspended
at 9.30p.m. and resumedat
10 p.m.

146. I am not going to assumea sanctimoniousattitude.
From the outset I am quite prepared to acceptthat we have
made mistakes. Man is not infaIlible. Mistakeshave beea
made everywhere-not only in the subcontinent. Mistakes
have been made by the Roman Empire, by the Britidr
Empire, by every State of the world. But Statesare not te

140. The PRESIDENT: I calI on the Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Pakistan.
141. Mr. BNUTTO (Pakistan):The Pakistandelegationhas
come to the Security Council at a time and moment of
14

be penalized for their mistakes. I admit that certain
mistakes have been made by us, as they have been made by
others. We are prepared to rectify those mistakes in a
civilized spirit, in a spirit of understanding and co-operation
in conformity with the highest principles of international
law and international norms. I am not going to absolve
myself of the tremendous and tragic blunders that have
been made.
147. We all make blunders-all of us in Africa, Asia,
Europe, the East and the West. It is not that we have been
oblivious of or blind to these factors. Everywhere there
have been blind spots and tragic developments. But the
effort must be always to try to repair the damage. We are
quite prepared to try to repair the damage.

military Juggernaut. It can never be destroyed by force and
by the preponderance of military power.
152. This is what I would like my Indian friends to
recognize-and I refer to them as friends even though we
are fighting. They recognized it in 1947 when they
conceded the inevitability of the establishment of Pakistan.
Their great leaders are still respected in Pakistan. They had
stood for an ideal. They stood for a united India. But they
recognized that that could not be maintained in the face of
historical factors and the diversity of cultures. Finally, in
1947, the Indian Congress accepted the creation of Pakistan
as an independent sovereign State, after years and years and
years of opposition.
153. There was a great Prime Minister, the first Prime
Minister of India, the father of the present Prime Minister
of India, who said: “We were too old, we were too tired to
oppose Pakistan, and Pakistan had to come into being, But
we hope that one day we will get together again”. I too
hope so-not that Pakistan will emerge as subservient to
India--but in the sense that we will get together again as
equal friends, in a common fraternity, living in a. common
subcontinent and sharing the common effort of seeing that
poverty, ignorance and misery are wiped out. ‘The two
countries that are the poorest in the world are Pakistan and
India. Our resources might be tremendous, but the fact is
that we two are the poorest in the world. Yet, in the last 24
years, we have gone to war three times. Three times there
has been conflict in the subcontinent. I remember the
Prime Minister of the Soviet Union once telling me that
even rich nations try to avoid war; poorer nations should
make a greater attempt to avoid war.

148. So I do not say that we did not make mistakes; I do
not say that mistakes have not been made in the subcontinent in the past. It is not a new phenomenon; it goes
back to ancient times. It is rooted in history, and I am not
going back into the historical factors involved in the
situation. I am trying to confine myself to the relevant
propositions involved in the present crisis.
149. And what are the issues involved in the present
crisis? There are certain basic and important issues involved
in the present crisis that has brought about a catastrophic
situation in our subcontinent. In my opinion the primary
and fundamental issue is that ,the world communily, the
Uni-ted Nations and people at large, will not accept the fact
that the unity of a State brought into being through the
efforts of its own people, by their own struggle, expressing
their own personality, is to be subjected to dismemberment
by the use of force. That is the important basic issue.

154. We are too poor. There is too much misery. There is
too much squalor. You should know, Mr. President, as the
representative of an African country, that our basic
problem is to fight poverty, to bring about social justice, to
bring about equality, to bring about a sense of fraternity, to
progress, to try and keep pace with the progress of other
countries, of other continents. It is unfortunate that today
we should be pitted against each other and that one of us
should dream semi-barbarically to annihilate the other.
There can be no liquidation. It is not possible today. Even
the great Powers cannot do it. Even they have found that
hegemony and domination do not last. Does India think
that today it is going to become a great Power in Asia? It is
simply not possible because then India will be pitted against
120 million people, valiant people with a great past,
fighting for their independence, fighting for their dignity,
fighting for their self-respect.

150. Pakistan was not created by force. Please remember
that the establishment of Pakistan was a great historic
phenomenon. Pakistan came into being in the face of the
opposition of the Indian Congress and of the British, who
were the masters not only of the subcontinent but of an
empire on which the sun did not set. Since such powerful
forces were opposed to it, the creation of Pakistan could
not have occurred without the pressure of historic forces
and the force of a people’s will. Pakistan crystallized as a
sovereign, independent State in 1947, but the germs and
seeds of Pakistan were laid much earlier. They were laid
from the time when Mohammed Bin Qasim set his foot in
the subcontinent.
The theme and the message of Islam
came into the subcontinent: the message of equality, of
fraternity, of brotherhood. The seeds of Pakistan were laid
much earlier than the creation of Pakistan.

155. So I offer a hand of friendship to India. I would have
offered a hand of greater friendship to India if we were not
at war. India knew that we were prepared to offer that
hand of friendship to India as soon as a civilian Govertient
returned to Pakistan. Perhaps they pre-empted that development, unfortunately for the subcontinent. But I shall
come to that later.

151. If Pakistan might seem to be destroyed physically
today by a predatory neighbour, by a military Juggernaut,
it will still last, because Pakistan is an ideal. Pakistan is not
a mere physical reality; Pakistan is an ideal. It will last even
if its total physical embodiment is dismembered. We are
prepared to face that physical destruction. We are prepared
for the decimation of 120 million people. We will then
begin anew and build a new Pakistan. But we will never
accept subjugation by brute physical force. This is the
reality. This is the situation: the ideal, the dream, the
concept, the vision of Pakistan can never be destroyed by a

156. So the issue, the basic issue involved today is that a
State, a sovereign State, brought into being by the will of
its own people, freely, without coercion, without interference, cannot be dismembered by force. It would be a
15

tragic precedent for the worId at large, a terrible precedent.
Today I speak not only for Pakistan but for a principle; I
speak for a basic principle which affects Asia, Africa and
Latin America. That is why the third world overwhelmingly
supported the cause of Pakistan in the historic resolution
adopted by the General Assembly on 7 December (resoZution 2793 (XXVI)].

157. If I had spoken only for Pakistan, 1 wouldhave been
isolated, because India is a bigger country than Pakistan.
Power politics would have come into play. Pakistan’s cause
succeeded on 7 December because it was based, not on the
interests of Pakistan conceived selfishly and subjectively,
but on a world principle-universally
accepted, universally
recognized-that a sovereign State, brought into being by its
own blood and toil and sweat, cannot be dismembered by a
predatory neighbour wanting to tear it apart limb by limb.
Today it is Pakistan; tomorrow it will be other parts of the
world. Please realize that position. Please remember, we are
not fighting the war for Pakistan alone; we are fighting the
war for a cause, for a just cause: the cause that involves a
State which came into being by its people’s volition and
whose estabIishment wasrecognized by India.
158. The British were the departing Power in 1947. What
interests did they have? If the subcontinent wanted to be
fragmented into six States, the British would not have
cared. They would have said: all right, let there be six
States; if there are to be four States, let there be four
States. They were leaving the subcontinent. Why did the
British create the two States of India and Pakistan? The
British left the subcontinent with two States because the
people of the subcontinent at that time, 400 million,
wanted two States, and not three, or four or five States.
One of the two States was India, that was called Bahrat,
and the other was Pakistan. And it was the peopIe of East
Bengal who played a valiant role, a predominant role, in the
creation of Pakistan. If the Bengalis, the East Bengalis-over
whom my friend Sardar Swaran Singh waxes eloquent and
sheds crocodile tears now-had wanted a separate State, the
British would have granted a separate State and there would
have been a separate State of Bengal-not only of PakistanBengal, but of Indian-Bengal as well, and of Assam. There
would have been a third State-and a fourth State as well.

the IJnited Nations Charter? I am out of touch with the
United Nations Charter, because for the last five and ehdf
years I have been struggling internally for the restoration of
democracy and social justice in my country. After five aad
a half years I am coming to the Security Council, after a
very big struggle for democratic and social justice in nlY
-land. Is the present situation not a chaIlenge to the United
Nations itself? This is another basic issue involved. Is the
United Nations going to permit this kind of mutation by
physical force?
162. Today it is Pakistan, tomorrow it will be Bhutanindeed Bhutan is already in the bag; Sikkim is already in tile
bag; Nepal is not yet in the bag, but it is going to be in the
bag very soon if Pakistan is dismembered. Bhutan, Sikkim,
Nepal, Ceylon, Afghanistan and Iran: the Pandora’s box has
not opened for Pakistan alone. I-t has opened for many
countries, and in a very decisive way. So it is a challenge to
all Members: who have to see whether this kind of mutation
can be permitted in the world through physical force,
blackmail and intimidation.
163. The Indian Foreign Minister has given a long list of
events to try to show that we are the aggressors. Now, I
appeal to your common sense and logic. India is five or six
times larger than Pakistan. We are about 120 million, they
are about 500 million; our foreign exchange earnings and
resources are much more limited. One of the reasons why
we wanted to create Pakistan was so that we could get into
our own little corner and live in peace with a bigger
neighbour.. But the bigger neighbour did not accept that
position. And so we have been accused of aggression. Can
Denmark be accused of aggression against Germany? Can
Mexico be accused of aggression against the United States
of America? Can Holland be accused of aggression against
France?
164. So, basically, I am dealing with the wider issue
involved. The first principle is that a sovereign, independent
State brought into being by popular free wil1 cannot be
dismembered by force. The second principle involved is
that there is a responsibility for the United Nations,
embodied in the Charter, undertaken because of the
consequences of the Second World War, and, through all
failures and successes,maintained for the last 25 years.

159. So there is a basic issue involved. Stripped of all the
frenzy and eloquence of Sardar Swaran Singh, it is that
States which have been created through a struggle and in
the teeth of massive and formidable opposition cannot be
dismembered by physical force by a neighbourin State
which is more powerful in military might. So please
remember what we are fighting for. We are not fighting just
for Pakistan. We are fighting for a cause that affects all of
US, every one of us: either States are to remain independent, sovereign, free, or else they will be dismembered
at will whenever a great Power or a semi-great Power, or a
seemingly semi-great Power, wants it.

165. In this connexion I shall have to tell the Council that
the United Nations has failed Pakistan in the past as well,
because we are smaller than India. We came here in 1947
&d 1948. We came here pleading for the exercise of the
right of self-determination of the people of Kashmir, which
both India and Pakistan had accepted. And the then Prime
Minister of India, the father of the present Prime Minister
of India, had himsklf said that Kashmir was a disputed
territory and that the future of Kashmir would be
determined by the free will of the people of Kashmir. That
was in 1948, but until today the Kashmir dispute has not
been resolved and a part of a territory that would have
formed a legitimate part of Pakistan has been denied tc
Pakistan.

160. Today it is in the subcontinent, tomorrow it will be
in other parts of Asia, Africa and Latin America; it can be
anywhere. So it is a basic issue which is involved in the
present situation.

166. Then we came here in 1965-the Foreign Minister of
India referred to that. At that time I was representing mY
country and I remember that we were told in the resolution

161. And I ask you, Sir, as President of the Security
Council: Is this not a challenge to the United Nations, to
16

-

which was adopted that the underlying causeof the conflict
would be resolved. If we had really gone into the causesof
the conflict, of which the Foreign Minister of India spoke
so much this evening, if we had really gone into the basic
causes of the conflict in 196.5, today we would not be
facing a greater tragedy. At that time the President of the
Security Council was Mr. Arthur Goldberg, permanent
representative of the United States of America. He told me
that that resolution was a bible-I wish I had asked him
whether it was the Old Testament or the New Testamentand we believed in that bible, because people believe in a
sacred document. He said “We will see to it that it is
implemented”. That was in 1965. It has not been implemented. So a further deterioration has taken place and
today we find ourselves facing an even greater catastrophe.
And if the world does not seize the problem, if the world
does not have the courage and the moral fibre to say that
these issues must be resolved and that the full force of the
international
community, its might and power must be
brought to bear on them, then Indo-Pakistani problems will
become ever more complicated. And who will suffer? The
poor people of India and Pakistan will suffer-and I am not
a friend of only the poor people of Pakistan; I am a friend
of the poor people of India also. We have more poverty
than any other people in the world.
167. We want to put an end to armed conflict. We want to
lay down arms. We want a period of security and goodwill
in the subcontinent, because we have had so much conflict
and so much turmoil. And the ilitb has not suffered; the
&te never suffers. The people who suffer are the poor: the
refugees of whom the Indian Foreign Minister spoke, the
people who merely eke out a subsistence living. We want to
give our people food, shelter, clothing and education. We
cannot do those things if we have daggers drawn, fighting
all the time, chauvinistically quarrelling in the same
geographical area, in the same place.

we must begin a new chapter, because our basic objective
was to bring about social and economic justice. What the
subcontinent faces is not a political crisis or an economic
crisis. The subcontinent faces a social crisis, a crisis of the
social structure, born of the struggle against an unmaintainable and disgusting status quo, which has lasted for
years. Therefore, we should bend all our energies for the
end of an iniquitous status quo. Europe has progressed;
other countries have progressed. We also are civilized
peoples. We have 5,000 years of civilization behind us. We,
too, have the means, the resources and .the ability to
progress, and we too can progress and bring about a better
life for our people, provided we lay down arms, not on the
basis of capitulation, not on the basis of the violation of
international principles, not on the basis of lacerating
States, of trying to dismember countries.
171. We should coexist, as the Soviet Union and the
United States, two great Powers, can coexist. Now today if
China and the United States can open a new dialogue, why
cannot this happen in the subcontinent? We wanted it to
happen. But we were not given a chance. The Indian
Government forestalled those possibilities by striking a
month before a civilian government, after 13 years, was
going to come into power in Pakistan. They should have
given us an opportunity, and we wanted that opportunity.
But they struck two months before. A civilian democratic
government was to be in@.lled as a result of the struggle of
both East and West Pakistan. The struggle in one region was
not unconnected with that in the other. It was a common
struggle, it was one united struggle. But we were not given
that chance.
172. We have been failed in the past by history, unfortunately, but in contemporary terms we have been betrayed
by the United Nations. We have been let down by the
Security Council’s inability to secure the implementation of
its resolutions, on Kashmir in 1947, in 1965. And today we
are again before this great world body. We have not come
here to beg for peace. Please do not misunderstand. We are
a nation of 120 million people. So what if a city falls? If
Dacca or Jessore fall, about which people talk so much? A
battle lost is not a country lost. Governments can go,
monarchies can go, dictatorships can go, but nations last.
States are rooted in the people. I wish the Indian
Government would realize this. It should not be intoxicated
by these reports of the fall of Jessore, the fall of one city or
another. What is the fall of a city? The country is still
there. The country was there before 1947 in idea, in spirit,
and it crystallized into a sovereign nation State, and it will
continue to be there even if today or tomorrow Dacca falls.
Do not be misled by press reports. Because we are a smaller
country we do not have the resources to pump in that kind
of propaganda. Dacca is not going to fall so easily. I see the
effort here is to filibuster until Dacca falls. And even if
Dacca falls, so what? The valiant soldiers of Pakistan, the
valiant people of East Pakistan, the soldiers of East
Pakistan-they will stand indomitably to defend Dacca to
the end. In some sections of the Western press Dacca has
been described as Dunkirk. Do not be uncharitable. There is
no comparison between Dunkirk and Dacca. Dunkirk was
20 miles away from Calais. We have a distance of 2,600
miles, surrounded by the Indian army. Dunkirk was not
surrounded from three sides. East Pakistan is surrounded

168. And when I say this I am not speaking from a
position of weakness-because Pakistan can never be weak,
and the Indians know that. We have a thousand years of
history.
169. If this conflict had not taken place and if the Indian
Government
had given us a chance to transform the
military regime in Pakistan into a civilian rbgime, it would
have seen how far we would have gone to bring about basic
changes in our outlook. I speak on these matters as an
elected representative of the people of Pakistan. Sardar
Swaran Singh spoke about Mr. Mujibur Rahman’s being an
elected representative. I was as much an elected represe.ntative of the people of West Pakistan as Mr. Mujibur
Rahman was an elected representative from East Pakistan. I
have as much locus stancliin West Pakistan as Mr. Mujibur
Rahman has in East Pakistan. I also speak not as a puppet. I
speak as the authentic voice of the people of Pakistan. I
spearheaded a struggle against a mighty dictator, and my
roots are with the people and I want to servethe people of
my country. The people of my country cannot be served if
we are going to be locked in this suicidal, fratricidal warfare
in this fashion.
170. I am not speaking from a position of weakness.I said
these things even during the election campaign. I said that
17

from three sides. If the people of East Pakistan were not
with Pakistan, East Pakistan would have fallen within
minutes. Seven to one is the Indian superiority over the
forces of East, Pakistan. They are completely blockaded. No
ammunition can get through, which I can understand they
do not want to allow through. But even medicines and food
cannot be airlifted. The blockade cannot be broken. We are
terribly blockaded.

176. But what I am trying to say is that I am glad he
raised those questions, even though it constituted an
interference in Pakistan’s essentially domestic matters, It
was as if I were to talk about the DMK movement in
Madras, about the Nagas’ or the Meos’ struggle for
independence, about the plight of poor Bhutan and Sikkitn,
or about the many other matters that plague India. What’s
sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. The con.
sequences will come to the surface soon. It is up to India. If
India thinks that Pakistan is going to be dismembered, the
process is not going to stop there. The germ is going to
spread, and it is going to spread very fast.

173. And here we have East Pakistan representatives still
sitting with us. It is an oversimplification to say that the
people of East Pakistan are against Pakistan. If the people
of East Pakistan were against us, we would have capitulated
and fallen long ago. Why is the Indian Chief of Staff,
General Manekshaw, every day issuing appeals for surrender? It is because nobody is surrendering. They are
going to fight and we are going to fight. We are not going to
surrender like that. And do not think that by filibustering,
that if the Security Council debate is postponed by a day or
two we are going to be down and out and that we are going
to be on our knees. Like Alice, we .have come to the
Wonderland to tell you that our country and our subcontinent is turning into a wasteland.

177. However, I will not choose to talk about the internal
problems of India. Interference in the internal affairs of
another country not only offends the principIes of the
Charter, but also violates the Bandung principles.
Mr. President, you are from a State in Africa. There are
other metnber States here from Asia and from Latin
America. We all come from the samefraternity, we are all
brothers-in-arms.We have all been exploited, we have all
beensubjugated,we are all the victims of ruthlessexploitation. Are not the Bandungprinciples sacrosanctto you?
Are they sacrosanctto me only, today, becausemy country
is exposed to the mighty Juggernaut of a great military
power that outnumbers my country in East Pakistan by a
force of sevento one and that hasblockaded us by sea?

174. We were told that the General Assembly, the
Security Council, are responsible for peace in the world.
But we do not want peace without justice. We want peace
with justice and our only demand is that our country
should be spared from invasion, that foreign interference
should stop, that an internal struggle should not be
interpreted as giving rise to an external obligation. This is a
basic requirement. Today we ask for it, tomorrow others
will ask for it. So I am not pleading only for Pakistan. I am
pleading really for the rule of international law and
morality.

178. No, this concerns all of us. The Bandung principles
are beingviolated, the PanchaShila. I wasnot the author of
the PanchaShila; I wasonly a student then. Who was the
author? Who was the man who articulated the Pan&a
Shila? At the Bandung Conference,the PanchaShila were
articulated by, among other people, Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru. He talked about the “five principles of peaceful
coexistence”. The father of the Prime Minister of India said
that non-interferencewas a sacrosanctprinciple and oneof
the five principles,the PanchaShila.

175. A basic, unalterable, principle of international law is
non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries.
Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter speaks of noninterference in the internal affairs of States. It states:

179. India today haswrecked the PanchaShila principles.
India has abused and ,violated the Charter and the basic
principles of international law and morality. India today
has violated the Bandung principles of which it was a
co-author.

“Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters which
are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
state or shall require the Metnbers to submit such matters
to settlement under the present Charter . . .“.

180. These, therefore, are the basicprinciplesinvolved in
the matter, and they are very important principles. And
furthermore, we never expected the countries of the third
world to indulge in blackmail and big-Power chauvinism.
We thought the great Powerswere the culprits of big-Power
chauvinismand of blackmail, of seekinghegemony. If the
world can rise againstthe greatestPower in the world and
againsthegemony, and if the greatestPower in the world
wants to reduceits sphereof responsibility,wants no longer
to be the praetor, the policemanof ,the world, then India
cannot do that either. If the United States of America finds
itself today incapable of extending its influence over a
world-wide range to becomethe policeman of the world,
how can India becomethe policemanof the subcontinent
of Asia? India does not have the capability. India is built
on a hollow foundation, nurtured by fraud and deceit.
India must abandon theseillusions.If the United States of
America, the greatestPower in the world, after 20 yearsof
experiencefollowing the SecondWorld War, finds that it

NOWthis is a Charter obligation. But the Indian Foreign
Minister spoke for an hour and fifteen minutes and all he
spoke about was the internal affairs of Pakistan. His whole
speech was devoted to the internal affairs of Pakistan, I did
not have a bad conscience sq I did not ask one of my
friends here-and we still have a few friends left-to raise a
point of order to say that he was raising a matter within the
internal jurisdiction of Pakistan. I welcomed it, I am glad
that the Indian Foreign Minister saw fit to talk about the
internal matters of my country. For one thing, I will have
an opportunity now to reply to it, if 1 can, but if I do not
cover all the points I hope that members will forgive me
because he only spoke just now. However, I shall try to
cover some of his major points and, if I am unable to cover
all his points, I shall try to seek a right of reply, not to
filibuster, but to try subsequently to clear the points that
he raised. I shall make that effort.
18

P‘

does not have the resources to dispense foreign aid and to
continue the Viet-Nam war, that it must honourably leave
Asia, India must also realize that it cannot hold on to
Pakistan, to a part of the subcontinent. India must give up
its pretence of trying to become the policeman of the
subcontinent, of telling us what we should do in Pakistan:
which leader we should recognize, which leader we should
arrest, which leader we should release, which party we
should negotiate with, what was the interpretation of the
manifesto of a certain party,
181. This is a precedent for al1 of you to consider before
the morning comes. It is all very well to talk sweetly and
softly and in clipped t.ones. But let us talk about the
realities. The Foreign Minister said: “Consider the realities”. I say I welcome that: Consider the realities. I
welcome that more than he would. The realities are that
dictation, do.mination, hegemony, exploitation are being
practised against my country through physical force and
physical might. The largest Muslim State in the world,
brought into being by its own volition, is being destroyed
and decimated by a militav machine and against the will of
the people of the country. If we were not n united people,
if we did not have a united resolve, we would not have
lasted for 24 years. Egypt and Syria united briefly. They
were Arabs. They were of the same race, they had the same
religion. How long did the Egyptian-Syrian unity last?
Three years, or two years. It broke up. Why are East
Pakistan and West Pakisian together? Because we have a
common denominator. We have a common interest, and
that common interest is opposition to Indian domination,
Indian hegemony, Indian exploitation. That is our common
interest. So we are brothers-in-arms. We will always remain
together. What has happened? The ‘Indian Foreign Minister
talks about all the mistakes made by Pakistan, Well, India
never has made any mistakes. I congratulate India for never
having made any mistakes in 24. years. We are the only ones
who make mistakes. We are the only sinners in the world.
Nobody else makes mistakes. We are the great sinners. But
the same great sinners have remained together for 24 years,
nrlcl today also it took India nine months in order to
prepare to intervene to destroy us.

Asia. The question here is not a matter of selfdetermination. As Asians and as members of the third
world, we must never renounce self-determination, Selfdetermination, after President Woodrow Wilson preached it
and articulated it, brought about the independence of many
countries. We subscribe to self-determination, There can be
no compromise on self-determination-but
it must be
genuine self-determination. What is self-determination’!
That a country must be allowed to determine its future,
that a people must be allowed to determine its future. We
are not against self-det.ermination. My distinguished friends
are against self-determiriation, becaus: if they had ra.llowed
self-determination to be practised today, there would have
been the right of self-determination in Kashmir and the
people of Kashmir, after 24 years, would have decided
whether they were going to be a part of India or a part of
Pakistan. But they are never allowed that ri&t to selfdetermination.
184. In Kashmir, where Pandit Nehru himself said “Yes,
there must be self-determination, because it is disputed
territory”, India has always blocked, stopped, prevented
any action towards the self-determination of the people of
Jammu and Kashmir. Self-determination is not only a
principle that was articulated by President Woodrow
Wilson. The great founder of the Soviet State, Lenin, one of
the greatest men of all times, articulated the principle of
self-determination. So self-determination was accepted by
India and Pakistan. But today, when 24 years have passed,
self-determination has not taken place in Kashmir. Today
India talks about the self-determination of a country which
determined its flrture in 1947 and became a part of
Pakistan. How is &f-determination involved in Bengal, in
East Pakistan? East Pakistan is a part of Pakistan, an
inextricable part of Pakistan, united with Pakistan for 24
years. It chose to be a part of Pakistan and was in the
vanguard of the movement for Pakistan. Let me tell you
quite clearly that there could have been no Pakistan
without the struggle of the people of East Pakistan for the
creation of Pakistan.
185. The Foreign Minister of India has talked about the
mother State. I also am a student of international law; I
have not come across any acknowledged theory of the
mother State. I have studied under Nelsen and Oypenheim
and other people, but I have not come across this theory. It
might be somewhere in some archives, found somewhere or
other, this theory of the mother State. But let us accept the
fact that there is such a theory of the mother State, that if
a part of the mother State wants to r&lease itself from the
mother, it must Bnd its own conditions for freedom. I
accept that position, although I do not find authentic or
reliable evidence for the mother State concept or theory
that has been propounded by the Indian Foreign Minister.
But if there is such a concept, who is the mother and who is
the child? The mother is East Pakistan and the child is
West Pakistan, because it is in East Pakistan that the
majority of our people live. Fifty-six per cent of our people
live in East Pakistan and the rest live in West Pakistan. The
mother natural1.y must be the 56 per cent and not the 44
per cent. As I told you and as the British know, because
they were in the subcontinent, there could have been no
Pakistan without the contribution of the people of East
Pakistan to the creation of Pakistan. They were a part of us

182. The Foreign Minister of India talks about the
patience shown by India in waiting for nine months. It was
not patience. india found it necessary; now that they have
not succeeded they must physically intervene to destroy
Pakistan. If all those brutalities, those terrible atrocities
that have taken place in Pakistan were really as bad as the
Foreign Minister said, and if there was such a great
nlovement in East Pakistan, then it would not have been
necessary for India to intervene militarily to bring about a
military, physical victory by force of arms. But they have
not achieved it yet, in spite of their best efforts.
183. So there is a basic contradiction involved in that.
And please remember, the issue is not an issue of
self-determination.
-4s an Asian-and I am as much an Asian
3s 1 am a Pakistani-1 have always had an Asian outlook.
For we cannot think in terms of our own CoUntrY alone.
One country in Africa cannot think in terms of that one
country
alone; it must think in African terms. We in Asia
must think in Asian terms. As President de Gaulle said, “a
European Europe”. I therefore say we must have an Asian
19

I

in the 1965 war; how heroically they stood by US. I
remember in 1967 when I[ went there how devoted and
concerned they were for the welfare and integrity of
Pakistan.
186. After the general elections about which Swaran Singh
has spoken, I went there, in January. I went there and I
went to many parts of East Pakistan and I asked them
“What do you want, because the people’s will is supreme?
What do you want? Do you want one Pakistan or two
Pakistans? ” Believe ma, Mr. President. I am not lying to
you; I would never lie to the President of the Security
Council. They all said “We want one Pakistan. We believe in
one Pakistan”. This one Pakistan would have remained one
Pakistan if the Indians had not stepped in with their
powerful military action.

am speaking for all of the third world and for all those who
believe in justice, equality and equity among nations.
188. Having made these general remarks, I should like to
get down a little more to specific matters. We have been
told by the Indian Foreign Minister tonight and before aat
it was implied in the position that India has taken on an
internal dispute of Pakistan, that the people of East
Pakistan want to be free and to sever relations with West
Pakistan, and that this was the result of the last elections.
In the last elections, which were held in December 1970,
the Awami League and Sheikh Mujibur Rahman received an
overwhelming mandate in East Pakistan. We recognize that.
In West Pakistan I and my party received an overwhehning
mandate. But what was the demand of the Awami League?
The Awami League said in their election campaign that
they wanted autonomy. They did not want secession. Wein
West Pakistan also were fighting for autonomy, for all the
provinces, because we are a federal State, best suited to bea
federal State. So they wanted autonomy and we wanted
autonomy; they wanted democracy and we wanted democracy; they wanted to end military rule and we wanted
to en’d military rule. We had these common factors between
us. But what happened was that, suddenly, after the
elections this demand for autonomy was converted into a
demand for secession. There were many forces in the
background. You know, Sir, that the line between maximum autonomy and secession can be a thin one, a very thin
one. Through international manipulation and other factors,
a struggle for autonomy was converted into a struggle far
secession.

187. Finally, in deciding this issue, the Security Council is
sometimes prevented from taking necessary action because
of power politics, because the great Powers have great
interests, and their great interests are determined by their
own calculations. But these factors do not prevail in the
General Assembly. The General Assembly is the voice of
the world. The General Assembly symbolizes the march of
humanity towards greater and greater progress. The General
Assembly is where you, Sir, and I and others can speak for
truth and justice, unimpaired by the calculations of power
politics. The General Assembly is where the poorer nations
speak. The General Assembly is where the farmers and the
peasants and the proletariat of the international community, so to speak, and not merely the We, have a voice.
Now what has the General Assembly decided? On 7 December the General Assembly, by an overwhelming and
189. But who is to interpret whether it is autonomy or
secession? The issue being internal, it is for the people to
massive vote of 304 in favour decided in favour of the unity
determine what is the point of that autonomy, whether it is
and integrity of Pakistan. The whole world said, taking
everything into account, taking the truth into account, that
genuine autonomy or ultra vires autonomy. It is not for a
Pakistan is one and that Pakistan mu&remain one. We have
third country to interpret. It is not for an outside party to
decide whether the people want secession or autonomy.
no diplomatic relations with some of the countries that
voted for us. We have no contact, but on a principle they
voted that Pakistan is one; it came into being as one, it
190. We were quite prepared to negotiate and to decame into being after great sacrifices and it must remain
termine the quantum of autonomy within the concept of
one Pakistan, but we were not prepared to accept thaf aa
one. Of the great Powers, the People’s Republic of China
outside neighbouring country should judge whether the
and the United States of America also supported this basic
demand was for autonomy or for secession. If the people of
truth. So this is an overwhelming verdict. I do not have to
East Pakistan had wanted secession they would have said SO
speak; the Indian Foreign Minister does not have to speak; I
and India would not have had to intervene. I accept that
only ask you to recognize this truth, to heed the voice of
blunders have been made, terrible blunders. But, in spite of
the world. Do not stifle it, do not bury it, do not igrore it,
those terrible blunders, India would not have had physically
because it is going to have far-reaching ramifications. Please
to intervene with a whole 8 or 12 divisions in East Pakistan
take cognizance of it, please realize its value and its
in order to get by force what it interpreted to be the
importance. Please do not become isolated from the voice
aspiration of the people of East Pakistan as a consequence
of the world. It is very important that you do not do that,
of the elections of 1970.
because the whole world has spoken for the unity and
integrity of Pakistan. How can you ignore it here in this
chamber? Can you ride roughshod over the voice of the $ 191. This is the basic problem again. NOW if we are going
world community? Can you arbitrarily, whimsically and ki to determine autonomy and secession on that basis, then
capriciously deny what the world wants? The world wants $ may I ask my distinguished friend, Mr. Swaran Singh, the
one Pakistan, the world wants the unity of Pakistan, the s following: When the Prime Minister of India, Jawabarlal
world does not want the dismemberment of Pakistan by i” Nehru, came to the United Nations in September 1960 and
violence or by force. All I have come here for is to tell you $ was asked: “When are you going to settle the Kashmir
that this is the voice of the world, this is what the world 8: dispute, with regard to which you have agreed that there
wants, this is its verdict. Implement it, recognize’it, accept ( must be a plebiscite? “, he replied: “I know
that I have
it, otherwise there is going to be trouble and not onIy for /, agreed to that; but if there is a plebiscite in Kashmir, which
Pakistan. Pakistan is in enough trouble; we are facing / is a disputed territory”-it
is not merely a disputed territory
will be
serious problems, but I am not only speaking of Pakistan, I 1’ but would have been inevitably part of Pakistan-“it
28

fight, and we shall fight for 1,000 years aswe havefought
for 1,000 years in the past. Our history is not a new
history. Wehave a l,OOO-yearhistory of confrontation. We
can continue.
196. The Indian Government and the Indian peoplehave a
choice: the choice is very clear. It is: Do you want to live
with us as friends in the samesubcontinent, believingand
respectingthe principles of international law andmorality,
or do you want to be our implacableenemies?The choice
is yours. We are prepared to extend the handof friendship.
We want to open a new chapter in our relations.Why can
we not open a new chapter in our relations?Why should
we always be the exception, if the Germansandthe French
can forget their problemsand get into the CommonMarket
after so many wars and if the Turks and the Greeksdo not
go berserkand mad over Cyprus and start a conflict?
197. There are so many international disputes,but there is
always the restraining hand of civilization, of morality. If
the Soviet Union and the United States after 15 years of
confrontation can reach a d&nte and if China and the
United States can open a dialogue, why cannot India and
Pakistan also open a dialogue? And we are prepared for
that dialogue; we wanted that dialogue.Wewanted a new
page, a new dimension. We wanted to move accordingto
the mood and the requirements of moderntimes, and we
were anxious for it. I think the Indian Governmentis very
good at researchbecausethey have quoted many facts and
figures. I made many important statementssayingthat we
are prepared to open a new pagein our history, but they
have prevented it. If India had not today tried to occupy
parts of Pakistan, I could have spokenmore on the subject.
But if I speaktoday on the subject, they might think that I
am speakingfrom a position of weakness.

192. There will not be a Bangla Desh only in Pakistan.
There will be a Bangla Desh everywhere. We shall see to it
that it is not only in Pakistan, Then there will be Bangla
Desh everywhere.
193. Bangla Desh exists on the lips of the Government of
India. Bangla Desh exists in their mind; Bangla Desh does
not exist in reality. And when I say that, I do not say that I
do not have love for my Bengali brothers. I say: JoiBangla
as much as I say Jia Sind. ‘They are parts of the same
federation. These slogans cannot be turned against us. So,
physician heal thy own wounds; do not heal the wounds of
Pakistan. Pakistan has always had the rough end. of the
stick. Pakistan has been the sinner for a long time;
Pakistan’s territories have been taken in Kashmir, in East
Punjab, in West Bengal, in Assam. Pakistan has been
lacerated enough, much more than Mexico was lacerated in
this hemisphere.

198. If only they had given us an opportunity. The Prime
Minister of India said that shecould not talk to a military
regime. But the military regime said that after 13 yearsit
was dissolving itself within a month. After the Prime
Minister of India had spent nine monthswaiting, could she.
not agreeon one more month for the civilian Government
to come to power and open a dialogue,a communication
between our two countries? Of course,the Indian Government did not wait for nine months out of tolerance and
good behaviour. It utilized those nine monthsfor infiltration into Pakistan. They wanted nine months to train
people-the so-called guerrillas. The Foreign Minister of
India hasmade a virtue of India’s waiting for ninemonths.
Well, he needed at least this time. We saw that. As a
political leader of my country I said: “By the end of the
year, there will be a new situation in Pakistan.” We were
anticipating their plans. After all, intelligence’matters,We
saw what their plan was.We could seeit. They wanted to
train guerrillas; they wanted to create an international
climate. The Indian Prime Minister wanted to go all over
the world to create an international climateof goodwill and
then to swing. So sheneedednine months to swing.It was
not out of good behaviour, waiting for the world to act.

194. But the ills and the curses that you would impose on
Pakistan by military force will not end by creating a
so-called State of Bangla Desh in my country only. Then
there should be Bangla Desh everywhere in the world. Why
not? Let us open up the floodgates, because if sovereign
States are going to be mutated in this fashion, let the deluge
come. Why should it affect only my country?
195. We are prepared to die. We are not afraid to die. Our
people are brave. We and India have shared 5,000 years of
history
together. They know us. Do not go by these
Western press correspondents who tell you that we are
running. We are not running; we shall not run. The
liquidation of Pakistan will never be permitted. Believe me,
Mexico might occupy the United States, Canada might
occupy
the United States, Denmark might occupy
Germany, Finland might occupy the Soviet Union-but
Pakistan will not be occupied by India in any circumstances. Rememberthat. We will not be occupied.Weshall

199. We said, give us another month. Much hasbeenmade
of the refugees,the refugeesthat went from EastPakistan
into the Bangla Desh of India. And in the BanglaDeshof
21

_”

Indii there are supposed to be nine or ten million refugees.
We have not contended that these figures are wrong; we
have not disputed the figures. As far as we are concerned,
we have said that we are ashamed of the fact that our
citizens have left our country. NO country likes to have
refugees; no country likes to have people leaving it. But if
our people have left our country, we want them back,
because if they have lived in that place for thousands of
years, and have lived there for 24 years after Pakistan was
created, then why can they not also in the future live in our
country? This is no problem. If we said, “NO, there are no
refugees”, that would be false. We took a position on
principle. We said that whatever the number of refugees, we
are prepared to take them back-whether there are six
million, three million, two million or eight million genuine
Pakistanis who, out of fear and propaganda, have left
Pakistan, we are prepared to take them back becauseif they
have lived with us before they can live with us again. The
Indian Prime Minister said that they could not go back
while there was a military r&me in Pakistan. We said, wait
for a month, all we ask of you is to convert nine months
into ten months; give us four more weeks. And I was
prepared-and I said this in Karachi on the 12th-to go and
visit those refugee crurlps as a political leader. I said that we
were not closing any option, we were not imposing any
conditions for a political settlement; but give us time, let us
finish with the present phase and let us enter the new phase
and usher in peace.
200. The Foreign Minister of India must know that I said
on 18 October in Lahore that I did not anticipate a war. He
has quoted various slogans like “Crush India”. I said that I
did not anticipate a war. Why did 1 say that? Because we
want peace in order to serve our people, to concentrate on
their misery, on their problems. We do not want to be
locked in internationa1 conflicts. We want time to achieve
progress for our people, We have a socialist and Islamic
programme for our people for bread, butter and progress.
We wanted time to implement that. We wanted time for a
civilian government to be established in Pakistan after 13
years, based on a massive mandate from the people, so that
we could progress, move ahead, and serve our people.
Instead, after nine months, they could not wait for one
more month. They struck. And they struck heavily,
reversing those forces of democracy about which the
Foreign Minister of India waxesso eloquent. If the Foreign
Minister is so interested in democracy, he should have
waited For some time and democracy would have come.
Democracy generates its own laws. It has a parliament.
There is freedom of the press, and the demands of the
public are more important than the demands of foreign
Powers. One thing might have led to another. We would
first have tackled the principles involved, the causes of
dissatisfaction, which, I can tell you frankly, were not
confined to East Pakistan; there was dissatisfaction also in
West Pakistan over questions of autonomy and democracy.
So we were prepared to tackle all these problems. And we
were prepared to tackle not only the problems of West
Pakistan, but also the problems of East Pakistan on
autonomy, on democracy, on secularism-all these matters.
But we were not given a chance. It was used as a pretext.
The idea was to see that Pakistan would not flourish and
resolve its problems; the idea was to take advantage of the
internal difficulties of Pakjstan-not to come to its rescue,

but %otake advantage of its internal diffictilties. Othenvjse,
we would have been given this opportunity.
201. India’s interest in the crisis did not arise suddenly
afler the tragic and fateful night of 25 March. Before25
March India had manipulated a hijacking incident at L&ore
which it used as a pretext to sever communications between
East and West Pakistan through the air, through the Iadian
Cbrridor. That was on 30 January, after I had returned
from East P,akistan, having completed my preliminary
negotiations with Mujibur Rahman. If the Indian Govern.
ment w;?ssuch a friend of his it would not have createda
new situation at that time. But the Indian Government was
not happy about the negotiations that we were having with
Sheikh Mujibur, because the moment that I had completed
the preliminary negotiations with him and had come back
to West Pakistan, the first thing that was manipulated was
the hijacking incident which was arranged by Indian @es
from occupied Kashmir in order to disrupt communications
so that Mujibur R&man and I could not come in contact.
202. Now the Indian Government talks about a political
settlement, a political agreement with the leaders of East
Pakistan. But when the accredited leaders of East and West
Pakistan met, the Indian Government disrupted their
communications because it did not want an agreement on
the basis of one Pakistan, which we were trying to achieve.
SO the first thing it did was to break the means of contact
between the leaders of East and West Pakistan. We could
not go by sea in those difficult circumstances in order to
hold political dialogue and negotiations.
203. After that, on the pretext of holding elections in the
Bangla Desh of India, they sent 150,000 troops to condtlct
the polls. The idea was to put an army into position against
East Pakistan and against Pakistan as a whole.
204. India has talked about how Pakistan, a smaller
country, one fifth of the size of India and less in manpower
and resources-and bear in mind India’s armed forces,its
army, navy, air force, its indigenous manufacturing capa.
city-has always been the aggressor against India. We come
to this question of aggression, as to how much we have
committed aggression against India in the last 24 years,
since 1947 when the two States of India and Pakistan C~MC
into being.
205. In 1948 there was a conflict in Kashmir. YOU all
know the history of Kashmir, which was a disputed
territory. It was a princely State. It had to determine its
OWQfuture, according to the standpoint of both Indiaand
Pakistan, by its free will. If India had permitted a plebiscite
in Kashmir there would have been no trouble there today;
the Kashmir problem would not still be on the agendaOf
the United Nations. But it was India which prevented the
plebiscite from being held in Kashmir. And yet it accuScS
Pakistan of the trouble there. If there is trouble in Kashmir,
it is of India’s making because India is the country that
admitted that there should be a plebiscite, a referendum, ia
Kashmir and then prevented that plebiscite. No less a
person than the Prime Minister of India himself-and YOU
can see this in the records of the Security Council-made
the commitments on the question of the plebiscite. And Yet
today the Indian Foreign ‘Minister has the temerity tc saY

22

that we were responsible for the conflict in 1947-1948 in
Kashmir.

what you call the vivisection of Bharatt Mata. That is the
truth of the matter. It has been established now in your
action, in your predatory aggression in East Pakistan. You
never really reconciled yourselves to the creation of
Pakistan. Today, more than ever before, you have eloquently, barbarically and ruthlessly demonstrated to the
world that you are not reconciled to the vivisection of what
you call Bharatt Mata. But, Sardar Swaran Singh, neither
Bharatt nor Mata will be left-because these are the
methods which leave behind neither a country nor
principles.

206, The Indian Foreign Minister referred to the Rann of
Kutch conflict. In the Rann of Kutch conflict, it was the
Indian forceswhich were the occupiers. Mr. Partharasarathi,
who is now here on the delegation, was the High Commissioner. He was a good friend of mine-1 was Foreign
Minister at the time-and he came to me. I said, we are
prepared to solve this problem peacefully; and we did solve
it peacefully. I remember that he came to me very agitated.
I said, there must be some trouble; we will solve it
peacefully. And if we had not wanted to solve it peacefully
it would not have been solved in that manner. We left it in
the able and experienced hands of the British who arranged
arbitration between the two of us. The British know the
subcontinent better than the rest of us. They arbitrated on
the question. The trouble is, too many people from the
outside have arbitrated in the disputes of the subcontinent;
right from Clive to the Tashkent Declaration, outside
intervention has decided the fate of the subcontinent. Why
cannot India and Pakistan decide the fate of the subcontinent for a change? Either we have left it to
outsiders-the
French, the British, the Russians and
others-to decide our fate or we have gone to war. I tell the
Government of India, let us not leave it to outsiders, and let
us not allow war to be the arbiter. Le,t us open a new page,
provided hostilities are ended and we return to normal
conditions. But the Rann of Kutch dispute was left to the
British and they arbitrated, and we accepted their award. In
my opinion, it wasnot a fair award because we were denied
our territorial rights still, we accepted what was short of
our rights. Very well, we accepted in the interests of peace,
security and good relations between our two countries.

209. Now I come to a problem which I do not like to deal
with, but it is essential that I do so, because it is a
connected, relevant and cardinal aspect of the problem. If it
were avoidable, I would avoid it. But since it is pivotal to
the problem I must refer to it because my people know that
this is the position, and the world must know it is.
210. India and Pakistan, as we call the two major
communities, have existed in the subcontinent for thousands of years. We have had conflicts, we have had wars. We
have known how to deal with each other. We have dealt
with each other and we have estabIished some kind of
equilibrium between ourselves. But today we are not pitted
against India as such. Today we are pitted against India and
a great Power. India is a big country. I have already said it
is. But today it is standing on the shoulders of a big Power
to look bigger. If it did not stand on those big shoulders
and look bigger, it would not have been arrogant enough to
defy the will of the General Assembly and the whole world
expressed in a resolution calling for a cease-fire,the end of
hostilities and the withdrawal of forces. Today we are
pitted not against India but against a great Power-and a
neighbouring great Power-to which we have done no harm.
We have done it no wrong. We have made every effort to
have the best of relations with that great Power. We have
the greatest respect for it. It is a neighbouring Power, very
close to Pakistan.

207. We were not, then, responsible for the 1947 holocaust, and we were not responsible for the trouble in the
summer of 1965 in the Rann of Kutch. After that came the
Indo-Pakistan war of 1965. Again, we went to Tashkent,
and we settled it. We had arbitration. I think that
arbitration also was not in the interests of Pakistan. That is
an objective assessment. Nevertheless signatures were attached by both the Prime Minister of India and the
President of Pakistan. Although the agreement more or less
accepted the Indian position, yet again in the interests of
peace, there was a settlement at Tashkent. The fact that
that settlement did not get Implemented-well, they can say
we are responsible; we say they are responsible. But the
crux of the matter is that we agreed to a settlement which
was not in our interests, which was more in their
interests-so much so that their Prime Minister died of
jubilation
at Tashkent. It wasfavourable to them, and their
press and everyone else wasin agreement that it was.

211. In 1960, as Minister for Fuel, Power and Natural
Resources, I was the first Minister to go to the Soviet Union
to conclude an oil agreement in order to foster good
relations between Pakistan and the Soviet Union. We
annoyed our allies; we annoyed and had some basic
misunderstandings with a country that is a greater Power,
militarily speaking. We were involved with that country in
two treaties-the South-East Asia Treaty Organization
(SEATO) and the Central Treaty Organization (CENTO)and in bilateral agreements. But we wanted to improve our
relations with a neighbouring country-and at that time it
promised that if we got out of those pacts or became
passive in those which were directed against it, that would
bring about a new turn in relationships. Perhaps we were
not as shrewd in power politics as are others, but believing
we should do so we made great efforts to improve our
relations with the Soviet Union.

208. So again we, as the smaller State, witnessed the
power and might of the bigger State, causing an erosion of
our rights. But where are we to stop? How much are our
rights to be eroded? Already the Indian,Prime Minister is
saying that the people of West Pakistan and Baluch.istm
must have their rights-already making a distinction between them. We know what is in your minds. We know whg,
you are stalling, how you are taking something and
consolidating it. And you want to take more and more and
more. And you have never really reconciled yourselves to

212. We have never wronged the Soviet Union. We have
had the greatest respect and admiration for the Soviet
people and for the great founder of the Soviet State, Lenin,
one of the greatest men of contemporary times, of all time.
And our people are still full of admiration. We cannot
understand why the Soviet Union is being a party to our
23

dismemberment. What wrong have we committed against
the Soviet Union? If the Soviet Union was not a party to
this exercise we would not be facing the present situation.
213. I do not want to go into details. I do not want to
quote facts and figures. I do not want to tell the Council on
what date a destroyer wastorpedoed, how it wastorpedoed
or what has been done. I am not a person who goes into
detail; I stress principles. My principIes make me ask the
Soviet Union what wrong the 120 million people of
Pakistan have done that the Soviet Union should adopt
such a partisan attitude, and support a predatory aggressor
and take such an extreme position-not in a just causebut
to see my country dismembered. That is a legitimate
question I ask in good faith, and still as a friend: Why does
the Soviet Union want to defy world opinion on the
question of the unity of Pakistan? Have we done the Soviet
Union some basic wrong?
214. What makes it moie puzzling is that on 2 April 1971
President Podgorny in a pessage wished the Pakistani
people well being and prosperity and said he had rejoiced
over their success in the democratic solution of the
complicated problems facing the country. Mr. Kosygin told
the special envoy of President Yahya Khan, Mr. A&ad
Hussein, that relations between the Soviet Union and
Pakistan were based on principled positions of strengthening co-operation for mutual benefit. He said the Soviet
Union was willing to continue developing those relations
and efforts for the cause of strengthening peace and
international security. Again, Mr. Kosygin told our Ambassador in Moscow repeatedly that the Soviet Union did not
wish to interfere in the internal affairs of Pakistan and that
it wasfor Pakistan to decide what political system to adopt.
He went on to emphasize that the political system within
Pakistan was for Pakistan alone to decide, not for India or
the Soviet Union. He said, “Please, Mr. Ambassador, tell the
President that every aspect of our co-operation is based
upon peace and not upon war. It is our constant policy that
alI disputes between India and Pakistan should be settled by
negotiations and not by armed conflict. We are friends of
Pakistan, and we want all questions between Pakistan and
India to be settled peacefully. They are not rich enough to
have conflicts; even richer States try to avoid conflicts. We
can sincerely say that Pakistan and India should resolve
their differences without resorting to a conflict. We should
like to see them as friends. We have no other consideration.
We do not want to interfere in your internal affairs.”

then Portugal and Denmark and others could do the same.
It is to ensure that during conflicts and troubles they can
still keep the sea-lanes open. How have the sea-fanesbeen
closed to us in East Pakistan? India could not have doneit,
especially with the Seventh Fleet and other forces operating
in those seas.
216. It is because of the massive support that the Soviet
Union has given to India. If the Soviet Union detaches itself
from the Indo-Pakistan conflict, we are prepared to be
pitted against India. India has become intoxicated with
precisely the military gains which are a result of the Soviet
support that it has received.
217. In this connexion, we must remember that the
Indo-Soviet treaty of 9 August was concIuded during this
crisis. Now, please consider that India has always pursueda
policy of non-alignment. India pursued a policy of non.
alignment from 1947 until 1962 when it unnecessarily
came into conflict with China. Just as they attacked us
today, they attacked China in 1962. But from 1947 to
1962 India was non-aligned. And the architect of that
policy wasPandit Jawaharlal Nehru. And his name hasgone
down in history as the architect of such a positive policy.
But even from 1962, India, on the whole, remained
non-aligned, albeit with its own methods of duplicity and
double-dealing.
218. Then, why did India abandon its principles of
non-alignment, openly, legally, juristically, on 9 August
1971, and align itself with a great Power, the Soviet
Union? As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, GeneralSecretary Brehznev’s Asian security proposal to isolate
China had been made two years earlier. Like the European
security proposal, it had its own connotation. But the Asian
security proposal of General-Secretary Brehznev had been
made two years earlier. Why did not India then endorse the
Asian security proposal? Or why did not India concludea
bilateral agreement in the spirit of the Brehznev proposals
in 1967 and 1968? Why was it on 9 August 1971 that the
Indian Government abandoned its policy of non-alignment,
violated its established principles, and concluded an agreement with the Soviet Union which was called the IndoSoviet treaty. What is the quid pro quo? What is the
reciprocity? As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, it is
obvious: a great Power wants an Asian security pact for
certain reasons, matching the power of another great
country. But what was the benefit, what wasthe advantage
to India? Why did a country that was wedded, fundamentally, irrevocably, to the classic policy of nonalignment, abandon it and go and conclude a pact with the
Soviet Union on 9 August? Could you tell me what that
quid pro quo was? That quid pro quo was the dismemberment of Pakistan. Nothing else. “We will join it, we wdl
abandon non-alignment, we will eat our own philosophy;
but this is an implacable enemy and you must be on OUr
side to destroy it”-that was the quid pro quo.

215. Now, those are the messagesfrom tile President and
Prime Minister of the Soviet Union. And in 19G5, when
there was a conflict between Pakistan and India, the Soviet.
Union had very good relations with India and with
Pakistan-though those with India were better, yet it did
not take such a significant and conspicuous position in
India’s favour as it has today. Today the Soviet Union has
openly and brazenly come out in support of India. The
problem is that we are facing not India alone-we have
faced India for thousands of years-but the Soviet Union.
Otherwise the blockade of the Bay of Bengal would not
have taken place, How could it have taken place, when the
great fleets of the great Powers are on patrol there during
peacetime? What is the object of that? They do not patrol
in peacetime so that they can have a good cruise, because

219. The real trouble started not with what happened la
Dacca on 24 March. The real, fundamental trouble started
when this treaty was concluded, and we had to face a new
India, supported by the power, the prestige, the spirit, the
resources, the technology and the arms of the Soviet Union.
If we had received half the amount of arms that the Soviet
24

Union has given to India, today we would be sitting in
Delhi.
220. Now, there is an interesting article in that treaty. It is
article 9:
“Each contracting party undertakes to abstain from
giving any assistance to any third party that engagesin an
armed conflict with the other party. In the event of either
party being subjected to attack or threat thereof, the high
contracting party shall immediately enter into mutual
consultations with a view to eliminating this threat and
taking appropriate effective measures to ensure the peace
and security of the country”,
221. These are diplomatic words, couched in defensive
jargon, for offensive purposes. We should know this,
because for 12 years we were members of two defence
treaties, and we still are. So we are familiar with the
language of these treaties. This is not a defensive treaty; this
is a treaty which has an offensive purpose. Today, also, the
consultation is going on. The Deputy Foreign Minister of
the Soviet Union has gone to Delhi, Some officials of India,
such as Mr. Dhar, have gone to the Soviet Union.
222. I would really like to know what crime or what
wrong Pakistan has committed against the Soviet Union,
that my country should be dismembered. Is it because the
Soviet Union has bad relations with China? China’s
relations with the Soviet Union do not mean that my
country should be dismembered by the Soviet Union.
China’s relations with the Soviet Union are their relations.
We have always taken the position that we want good
relations with China and we want good reiations with the
Soviet Union. We do not want to have good relations with
China at the cost of the Soviet Union, nor do we want to
have good relations with the Soviet Union at the cost of
China. But as a result of our good relations with China, we
are being not only penalized, but treated in a fashion
where, limb by limb, we are being taken apart. This is
unprecedented.

has stood by the third world. Its crime is that it has stood
by principles. Its crime is that it will never abandon its
friends. NOW, if China was a chauvinist Power, if China was
an expansionist Power, if China was an arrogant country, if
China wanted to exterminate us, we would not have good
relations with China. Of course, at one time our relations
were not good. But China is not an expansionist Power.
China has not shown any sign ever of interference in the
affairs of another country. So why should we unnecessarily
spoil our relations with China? But the choice offered us
is: either spoil your relations with China or get dismembered. This is a very poignant choice, a very tragic choice.
226. But I say that even if a part of our territory or
country is occupied, that is not so important ashaving good
relations with China. For whatever is occupied can be
regained-and we will regain it, because it is our territory,
they are our people, they belong to us. Even this threat, the
threat that you must be punished for having good relations
with China-the world must see what happens to China’s
friends and what happens to the Soviet Union’s friends-we
consider only temporary. We are convinced that the friends
of the Soviet Union are not going to be beneficiaries in the
long run, when they are aggressors.The friends of China are
not aggressors. The friends of China are defending their
self-respect, their sovereignty and their integrity; and if
they are going to suffer some consequences, well, a brave
nation, an honourable and self-respecting nation, is prepared to accept that confrontation.
227. Take East Pakistan for five or ten years. We will have
it back; we will fight to take it back; and we will get our
country back. Your occupation is not going to make any
difference. East Pakistan belongs to Pakistan and all the
forces in the worId can get together, but out country will
remain unimpaired in the long run. You can have any
illusions; you can stand on the back of any great Power;
you can use all its resources. But believe me, Mr. Foreign
Minister, finally-this
is the lesson of history from the
beginning of time-what belongs to a people will go to that
people. “Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar’s;render
unto God that which is God’s.” East Pakistan is part of
Pakistan; you know this. This is a lesson of history.

223. But even if we are being torn apart limb by limb, we
will not abandon our good relations with China. China is a
reliable friend of Pakistan; China is a reliable friend of Asia;
China is a reliable friend of the third world. Earlier on, we
had to suffer with a greater Power than the Soviet Union
for the development of our relations with China. But,
today, we are happy to seethat there is some change in that
situation. We would be happy to see some change in the
situation between the Soviet Union and China also.

228. The fact is that we are being made a Poland in Asia.
Although Poland voted ‘against us, we are being made a
Poland. In 1939, there was a pact between Germany and
the Soviet Union, and Poland suffered. In 1971 there is a
pact between India and the Soviet Union, and Pakistan is
suffering as a result of that pact. But we will not suffer for
ever. The truth must prevail. Even if the Security Council
takes no action, even if we have to face more trouble, even
if this blackmail is to culminate in further aggression, we
are quite confident that, finally, victory will be ours
because we stand by justice. And all we are doing is to
preserve our national unity and our national integrity.

224. But why should we be the victims? Why should we
get into this nutcracker? The trouble is that we belong to
Asia. We cannot transplant ourselves from Asia into the
North American continent or Europe. China’s borders with
Pakistan are very long, very rugged; the Himalayas unite
and link China and Pakistan-the mountains, the rivers.

229. The United States of America has been accused of
supporting. Pakistan. The United States of America is not
supporting Pakistan but a principle. Please keep the
distinction in mind. The United States of America has come
out as a great Power for a principle, and that principle is
not that it is supporting Pakistan; the principle is that it is
supporting the unity of a country. It supports the integrity

225. Why should we have bad relations with a country
wltich wants to have good relations and is a great Power on
our continent? What is the crime that we have committed
by having good relations with a friendly country which has
supported
us Bnd has stood by us? China’s crime is that it
25

of a country. It cannot permit a country to be dismembered by force. It cannot permit a country to be treated
like a despised neighbour. And we are thankful to the
United States for the position it has taken, not only for
Pakistan but for an important international principle. We
are beholden to the United States for promoting, not our
cause, but the cause of peace, justice and international
morality. And the llnited States knows that its own
prestige in the world will rise as a result. The United States
has no cause to feel embarrassed. Indeed, if the United
States had taken the opposite position, we would have
understood it because, unfortunately, sometimes we have
had strained relations. I am Sony we have had those
strained relations. I am prepared to do everything in my
power to repair those relations in Asia for the United
States, and in my country where I do not speak as a puppet
or as representative of any r6gime. I speak in my right as (an
authentic voice of the people of West Pakistan. The time
will come. We cannot forget it.
230. We are thankful to all countries which are supporting
the cause of justice-we are thankful to China, we are
thankful to the United States for supporting the voice of
the world.

234,. I appeal to you, in the name of the people of
Pakistan. France-Pakistan relations have been so good, se
cordial and so warm. Today when we are fighting for our
lives with our backs to the wall, when we are facing a much
worse Dunkirlc-speaking
of Dunkirk, that is nothing
compared to what our forces are facing-we would expect
that France, conscious of the rights, conscious of its
contribution to civilization and to world peace, would play
an effective and positive role.
235. As for Britain, we are members of the Common.
wealth, we have remained members of the Commonwe&
and I do not want to say too much. This crisis was, to some
extent, aggravated by the attitude the British took, for
wherever we go outside Asia, we are told that the Britidl
know the subcontinent very we11so we must consult thenI.
If the British knew the subcontinent so we11they would not
have left us in this state, because for twentyfour yearswe
have had conflict after conflict due to the way in which the
departing Power left us.
236. Now the question is this: Why did the departing
Power leave us in that situation? Of course, the departing
Power took cognizance of the reality of the situation
cre’ated by the will of the peopie. The British would not
have permitted the partition of the subcontinent into two
States--India and Pakistan, one divided by a 1,000 miles--if
that was not what the people of the subcontinent had
wanted. But the British did not give any benefit of doubt to
Pakistan. The First Governor-General of India, Lord Louis
Mountbatten, was British; he was not the first GovernorGeneral of Pakistan. Certain areas which the British
originally said would be parts of Pakistan were denied to us
at the last minute. So the fact is this: after denying our
legitimate rights, ,the British said of whatever was left,
“This3 finally, is Pakistan”. Now, since the British decided
what was finally Pakistan, why must they now not play a
role to at least preserve what they finally conceded as
Pakistan?

231. And now I come to France. The relations between
France and Pakistan have been very good. Right from the
creation of Pakistan, slowly, we have stepped up our
relations in commerce, in trade and in economics. We have
also obtained a deeper understanding. We have great resptict
and regard for French civilization and culture. We admire
the current of French thought in Asian political thinking.
The relations between Pakistan and France have been so
good that we are really pained by France’s present attitude
in claiming that they are working behind the scenes.When
there is no scene left where will behind the scenesbe?
232. France must take a positive, moral position for
national unity and integrity. We are not enemies of France;
we are good friends of France. As far as we are concerned,
Mr. Permanent Representative, the die has been cast. You
must cast your die. Sometimes there will be the east wind;
sometimes there will be the west wind. Do not go by the
east wind; do not go by the west wind. Go by principle.
The principIe is that Pakistan is a united, sovereign State,
and an attempt is now being made to dismember Pakistan
by physical force. We have the greatest admiration and
respect for your great country. When your great former
President went to Canada, all he said was “Vive Ze Qutbec
Zibre! ” and such a storm was created. It was not said in the
context of secession, but the whole world wasin an uproar
over how President de Gaulle wasinterfering in the internal
affairs of other countries. That was nothing compared to
what the Indians are doing in my country. They are not
shouting a slogan of “Vive ik Joi &z&u! ” They are going
in there with their arms, with their might, with their tanks,
to take over my country.

237. As far as the third world is concerned, we are most
grateful to it. We are part of the third world. When it has
come lo us, in our humble way we have always tried to
make a contribution to the cause of the third world.
Anywhere in the Arab countries, Morocco, Algeria, on the
questions of independence, on Viet-Nam, Cambodia,
wherever issues of the third world have arisen, Pakistan has
been in the forefront in supporting principles. Pakistan is
grateful to the third world which has spoken the truth. I
salute the third world. If the third world had not spoken
the truth on this present situation in the subcontinent, then
the third world would have become the fourth world and
the fourth world would have been the graveyard of the
third world. By upholding truth and unity and justice with
respect to Pakistan, you have really preserved the third
world. We are not fighting only Pakistan’s battle’, as 1
stated. If Pakistan is to be subjugated by force in this
fashion, then as far as the subcontinent is concerned,
Ceylon can forget its independence, Burma can forget it,
Nepal, Bhutan, Afghanistan, Iran and all these countries can
forget it. The steamroller will continue and go on and cfl.
Any larger country will dictate to its smaller neighbour that
so and so should be the President, that so and SO should be
the Prime Minister, that this is its will, that there should be

233. So I appeal to you in the name of justice, I appeal to
you in the name of humanity, I appeal to you in the name
of the people of Asia-now you have a good name in Asia;
you are a respected nation-please do not take the
short-term factors into account. You must kriow that these
bad days will passand the truth will prevail.
26

autonomy here and secession there. And it will send its
forces to enforce the diktut. AI1 we ask of the third world is
not to forget us, because we never forgot the third world.
We are a part of it. We are the small ones. We are the ones
that they try to bully. We are the ones that they have tried
to dominate. We must dl unite collectively to put an end to
great power hegemony and to great power domination. And
We
will
suceed. There will be reverses, like the reverses we
are facing. There will be troubles. ‘l’here will be problems.
But finally the third world is bound to succeed, because the
third world is really the most inspiring force in contemporary politics. That is why today even if this draft
resolution [J’/10446’f is vetoed, even if there is a deadlock,
even if another draft resolution is vetoed, even if there are
more difficulties for my country and more problems, I am
sure that finally we shall succeid because th.hethird world is
with US. And today we have come to the Security Council
to ask for the implementation of the verdict of the third
world. That is all we ask to be done.
238. Again, 1 should like to return, before I conclude, to
Indo-Pakistan relations. I have some notes here of the main
points made by the Indian Foreign Minister. He raised quite
a few points and I cannot refer to all of them now.
EIowever, there are some of them that I should like to
kXld1
upon. I have already touched upon some. I am sure
that later the President will be kind enough to grant me the
rigllt of reply.
239. The Foreign Minister of India said that West Pakistan
exploited East Pakistan-the resources and the riches of
East Pakistan-and that is basically the reason why we have
come to the present situation. This is a very fundamental
question. Exploitation is not a phenomenon of individuals
or regions. Exploitation takes place as the result of a social
system. It is the social system that exploits. And the same
social system basically prevails in India and Pakistan. AS
much as they are making efforts in India to change their
social system, we are also making efforts in our country to
change our social system, because we believe that our
present social systems are basically exploititive. The political party which I lead contends that there was exploitation, that East Pakistan had been exploited, as well as
regions in the West, but by the social system. The struggle
was really related to the social system. We are not denying
that there were problems. But we do not say that this
means our country should be destroyed and dismembered
by another country.
240. If tomorrow
there are certain parts of another
country
that are being exploited because of the social
system or for some other reason, does that mean that that
country
should be destroyed or dismembered? Certainly
not. Therefore, that is a wrong premise on which they have
proceeded.
2.41. In addition, the question is why India has occupied
East Pakistan. It is rich, alluvial, fertile, and it has jute; it is
a very rich region of the subcontinent. But the disaster of
East Pakistan and of the other part of Pakistan is that a rich
region has remained poor. We do not want to have
exploitation in any part of our country and we do not want
exploitatioIl
in any part of the world. But we should be
@ven the chance to decide how we remake our own

country, how we transform our own social system and how
our nation is to evolve. It is not the right of another
country to dictate to LIS how that should be done or what
should be done or who should come here to represent a
point of view.
242. Today the Indian Foreign Minister said that the
problem co&d only be resolved if a representative of the
so-called Bangla Desh government, which was created by
India, was represented in the Security Council. But Bengal
is 13engwl and East Pakistan is part of Pakistan. Are you
going to permit this kind of precedent, when provincial
parties and those who are clients or large countries should
have representation before the Security Council? I know
the wor1.d started with the Greek city state. Are we going to
end with the principalities of India all over again?
Sometimes the Maharatlras will come to the Security
Council; sometimes the Sikhs will come to the Security
Council; sometimesthe Punjabiswill come to the Security
Council; and other provinces will cotne to the Security
Council to present their case. We can also bring some
people from India. We have not indulged in that kind of
mischief. But give us sometime; we can alsogiveyou some
representativesfrom India who will comehere andaskthat
they should be represented.
243. Sokoyu Bang/g, Sardm Snhil,, Aya Am’ dar Sonar
BangIa, i3haratar nai, which in Englishmeans:listen, Sardar
Swaran Singh, the golden Bengalbelongsto l%kistan,not to
India. Golden Bengalis part of Pakistan. You cannot take
away golden Bengallike that from Pakistan.Wewill fight to
the bitter end. We will fight to the last man.
244. The PRESIDENT: I have no f~lrther speakerson my
list, I believe that it is the desireof membersto try to digest
the various statements that we have heard from the
representative of the United States,who gaveus the reasons
of his delegation for calling this meeting, from the Foreign
Minister of India and from the Deputy Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Pakistan. 1 think it is right that we
should pay heed to the call for urgency. Both the Foreign
Minister of India and the Deputy Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Pakistan have said that the United
N&ions has failed the subcontinent. They have both agreed
on that point and I believethat the Security Councilought
not to fail the subcontinent in this trying hour.
245. Both have appealedfor peacebasedon justice, on the
honourable settlement which the representative of the
United States is asking us t.o achieve. Jn the circumstances,
it is my belief .that we would need somefurther consultations, two strata of consultations: first, with our respective
Governments at home, so that we could have definite
instructions t,o resolve the matter once and for all, and that
within the next 24 hours; and second,horizontal consultations here in Mew York, so as ‘to a.chieve a spirit of
compromiseand accommodation.
246. Unless I hear anything to the contrary, we shall
consider the discussionof the item on our agendasuspended, so that we can have fruitful, two-level consultations and resumetomorrow.
247. Mr. BUSH (United Statesof America): I certainly do
not want to interrupt you, Mr. Rresident,but I did want to

be recognized before, the meeting was adjourned. We feel
that we are meeting here with a certain sense of urgency.
We knew nothing of what Ambassador Malik referred to,
that there was some understanding that, after the presentation we were ‘permitted to make and the presentations by
the representatives of India and Pakistan, representing their
Governments here, this would be the procedure to be
followed. I had the feeling, from what Ambassador Malik
said, that there wassome understanding in the Council to
this effect. I would like to reiterate that nobody consulted
the United States Government about this situation. We
think we are meeting here with a sense of some urgency. It
was a week ago today that the General Assembly acted.
Most of the representatives are familiar, in our opinion,
with what the General Assembly did. It was not very
different from what the Security Council had done several
days before.
248. We have a draft resolution before the Council
[S/10446], It would not take very long to have a vote on it
one way or the other. I would hate to have the Council
once more adjourn, with only three presentations having
been made, and once again give the world at large the
feeling that we are unable to act, even if not in total
harmony; that another week might go by, or’ even another
day, without our taking some action, whether or not we get
total agreement on it.

cedure which the representative of the Soviet Union
mentioned earlier might be adopted if the situation
warranted it. It is a pity if the representative of the United
States was not apprised that such an understanding had
developed as the consultations continued. Unfortunately,
he wasnot available to be so informed.
252. I call upon the representative of the United Stateson
a point of order.
253. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): Perhaps [
would retract what I said, if we are the only delegation aat
was not apprised of that understanding, though every other
delegation was. I beg your pardon, if that is true. Therewas
a consultation that I did not attend. Therefore, if every
other representative knew about the understanding, I would
withdraw my comments concerning it.
254. The PRESIDENT: I would have liked to put this
directly to the decision of the Council, but I notice that the
representative of the Soviet Union would like to say
something. I now call on him.
255. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation jkorn Russian):What is involved is not a matter

249. So our view, on behalf of the United States Government, is that we would object to an adjournment. Needless
to say, however, if it were voted by the Council, we would
certainly abide by the Council’s decision. But I do not
think there is anything so new about what the General
AssembIy did. Representatives have had a long time to
consult their Governments about this. It was one week ago
that the General Assemby acted.
250. Therefore, I would like to urge that the Council try,
within the next few minutes, to dispose of our draft
resolution one way or the other. If it is successful, fine; we
might actually stop some killing, we might stop some
bloodshed. If it is not successful, perhaps we could do as
the President says. Certainly we are prepared to meet again,
and meet soon, to try to find some other draft resolution.
But we already have one here. It is based on the
overwhelming voice of the General Assembly at large-104
to Il. I do not think it requires great study or consultation.
Certainly most representatives in the Council had to receive
instructions on it, in general, once before. It is true there
are some changes, because we referred it to the General
Assembly. But I would like to see us stay in session for a
very short period of time and try to dispose of this draft
resolution one way or ‘he other.
251. The PRESIDENT: First, on the question of the
understanding. Before the meeting was held as a result of
the letter received calling for an immediate meeting of the
Security Council, it was necessary, in accordance with
custom, to hold informal consultations, first with the
representative requesting the holding of the meeting, next
with the permanent representatives on the Security
Council, and afterwards with the non-permanent representatives on the Council. In the course of those informal
consultations, there was au understanding that the pro-

of an understanding, but a matter of substance. I have
already drawn attention more than once to the fact that the
United States representative is in a privileged position by
comparison with every one of us. Today, judging by reports
on the United States radio, he was at a meeting of the
National Security Council; he saw President Nixon, he
received some sort of instructions and now he is speaking
here. None of us had, or has, such an opportunity. I tried to
contact Moscow by telephone, but I wasunsuccessful.
256. The question is a serious one. The representative of
the United States asserts that nothing new has happened,
but he himself recognizes that “it is true there are some
changes”. Of course there have been changes. Statements
have been made by two high-ranking representatives of the
parties concerned, the Foreign Minister of India and the
Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan. The Deputy Prime
Minister of Pakistan said a whole host of things which must
be answered and which make it necessary for the meeting
to be continued. Are we ready to go on until morning? Let
us continue until morning, for, in particular, the distiti
guished Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan spoke about
everything under the sun. He frightened us all, but he did
not touch on the main cause of the conflict in the Indian
subcontinent. And that must be discussed. Is this new?-It
is new. Must each of us ponder what has been’said here?
He must do so, he is obliged to do so. Must each of Us
report to his own Government? He is obliged to do se.
Much each of us receive instructions from his Own
Government? He is obliged to do so and must do so.
257. Yet again I stress that we, unfortunately, do set
enjoy your privileges. You have only to telephone WasMc
ton to receive ready-made instructions. Do you absolutely
have to have a vote? I warned you that I have se
instructions on so serious a matter and on a meet@ is
which the Foreign Minister of India and the Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Pakistan have taken part I
asked you r.ot to insist on a vote. There is little time lefi

28

change, then it has become more serious and needs our
urgent action without further delay. I believe this is the
responsibility of every Government, every representative
participating in the Security Council meeting. We should
allow no further delay. So I should like to addressan appeal
to all my’colleagues here in the Council, to try their best to
co-operate and continue our urgent, serious discussionsand
try our best to reach a satisfactory solution to this question
and unanimous agreement.

before morning, and I think that we shall be able to
continue our discussion of this serious question. If you
introduced your proposal merely in order to have a vote,
then go ahead. There is an agreement for you. In two
minutes you can vote. Ydu need only two minutes for a
vote. Is it for this that you introduced your proposal? Is
this really a serious approach to the solution of such a
serious problem? Everyone here, the whole world will
know why you introduced your proposal: merely in order
to receive yet another Soviet veto.

266. Mr. BUSH (United States): The representative of
Somalia has negated my desire to speak at this particular
time. His comments were parallel to what I was going to
say.

258. I cannot tote on a draft resolution without having
consulted my government and without having received
instructions from it.

267. Mr. KUI,!AGA (Poland): It may perhaps be easy for
certain delegations to make decisions on questions of this
importance in a very short time. The discussion up to now
has seemed to indicate that, but I should like to say that I
learned about the meeting today from the radio. I wasthen
informed about consultations which were to start at a
certain hour. We arrived here, and it was after a demand for
further delay that we heard the reading of a draft resolution
which we received during the meeting itself, while we were
listening to the speeches of the representative of the United
States, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of India and the
Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan. In his speech he raised a
number of questions which in my opinion require some
comments. That is the situation: while we were listening to
the speeches of parties very interested in that problem, we
did not have time to consult or to look at the draft
resolution, much less to study it. That is why I think, in the
case of my delegation, I should like to study that, to
consult with my Government and to have instructions from
my Government before I come to a vote.

259. The President and the Council have put a reasonable
proposal to you, namely, that we should continue our
consultations in the presence of the two high-ranking
representatives of the two parties. The reasonable view
always prevails. But why is this not to your liking? Do you
need a vote? You shall have it.
260. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the United
States of America has contested my own interpretation of
the understanding, and therefore I have to put it to the
Council, whether the Council wants us to break up for
further consultations, both with our various Governments
and with the representatives we have here. The suggestion
has been made that there is nothing more we can do; we
have been unable to act. That is not so. We have been able
to act, we have been able to get the two Foreign Ministers
of the parties concerned to come here, to meet with us at
the same table, to talk and to be listened to with all
attention and respect. I believe it may be necessaryfor us
to profit from this rare opportunity. But I am in the hands
of the Council. I have to put it to the Council.

268. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
from French): My delegation was somewhat surprised at
the haste with which this Council meeting was convened-not as far as the principle of meetings of the Council
is concerned; we have always been in favour of that and I
myself have pointed this out to the General Assembly;5 we
were convinced that in the light of the gravity of the
situation the question would at some time 01 another come
back to the Security Council-but I wonder precisely why
we are meeting. Is it to vote? Is it once again to count
hands on a draft resolution which is identical to the
resolution that was already submitted to US and on which
the result will be the same? Or have we met to try to find a
solution, to try to devise the unanimous agreement which
the circumstances require? Doubtless we can continue the
discussion. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan addressed me
personally. I am happy and I am quite ready to respond to
him, and to continue this beginning of a dialogue. But there
are decisions to be adopted. There has been a draft
resolution submitted to us [S/10446/. We have primarily to
profit from the presence here of representatives of the two
countries concerned, in the persons of their Foreign
Ministers, and thereby try to set up a bridgehead, perhaps
to try to build something positive and not merely to count
hands in another vote.

261. I call on the representative of Somalia on a point or
order.
262. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, I believe it
would be in the interests of our work if we allowed a little
more discussion to take place on the particular point under
discussion, and then perhaps later on you could put your
proposal to the Council.
263.

The PRESIDENT: I take note of that suggestion.

264. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation jkom Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has been in the Council chamber
from 3.30 p.m. and has participated in the consultations.
But we are now told that we have reached an agreement, as
mentioned by Mr. Malik, in the process of the consultation.
This understanding does not exist as far as we are
concerned.
265. Secondly, the question of the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent
is nothing new; it is not a new question,
especially for Mr. Malik. Also I think we can say that for
every representative here, for every member of the Council
or for their Governments, a grave and acute question such
as that of the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent is not a new one,
not a strange one. The situation has seen no new changes,
but it has become increasingly serious. If there is any

269. I think, Sir, that your proposal is extremely well
taken. In the present circumstances, we should continue
5 ibid., Twenty-sixth Session. Plenary Meetings, 2003rd

29

meeting.

consultations with the Foreign Ministers concerned, with
the delegations present, and then take up our work as soon
as possible; but I think it is wisdom itself that dictates that
if we continue the discussion now and go on to a vote, we
will arrive at another stalemate which will again render the
Security Council still more ineffective and will again and
further damage the prestige of the United Nations. Therefore I would heartily support the motion for postponement.

on any draft resolution should have the right to ask for time
to study that draft, toisend it to his Government and to ask
for instructions.
274. Why do you Mr. Bush, absolutely insist on putting
pressure on the Council to vote immediately, this very
minute? Why can you not take into account the requests
of those members of the Security Council who, with fn]]
justification, have asked that the voting should be post.
poned somewhat, for a few hours in fact? It is already past
midnight and we can convene a meeting tomorrow morning
at which anyone who wishes to do so can expresshis
opinion, for, as the representative of France rightly said,
the distinguished Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan raised
nlatters which affect almost everyone sitting around this
table. He said all sorts of fantastic things, side-stepping the
main cause of the conflict in the Indian subcontinent. Hji!:
statement calls for a reply and the situation demands a
discussion of this matter, not a vote on your draft
resolution simply because it is yours. The need might arise
to introduce amendments to your draft resolution, and
agreement must be reached on them with our Governments.
You must understand the true nature of the situation. If
your approach to the consideration of this matter is a
serious one, then let us go about it seriously. If all you need
is two minutes to see that your draft resoIution is not
accepted, then you have evil intentions and hidden motives.
You do not desire to bring about a settlement of the
problem, but to have your draft resolution rejected yef
again and to shift the blame to those who cannot agreewith
it for the reasons I have indicated.

270. Mr. BUSH (United States): I would say that it is not
the same old warmed-overhash, something is different since
we met here before. We have had two presentations here,
but the most significant thing-and I do not think any
member of this Council has only now be@m to think about
it-is that the General Assembly a week ago today acted by
a vote of 104 to 11, and we have had a week to consult our
Governments about this. We have had a week to think
about it, we have had a week to do something about it, and
if this draft resolution indeed ends with the same vote as
before or with something approximate to it, let us find
another. It is not an effort, as Ambassador Malik said, to
force a veto. If he could give .me some assurancethat he
could get instructions tomorrow that would enable him
to vote for it or to have a more forthcoming position, we
would be enthusiastic about it. But the world is watching,
and if the draft resolution cannot be unanimous, it seemsto
us that the Council should be able to expressitself on it, at
least to let the General Assembly know-the 104 nations
that stood up and voted for something almost identicalthat many members on this Council care, and that many
members at least want to give it another try. That is the 275. 1n addition, I must make a strong protest againsl
reason. It is not an el’fort to embarrass some country. IF American propaganda which claims that the Soviet Union
that is not unanimous, or if that does not get enough votes spoke against a cease-fire. IJntil now this propaganda has
to succeed, let us meet again tomorrow and try another
only been spread on the radio, television and in tfle
approach that some consultations would bring forward. But
American press. Today, an official spokesman of the White
I think we have had a week at least to consider the House slandered the Soviet Union and its position. I ask
ingredients of a resolution which we had already considered you,
Mr. Bush, to take note of my protest about the
before, and my hope is that many delegations who felt they
statement by the White House spokesman and to take the
must abstain or vote against it, will be influenced by the
draft resolution [S/lU4?8/ which I introduced at the last
weight of world opinion, the weight of what the General meeting on the matter [16081/z meeting] and show it to
Assembly did by 104 to 11. That is all we are pressing for.
him. In it you will find the words “cease-fire and cessation
of hostilities”. But there is another point too, and that is
271. The PRESIDENT: I know that the representative of
something about which even Mr. Bhutto was silent. If
the USSR wishes to speak. I do not want to deny him his mentions, the cause of the conflict in We Indian subright but before I call on him I should like to say that there continent. It mentions the need for a political settlement;
does appear to be a consensusof opinion that we should
the two questions are closely interrelated. And I assureyou,
continue with the discussion and express our opinion on Mr. Bush, that if you had adopted those proposals, tile
the draft resolution before us.
matter could have taken another turn. But you had to have
a vote, you had to have a Soviet veto so that you could
272. Unfortunately, as President I do not have a list of
subsequently slander the Soviet Union even from the M&e
speakers inscribed for that purpose. I would be quite
House. That is where your serious approach to the solution
prepared to allow the discussion to continue, but we cannot of this problem leads. And today you are continuing the
continue in vacua. There must be representatives wishing to
very same policy; you do not wish to allow the other
speak not on procedure but on substance.
members of the Security Council to study your proposals
seriously or to consider how a way out of the situation
273. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
could be found by taking advantage of the fact that two
(translation from Russian): Your explanations are extremely
high-ranking representatives of the two parties are parficivaluable and I thank you for them. The United States repre- pating h&e in the work of the Security Council.
sentative has referred, to the General Assembly resolution.
But we are speaking of a vote on his resolution, on the draft
276. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): ! hate to
resolution which he introduced. He introduced it today
prolong the meeting by getting into an arguing match with
during his statement. The most elementary rules of pro- my colleague from the Soviet Union. But if he indeed
cedure demand that eachof the participants in the discussion suggests that this draFt resolution is some plot, sOme
30

connivance, to embarrass the Soviet Union, then he must
also suggest that the draft resolution adopted by 104
Members
of the General Assembly [resolution
2793 (XXVI)] was some plot, some connivance, to embarrass the Soviet Union. The texts of these two resolutions
are very similar.
277. I do not care about two minutes; I should be willing
to sit here all night long and talk about it. But there is a war
on and we are trying to do something about it. That is what
the United States is trying to do. We are not in the least
interested in seeing you veto it. We want to seeyou support
it, and that is what the General Assembly wanted.
278. I refuse to be placed in the position, for the United
States Government, of having somebody suggestthat we are
here simply to embarrass a country or to seesomething not
happen. We are here because we sensed inaction and we
wanted to see something happen. If this draft resolution
does not work, then let us sit here and find one that will.
But do not back my country into a corner and say that we
are trying to force a Soviet veto. We want a Soviet vote in
favour of the same resolution that 104 Members voted for.
279. The PRESIDENT: While some delegations are
making up their minds whether or not to intervene I should
like to say that we must pay heed to some of the
statements made by the Deputy Prime Minister of Pakistan.
In his eloquent statement he reminded us that at a certain
stage all Pakistan wanted wasone month so that conditions
for civilian rule and proper understanding of the main
parties in the subcontinent would mature. I do not believe
that in the Security Council we ar_easking for one month;
we are not asking even for a day. Let us not rush.
280. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): We have been fortunate this
evening to have had an opportunity of listening to the
Foreign Minister of India and the Deputy Prime Minister of
Pakistan. We are fortunate this evening in that unlike
previous meetings we have here two very senior representatives of their respective Governments, and it might be
possible, with their presence in New York, to perhaps try to
reach a formula which could very well bring peace, or at
least pave the road to peace, in the subcontinent.
281. A great deal depends not so much upon the
non-permanent members, because we are alwayssuperseded
by the veto power of the permanent members. h this
particular problem it is the permanent members that have a
special responsibility not only to exercise leadership but
also to see that the privileges they enjoy are properly and
constructively put to use.

we have had up to now. I note from the reply of the
representative of India that his Government does agree in
principle to a cease-fireand a withdrawal of Indian forces
from East Pakistan, although it is qualified, unfortunately.
But at least there is a commitment to that principle, which
is what we all desire. If we can reach a formula which
would make that commitment and perhaps the position of
the Pakistani Governme$ clear concerning the problem
which certainly exists in East Pakistan, we might be able to
reach an agreement.
284. I would suggest, therefore, that we adjourn our
meeting at this stage, and that the five big Powers should
not just sit in silence or bicker, but rather show the world
Orgsnization some senseof leadership and direction.
285. The PRESIDENT: A definite proposal has been
made for a brief postponement-I shall not call it an
adjournment-of
the debate. I should like to ask the
representative of the United States whether he can agree to
this.

286. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I[ must say
that I find the logic of the representative of Somalia
overwhelming and I wasmost impressed by the spirit in
which he made his intervention. I also think that if indeed
there is a chance that the representative of Poland, who is
awaiting instructions, can get positive instructions from his
Government to vote in favour of a draft resolution similar
to the one before us, or something like it, and if the
representative of the Soviet Union would, before the
President calIs the next meeting, find it possible to vote in
favour of a draft’ resolution like this, or something on the
lines of the Assembly’s cease-fireand withdrawal resolution
I believe that they will be approaching it in the spirit that
we accept it here, a spirit of construction, of trying to get
something done. I hope that when we reconvene very soon,
those delegations will have received instructions which will
permit them to act in accordancewith the resolution of the
General Assembly.
287. We are overwhelmed by the logic of the position of
the representative of Somalia, and I would withdraw our
objection to the President’s ruling.
288. The PRESIDENT: The proposd is that we should
adjourn the discussion for a few hours in order to permit
fruitful consultations to take place. If there is no objection,
I shall consider it adopted.

breakthrough.

289. Before I adjourn the meeting I wish to remind
members of the Council of the meeting which is scheduled
for 10.30 this morning-in 10 hours’ time-on the question
of Cyprus. It is my hope that the draft resolution which is
the subject of consultation among members of the Council
will be adopted at that meeting and that the Council will be
able to conclude its discussion on the item in part of one
meeting so that we can devote the other part of the
morning meeting to a continuation of our discussion
concerning the problem now facing us.

283. Perhaps, Mr. President, we might adjourn until later
in the day when we m&ht have much better prospects than

The meeting rose on Monday, 13 December, at 12.35 am.

282. My delegation would hope that the Council will
resume this debate tomorrow and that in the intervening
period the permanent members-France and the United
Kingdom, which have yet to give this Council the benefit of
their advice and leadership-will take more initiative; and
perhaps, with their good offices and with those of the three
other permanent members, we might be able to make a

31

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

YUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sant en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaims
du mondc entier. Informex-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
h : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.
ICAIC

HOJIYPHTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHN8

OPI-AHH

PUBLICACIONES

3A4IiM

DE

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo. Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.50 (or equivalent

OS’hEAHHEHHFdX

NACIONES

HAUIWt

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

82230--October

1974-2,050
