Re11olutio1U1 adopted on the reporu of dae Fourth Committee

the prevailing policies, laws and practices which, in the
Trust Territories, relate to land, land utilization and
the alienation of land, taking into account the present
and future needs of the indigenous inhabitants from
the standpoint of the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship System and the future economic
requirements of the Territories, as well as the social
and economic consequences of the transfer of land to
non-indigenous inhabitants,

Having noted the actions of the Trusteeship Council
in this field, both through its regular procedures for
the examination of conditions in the Trust Territories
and through the establishment of the Committee on
Rural Economic Development of the Trust Territories,
Bearing in mind the technical difficulties that the
Committee has encountered in the various aspects of the
study entrusted to it,
Noting with regret that the Committee has not yet
been able to carry out the aforementioned study,
Considering that the questions of land tenure, land
utilization and land alienation call for analysis and
opinion of a technical and expert nature, and recalling
in this connexion General Assembly resolution 561
(VI) of 18 January 1952,
Considering that, in the meantime, it would be appropriate for the Trusteeship Council, with the assistance of the Committee, to continue to devote particular
attention to the question of the alienation of land in
the Trust Territories,
1. Decides, in order to facilitate the eventual study
by the General Assembly of problems of land tenure,
land utilization and land alienation in the Trust Territories, to invite the appropriate specialized agencies,
particularly the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the International Labour Organisation to submit to the Trusteeship Council their
observations and suggestions concerning these problems;
2. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that it
ensure, through the Committee on Rural Economic Development of the Trust Territories or by such other
means as it deems appropriate, the early submission
of its study of the prevailing policies, laws and practices relating to land tenure, land utilization and land
alienation in Trust Territories, taking into account the
present and future needs of the indigenous inhabitants
from the standpoint of the basic objectives of the
International Trusteeship System and the future economic requirements of the Territories, as well as the
social and economic consequences of the transfer of
land to non-indigenous inhabitants ;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council to include the
results of this study in its next report to the General
Assembly.
729th plenary meetino,
13 December 1957.
1209 (XII). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Ha·uino examined chapter V, section D, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council28 and the
report of the Secretary-General on offers hy Member

29

States of study and training facilities for inhabitants
of Trust Territories 21'.>,
Recalling that, in its resolutions 753 (VIII) of 9
December 1953 and 1063 (XI) of 26 February 1957,
the General Assembly recommended that . th~ Administering Authorities of the Trust Territones take
all such measures as would ensure the greatest possible use by inhabitants of the Trust Territories of the
scholarships and training facilities offered by Member
States,
Noting that the major part of the scholarships offered
by Member States remains unutilized,
1. Takes note of chapter V, section D, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council and of the
report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member
States of study and training facilities for inhabitants
of Trust Territories;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1063 (XI) of_ ~6 F~bruary 1957 and once again invites the Admmistermg
Authorities to take all necessary measures to ensure
that scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States may be utilized by inhabita~ts of the Trust
Territories and to render every assistance to those
persons who have applied for, or have been granted,
scholarships or fellowships;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible and as may be sought by the
Members concerned a~d by the applicants, within the
framework of the procedures laid down by the Trusteeship Council;
4. Requests the Secretary-G~neral to !nclude! in ~is
future reports to the Trusteeship Council, deta~led mformation concerning the actual use of scholarships and
training facilities offered by Member Sta~es . for the
education of inhabitants of the Trust Terntones;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Cou!1cil !o resum~,
at its sessions held in 1958, the considerat10n of thts
question and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its thirteenth session.
.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
1210 (XII). Effects of the European EconomJc
Community on the development of certatn
Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
H avinq examined the report of the Trusteeship
Council,28
Having observed that the .Treaty . establishing t~e
European ~co1;omic Commumty :provide~ that certam
Trust Terntones are to be associated with the Community,
Believing that this association may have significant
effects on the development of such Territories,
1. Invites the Administering Authorities concerned
to submit information to the Trusteeship Council on
the association of the Trust Territories under their
administration with the European Economic Community and on the possible effects of the Treaty establishing the Community on the development of those
Territories;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council !O incJude in
its report to the General Assembly, at its thirteenth
.. Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
A11nexes, agenda item 13, document A/3718.

30

General AuemhlT-TweUda See1ion

session, a separate section dealing with the effects that
the association of certain Trust Territories with the
Community may have on the development of those Territories, in the light of any surveys of this problem carried out by the Secretary-General in virtue of General
Assembly reStJlution 1153 (XII) of 26 November 1957,
by the Economic and Social Council, the Economic
Commission for Asia and the Far East, the Economic
Commission for Latin America, or other international
bodies, in so far as such surveys are concerned with
the development of those Territories;
3. Resolves to resume examination of this question
at its thirteenth session.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1211 (XII). Situation in the Trust Territories of
the Cameroons under British administration
and the Cameroons under French administration26

The General Assembly,
Having studied the chapters of the report of the
Trusteeship Council which relate to the Trust Territories of the Cameroons under British administration
and the Cameroons under French administration, 27
Noting continued tensions and disturbances in a
certain area of the Cameroons under French administration,
Noting the fact that the amnesty law envisaged by
the Administering Authority has not yet been promulgated,
Taking note of the progress achieved in both Territories a!1~ of _the measur~~ to that effect adopted by
the Admmtstermg Authont1es and by the authorities
of both Cameroons,
Having heard and considered the statements of the
petitioners from these Territories in the course of the
hearings granted by the Fourth Committee,
. Bearing in mind that the Trusteeship Council will,
m the normal course, send a visiting mission to the
two Territories in 1958,
1. Takes note of the pertinent chapters of the report
of the Trusteeship Council;
2. Transmits the statements of the petitioners to
the Trusteeship Council for further study;
. 3. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council take
mto_ account the <;1bservations and suggestions made
dunng the debate m the Fourth Committee, when the
Council considers conditions in the Trust Territories
of the Cameroons under British administration and the
Cameroons under French administration at its twentyfirst session;
~- Expresses the hope that, as a result of the application of ~ppropriate measures, in particular the early
promulgation of the amnesty law by the Administering
Authority, and the renunciation of the use of violence
""This resolution was submitted directly in plenary meeting
and adopted by the General Assembly after consideration of
the report of the Fourth Committee. For the text of the report,
see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session
Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/3779.
'
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Supplement No. 4 (A/3595 and Corr.I), part II, chapters IV
and V.

by all political parties, it will be possible to achieve,
in the Cameroons under French administration, conditions conducive to the early restoration of a normal
situation in the disturbed area, and to the furtherance
of democratic progress and political activities in the
Territory;
5. Is confident that the appropriate steps to be taken
by the Administering Authorities will further facilitate
the realization in both Territories of the final objectives
of the Trusteeship System, in accordance with the free
expression of the wishes of the populations concerned,
taking into account any alternative relative to their
future status ;
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council to instruct its
next visiting mission, in 1958, to take into account the
observations and suggestions made at the twelfth session of the General Assembly during the examination
of the situation in the two Territories.

729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1213 (XII). Question of the frontier between
the Trust Territory of Somaliland under
Italian administration and Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 392 (V) of 15 December
1950, 854 (IX) of 14 December 1954, 947 (X) of
15 December 1955 and 1068 (XI) of 26 February
1957,
Having taken note of the reports transmitted t9 the
General Assembly by the Governments of Ethiopia28
and of Italy 29 in accordance with the recommendation
contained in resolution 1068 (XI),
Having heard the statements made by the delegations
of Ethiopia and of Italy, including that of the representative of the Government of Somalia, 30
Noting the efforts made by the Governments of
Ethiopia and of Italy in negotiations to reach a solution of the question of the frontier between the Trust
Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration
and Ethiopia,
Noting that, although some progress was made during the discussions, direct negotiations have not resolved
some of the main differences between the parties,
Considering that it is in the common interest of
Ethiopia and the Trust Territory that there should be
a final settlement of the question of the frontier between them before the Territory becomes an independent sovereign State in 1960,
Having regard to the urgency of the matter,

1. Expresses the opinion that a final settlement can
be achieved most expeditiously by a procedure of arbitration;
2. Recommends the parties to establish, if possible
within three months, an arbitration tribunal-consisting
of three jurists, one to be appointed by Ethiopia, one
by Italy and one by agreement between the jurists so
28
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 39, document A/3753.
29
Ibid., documents A/3754 and Add.1.
'"'Ibid., Twelfth Session, Fourth Committee, 734th meeting.
