S/2020/327

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 April 2020
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the sixty-sixth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018), and
paragraph 8 of resolution 2504 (2020), in the last of which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to provide a report at least every 60 days, on the implementation
of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system regarding
their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for February and March 2020.

II. Major developments
Key points
1.
The first confirmed case of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the Syrian
Arab Republic was announced on 22 March 2020 and the first fatality resulting from
the virus was announced on 29 March. At the end of the reporting period, 10 cases
had been confirmed, including two fatalities. Early economic impacts attributable to
COVID-19 compounded the ongoing economic crisis. In March, food prices reached
their highest recorded level since 2011.
2.
In the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, hostilities continued throughout
February. On 1 March, Turkey announced the 27 February launch of Operation Spring
Shield. A ceasefire agreed between the Russian Federation and Turkey took effect on
6 March. By that time almost 1 million people had fled the intensification of hostilities
that commenced in December 2019, causing a further, drastic deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the north-west.

20-05694 (E)

270420

*2005694*

S/2020/327

3.
The humanitarian cross-border operation into the north-west of the Syrian Arab
Republic continued at record levels, in response to the catastrophic deterioration of
the humanitarian situation for millions of people, including by distributing food
assistance for 1.2 million people in February and 1.8 million people in March. On
2 March, a United Nations inter-agency mission to the north-west gathered first-hand
information from the affected population about their humanitarian needs.
4.
Response efforts from within the Syrian Arab Republic continued at scale in
response to assessed needs throughout much of the country, even as access for some
humanitarian actors, including the United Nations, remained limited in some areas.
Assistance from within the Syrian Arab Republic included the delivery of food
assistance for 3.3 million people in February and 3.2 million people in March. During
the reporting period, the United Nations and its partners conducted 1,094 missions,
over 92 per cent of which deployed from sub-offices outside of Damascus. Only
44 per cent of requests for missions from Damascus were approved.
5.
In the north-east, services at the Aluk water station were disrupted multiple
times in March, with operations resumed by the end of the reporting period. This
station is the main source of water for about 460,000 people in the north -east. It relies
on electricity from Tishrin Dam to Ra’s al-Ayn.
6.
In the southern part of the country, on 19 February, two humanitarian workers
were killed and a third injured in Dar‘a when their vehicle was attacked by an
unidentified armed group. Another humanitarian worker was killed in an outbreak of
violence in Jallayn, rural Dar‘a on 18 March.
Humanitarian update
3.
The first confirmed case of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) in the Syrian
Arab Republic was announced on 22 March 2020 and the first fatality resulting from
the virus was announced the following week, on 29 March. At the end of the reporting
period, 10 cases of COVID-19 had been confirmed, including two fatalities. The
World Health Organization (WHO) assessed the Syrian Arab Republic to be at very
high risk of an outbreak in the light of its fragile health system, high levels of
population movement and the practical difficulties of implementing isolation and
protective measures in areas of displacement, with high population density and low
levels of sanitation services. Early economic impacts attributable to COVID -19
compounded the ongoing economic crisis, with significant price increases and
shortages in some basic goods recorded in March across country. The average price
of the World Food Programme (WFP) standard reference food basket increased by
9 per cent in March from the previous month. The largest week-on-week price
increase in March coincided with the imposition of travel restrictions across the
country and the closure of non-food related businesses. An 18 per cent price increase
was observed between weeks three and four, placing foods prices at the highest level
recorded since 2011.
4.
Throughout February, government and pro-government aerial bombardment
continued across the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, at some of the highest
levels since the start of the conflict, and further intensified at the end of February.
Government and pro-government forces continued ground advances from several
directions. Daily clashes with non-State armed groups included mutual artillery
shelling and ground clashes with high numbers of casualties. On 1 March, Turkey
announced the launch, on 27 February, of Operation Spring Shield. Military activity
along the frontline areas subsequently increased, with several towns and villages,
including Saraqib, changing control multiple times. On 5 March, the Russian
Federation and Turkey reached agreement on an Additional Protocol to the
2/20

20-05694

S/2020/327

Memorandum on Stabilization of the Situation in the Idlib De -escalation Area. The
Additional Protocol serves as an agreement to cease all military actions along the line
of contact in the Idlib de-escalation area starting from 6 March; to establish a security
corridor six km deep to the north and 6 km deep to the south of the M4 highway; and
to begin joint Russian Federation-Turkish patrolling on 15 March along the M4
highway from the settlement of Turumbah to the settlement of Ain -Al-Hayr. As from
6 March, the de-escalation area saw a cessation of aerial bombardment, while
sporadic ground-based bombardment continued in the southern part of the country.
5.
By the time the ceasefire of 6 March had come into effect, almost 1 million
people, a third of the total civilian population of the “de-escalation area”, had fled the
intensification of hostilities that had commenced in early December 2019. About
560,000 people moved to the north-west of Idlib, into a small area along the border
between the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey that was already hosting hundreds of
thousands of displaced persons. About 400,000 people moved to areas in northern
Aleppo Governorate, including I‘zaz, Afrin, Jindayris and Bab. The rapid mass
displacement since December exacerbated the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the north-west, which continued during the reporting period. Alarming
rates of acute malnutrition (21 per cent) among displaced pregnant and lactating
women were reported. The United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF)
reported increased rates of stunting, with almost 3 out of every 10 displaced children
in the north-west under the age of 5 stunted, compared to 2 out of every 10 prior to
the further intensification of hostilities in Decemb er 2019.
6.
In the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, intermittent artillery shelling and
a limited number of ground-based clashes were reported along the eastern and western
edges of the territory between Tall Abyad and Ra’s al-Ayn. The M4 highway
reportedly opened at times, although civilian traffic was often not able to proceed.
Services at the Aluk water station, the main source of water for some 460,000 people
in the north-east, including populations in Hasakah city and surroundings and in the
Hawl and Arishah camps, were disrupted multiple times in March, with operations
resuming by the end of the reporting period. The Aluk water station relies on
electricity supply from Tishrin Dam to Ra’s al-Ayn. Effective functioning of electric
lines towards Ra’s al-Ayn and water pumps to El Bab remain key for the sustainability
of the Aluk station. The Hawl camp continued to host about 65,500 people. All
educational activities in the camp were suspended from 22 March as a precautionary
measure against the spread of COVID-19, and movements in and out of the camp
were restricted by the camp administration, with exception s for humanitarian staff.
7.
At Rukban, which has not been reached by a humanitarian convoy since September
2019 owing to a lack of security guarantees from armed groups in Rukban, informal
commercial supply routes from Damascus and Dumayr were closed off in February,
further disrupting the delivery of food, fuel and medical supplies into the camp. On
18 March, the Government of Jordan ended the referrals of urgent medical cases from
Rukban without prior COVID-19 screening, which is unavailable in the camp.
8.
In southern part of the Syrian Arab Republic, tensions between government forces
and members of reconciled armed groups continued to have an impact on the civilian
population. Two Syrian Oxfam staff members were killed in Yadudah, western rural
Dar‘a, on 19 February when their vehicle was attacked by an unidentified non-State
armed group. An Oxfam volunteer was also injured. On 18 March, eight civilians were
killed as a result of artillery shelling in Jallayn, western Dar‘a. Of those civilians, three
were children and one a staff member of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Moreover, local cells of former
opposition fighters carried out attacks by small arms and explosive devices against
government forces. There were reports of government forces shelling towns and
conducting seek-and-arrest operations to locate individuals with former links to
20-05694

3/20

S/2020/327

non-State armed groups and perpetrators of acts of violence. The expanded presence of
government forces was also marked by an increase in the number of checkpoints
erected. The uptick in violence in March has reportedly been followed by talks between
government officials and local representatives.
Update on overall developments
9.
Further to the appeal of the Secretary-General on 23 March for an immediate
global ceasefire to focus on combating COVID-19, the Special Envoy for Syria, on
24 March, called for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic to allow for an all-out effort to suppress COVID-19 in the
country. He noted that a nationwide ceasefire – a foundation of Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015) – was needed more than ever and should be respected by all
parties in order to confront the danger facing all Syrians. The Special Envoy also
called for large-scale releases of detainees and abductees on humanitarian grounds,
and for full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access to all parts of the country,
using all possible modalities. He noted that international donors should do whatever
is necessary to ensure that Syrians have access to the equipment and resources needed
to combat the virus and treat patients. The Special Envoy directly engaged with
concerned Member States so that all necessary humanitarian exemptions to sanctions
would be made available and fully utilised, and that all hurdles would be set aside in
order to urgently move the most critical items into the country to combat COVID-19.
10. The Co-Chairs of the Constitutional Committee agreed upon an agenda for the
next session of the Committee. The Special Envoy stated that, while COVID -19 made
it impossible to convene Syrians in Geneva at present, he would consult with the
parties to see if useful preparations could begin for future sessions.
Protection
11. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) verified incidents, occurring from 1 February to 3 1 March 2020, in which
at least 312 civilians, including 51 women and 100 children, had been killed and at
least 466 civilians, including 55 women and 130 children, injured as a result of the
conduct of hostilities across the Syrian Arab Republic, includin g due to airstrikes,
ground-based strikes, improvised explosive devices, explosive remnants of war,
armed clashes and targeted killings, at the hands of various parties to the conflict. The
majority of civilians were killed and injured due to an intensific ation of airstrikes and
ground-based strikes by pro-government forces that hit areas within the
“de-escalation area” in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic in February and
early March. At least 208 civilians, including 39 women and 70 children, were killed
as a result of reported airstrikes and ground-based strikes by government and
pro-government forces in the north-west of the country. On the basis of the consistent
pattern of civilian harm, OHCHR has expressed strong concerns that parties to the
conflict have failed to respect the key international humanitarian law principles of
distinguishing civilians from fighters and civilian objects from military objectives; of
refraining from indiscriminate attacks; of proportionality in attack; and of precau tions
in the conduct of military operations.
12. In areas under the effective control of various non-State armed groups in the
northern part of the Syrian Arab Republic, such groups have continued to
systematically target civilians, journalists and health service providers perceived as
affiliated to an opposing party or allegedly critical of the armed group in control of
the territory. The whereabouts and fate of many deprived of their liberty remain
unknown. In Idlib, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, which has been designated as a terrorist
group by the Security Council, has systematically imposed rules and codes of conduct
on civilians living in areas under its control that are fundamentally contrary to human
4/20

20-05694

S/2020/327

rights, including the right to life, liberty and securit y of person, to freedom of
movement, to freedom of expression and to freedom of peaceful assembly and
association. Through self-appointed courts, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham members have
inflicted harsh penalties and executed persons perceived as critical of the rules or
accused of affiliation with the Government.
13. During the reporting period, non-State armed groups carried out seizures of
houses, land and property of civilians, who had previously fled the hostilities.
OHCHR received reports that Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham in Idlib and the Syrian
Democratic Forces in Aleppo had claimed property and houses of those who had fled
violence in the area.
14. In areas under the control of the Government., OHCHR continued to receive
reports of civilians being detained without reasons provided to them and their
families, raising concerns as to arbitrariness of arrest and detention. Relatives of the
individuals detained by Government forces or non-State armed groups were not
informed of, or were denied information related to, the fate and whereabouts of their
family members, raising concerns that in some cases this could amount to enforced
disappearances. OHCHR also continued to document in Dar‘a Governorate cases of
families that had received notifications of the death of rel atives while in the custody
of the Government. The bodies of the deceased were not returned to their families,
and no information was provided regarding the circumstances of their deaths or the
whereabouts of their bodies.
15. Hostilities damaging educational facilities and harming civilians continued to
be reported by humanitarian organizations. In total, 16 incidents were verified by the
United Nations during the reporting period: 1
(a) On 3 February, a kindergarten near Anjarah village, western rural A leppo,
was hit by airstrikes, killing two children and one woman. Substantial damage to the
building was reported;
(b) On 3 February, Atarib school for boys was hit by an airstrike on Atarib
town, Jabal Sim‘an-Aleppo, causing material damage;
(c) On 3 February, Binnish High School for girls was hit by an airstrike on
Binnish town, Idlib, causing material damage;
(d) On 14 February, Fu‘ah Primary and Secondary School in Fu‘ah village,
Binnish, Idlib city centre, was hit by a rocket, causing damage to w alls, doors and
windows;
(e) On 25 February, multiple schools and kindergartens in Idlib were impacted
by airstrikes: Bara‘im 1, Bara‘im 2, Khaled Shaar, Zahir Bibars, Izz Bin Abdulsalam,
Hurriya, Bara‘im kindergarten and Manahil kindergarten. At least se ven teachers were
among the casualties, one of whom was killed, in Bara‘im 2 secondary school;
(f) On 25 February, an airstrike hit Rural Munib Kamisha school, killing
11 civilians, injuring more than 40 and completely destroying the facility. Eight of
those killed were children, two girls and six boys, all below the age of 15. The school
was reportedly being used as a shelter for internally displaced persons.
(g) On 25 February, an airstrike hit Kafr Tinah school, in Kafr Tinah village,
Darat Izzah, Aleppo, causing material damage;
__________________
1

20-05694

These attacks have been confirmed using tried and tested systems, whereby the United Nations
receives reports from partners on the ground and reviews them against at least two other independent
sources. Only attacks that are fully vetted and confirmed by all independent sources are included in
the list of confirmed attacks. These systems are used worldwide and are widely respected.
5/20

S/2020/327

(h) On 1 March, Bdama primary school in Bdama town, Idlib, was affected by
artillery shelling, partially damaging the school;
(i) On 2 March, Adwan Secondary school was severely damaged by an
airstrike on Adwan village, in Ariha, Idlib, causing severe material damage.
16. The Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care of the World Health
Organization (WHO) reported 10 incidents affecting health -care facilities and assets
that caused injuries to five people. Additional incidents are yet to be verified as part
of the WHO surveillance system.
17. During the reporting period, the internal United Nations Headquarters board of
inquiry concluded its investigation of a series of incidents that had occurred in the
north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic since the signing of the memorandum on the
stabilization of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation area between the Russian
Federation and Turkey on 17 September 2018. The board submitted its report to the
Secretary-General, through the Chef de Cabinet, on 9 March 2020. On 6 April, I
transmitted a summary of the board’s report to the Security Council.
Humanitarian response
18. Humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations agencies throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic included food assistance for 4.5 million people in February and
5 million people in March, across all 14 Governorates. Over 1 million people were
reached through protection projects (see table 1). Preparedness and response planning
were undertaken to develop a single plan for the country-wide response to COVID-19.
Response efforts under way included preparing frontline humanitarian workers, most
of whom are Syrian, to interact safely with communities. The United Nations
supported efforts to strengthen surveillance and early warning systems across the
country, in joint efforts with relevant authorities. United Nations agencies also
supported efforts to pre-position equipment and supplies, to rehabilitate the Central
Public Health Laboratory in Damascus, to identify and upgrade available isolation
units, and carry out community engagement programmes. Contingency measures
were initiated to protect humanitarian workers and beneficiaries while maintaining
the provision of humanitarian assistance. Measures included revised distribution
procedures and the postponement of some planned activities. In the north-west of the
country, assessed as particularly vulnerable, three hospitals in Idlib and two hospitals
in Aleppo were identified to serve as isolation units, in addition to 28 community based isolation centres under identification. All five identified hospitals were found
to be inadequately equipped and requiring extensive provision of supplies, additional
staffing and maintenance. All efforts to strengthen COVID -19 preparedness and
response were severely constrained by the global shortage of personal protective
equipment, ventilators and other vital medical supplies.
Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other
organizations through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic:
February and March 2020

Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
International Organization for Migration
Mine Action Service
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

6/20

Average number
of people
reached monthly

1 000
125 000
9 000
670 000

20-05694

S/2020/327
Average number
of people
reached monthly

Organization

United Nations Children’s Fund

821 000

United Nations Development Programme

403 000

United Nations Population Fund

475 000

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

167 000

World Food Programme

4 356 000

World Health Organization

656 000

19. From inside the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian assistance provided by
United Nations agencies included delivery by WFP of food assistance for 3.3 million
people in February and 3.2 million people in March. UNICEF reached 1.3 million
people with water, sanitation and health services. WHO delivered over 900,000
treatments to 10 Governorates and supported 100,000 outpatient consultations. About
335,000 Palestinian refugees received cash assistance through UNRWA.
Figure I
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners through
cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: February a nd March 2020
(monthly average)
(Thousands)

2 023

38
Nutrition

248

-

Non-food Education
items/shelter

310

210
Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Food

Health

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and
by district: February and March 2020 (monthly average)

20-05694

Governorate

District

Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/
shelter

Water,
sanitation
Nutrition and hygiene

Aleppo

Afrin

–

28 575

–

–

Aleppo

Bab

–

62 798

–

–

–

–

Aleppo

I‘zaz

–

184 915

80 285

33 143

10 950

43 400

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

–

39 913

–

–

–

–

Idlib

Ariha

–

–

–

2 500

–

2 500

Idlib

Harim

–

1 667 835

200 274

147 775

26 550

131 460

Idlib

Idlib

–

38 928

29 073

64 900

–

32 500

–

–

7/20

S/2020/327

20. In the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, the cross-border operation
continued to respond to a catastrophic deterioration of the humanitarian situation for
millions of people who cannot be reached by other means. WFP distributed food
assistance in Idlib and western Aleppo Governorates for 1.2 million people in
February and for 1.8 million people in March. Emergency ready-to-eat rations were
provided to over 500,000 displaced persons in February and 83,000 in March, with
the significant decrease in March resulting from the sharp decrease in new
displacement following the 6 March ceasefire. UNHCR assistance through the crossborder modality included almost 15,000 tents to Idlib and Aleppo Governorates. On
2 March, a United Nations inter-agency mission crossed into the north-west of the
Syrian Arab Republic from Turkey and gathered first-hand information from the
affected population about their humanitarian needs. The mission found acute and
complex protection needs, urgent need for adequate shelter, food, sanitation and basic
health services. The interagency mission was led by the Regional Humanitarian
Coordinator and included representatives from the International Organization for
Migration, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), WFP, WHO and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
21. During the reporting period, the Russian Federation sent informational bulletins
to the United Nations from the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and
Refugee Migration Monitoring, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief
assistance. Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms
of humanitarian assistance.
22. The humanitarian readiness and response plan for the north-west of the Syrian
Arab Republic, which had requested $336 million over six months to assist up to
800,000 people, was revised in February as needs surpassed planning estimates. The
revised plan is aimed at assisting up to 1.1 million people, with a funding requirement
of $500 million to cover the immediate needs of persons displaced since the
intensification of hostilities in December 2019. By the end of March, some
$340 million had been received or pledged. Work continued to finalize the Syria
Humanitarian Response Plan for 2020, covering humanitarian needs across the Syrian
Arab Republic, including new requirements resulting from the developing COVID -19
crisis.
Humanitarian access
23. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. The access landscape in the country is
complex, with different areas serviced differently and different types of services
requiring different operating modalities. Access is critical for principled humanitarian
action, which depends notably on the ability to independently assess needs and deliver
assistance and to monitor and evaluate the impact independently, including by
regularly engaging directly with affected people.
24. The COVID-19 crisis has had a heavy impact on the ability of humanitarian
workers to operate in the country. At the end of the reporting period, most land border
crossings into the country were closed, with limited exemptions from Jordan,
Lebanon and Turkey for commercial and humanitarian shipments, and for some
movement of humanitarian and international organization personnel. International
flights to Damascus International Airport were suspended, with humanitarian and
commercial exemptions for domestic flights. Tartus and Ladhiqiyah ports remained
operational, with precautionary measures, including mandatory sterilization
procedures, in place. In the north-east of the country, the Fish Khabur/Simalka
informal border crossing was closed in early March. An initial agreement with the
8/20

20-05694

S/2020/327

parties to allow humanitarian staff and supplies to cross during one day each week
did not hold and further negotiations with the parties continued In the north-west, the
Bab al-Hawa and Bab al-Salam border crossings remained open for humanitarian and
commercial shipments, but were closed to individual movements other than
emergency medical cases. Restrictions were in place at most crossing points inside
the country, to varying degrees, including at Tayiha in Aleppo, Akarshi, Abu Asi and
Tabaqah in Raqqah and at Salihiyah in Dayr al-Zawr. Crossing points at Abu
al-Zandayn, Umm al-Julud and Awn Dadat in Aleppo were closed.
Access in government-controlled areas
25. Notwithstanding COVID-19-related limitations, the United Nations continued
to provide assistance from within the Syrian Arab Republic to millions of people in
need in thousands of locations. More than 1,800 United Nations staff members are
in-country, with more than 600 deployed in nine humanitarian hubs outside
Damascus, in Aleppo, Dar‘a, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli,
Suwayda’ and Tartus. A further 3,860 staff of UNRWA are deployed across the
country. The decentralized presence of United Nations staff contributes to greater
access and proximity to affected populations.
26. Overall, the United Nations and its partners conducted 1,094 missions during
the reporting period. Of the conducted missions, almost 66 per cent did not req uire
specific approvals. Almost 27 per cent were conducted with approvals from line
ministries, governors and other authorities. Eight per cent were conducted with
approval through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Of the 1,094 conducted missions,
5 per cent were assessment missions, 29 per cent were missions accompanying aid
deliveries, 59 per cent were monitoring missions and 8 per cent were security,
logistics and administrative support missions (see table 3 and figure II).
27. Many aid deliveries are implemented through national partners, in particular
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
Requesting approval for delivery of assistance often requires approvals from multiple
ministries. The United Nations is regularly deployed alongside the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, including to undertake assessments, accompany deliveries and follow up
with monitoring and evaluation missions. Missions that deploy from Damascus, both
from main offices and sub-offices supporting Rif Dimashq or the southern part of the
country, submit requests to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Requesting approval for
a United Nations movement out of Damascus involves the submission of a note
verbale that includes mission participants and destination, and miss ions can deploy
upon the approval of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Many missions, however, take
place at the local level, where sub-offices submit requests directly to local governors,
without the need for approval from line ministries. For many United Nations agency
programmes there are blanket approvals in place to assess, accompany and monitor
deliveries, meaning that further specific requests are not required.
28. During the reporting period, requests for 323 missions requiring national formal
approval were submitted. Of these, 44 per cent were approved and 25 per cent were
conducted. While requests made at the end of the reporting period would not be
expected to receive a formal response before the end of the month, and the approved
missions may not have been conducted, the numbers indicate limitations on access
(see table 4). The approval rate during the previous reporting period was similarly
low, at 45 per cent. Part of the reason for the lower approval rate may relate to
limitations being put in place as a result of COVID-19. On 22 March, the Ministry of
Foreign affairs notified the United Nations that only aid deliveries would be approved
and that other movements would need to be limited.

20-05694

9/20

S/2020/327

Table 3
Total number of missions conducted from within the Syrian Arab Republic by
United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators, by type: February to
March 2020
Note
verbale

Blanket
approval

Programme
approval

Total

Assessment missions

14

33

5

52

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

20

290

2

312

Monitoring missions

27

607

13

647

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

21

62

0

83

82

992

20

1 094

Type of mission

Total

Figure II
Total number of missions conducted from within the Syrian Arab Republic by
United Nations agencies, by Governorate: February to March 2020
250

19

200
11

150

7

100

3
3

214

6

14

154

50

115

106

3
1

100
78

62

48

3

1

33

31

8
37

0

Blanket

18

0

3

11

5

Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Table 4
Requests for United Nations access for single-agency missions: February to
March 2020
Number
requested

Number
approved

Per cent
approved

Assessment missions

62

25

40

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

58

32

55

Monitoring missions

145

49

34

Security, logistics and administrative support missions

58

37

64

323

143

44

Type of request

Total

29. In government-controlled areas, communities and enclaves that remained
difficult to access, owing to a lack of approvals from the Syrian authorities as well as
security considerations, included Duma, Zamalka, Irbin, East Harasta, Kafr Batna,
10/20

20-05694

S/2020/327

Mudayra and Nashabiyah in eastern Ghouta; Bayt Jinn and Mazra‘at Bayt Jinn;
Zakiyah and Dayr Khabiyah and Darayya. Access to some areas that had shifted
control since 2018, in the south, eastern Ghouta, and Idlib, remained challenging
owing to insecurity, administrative measures or lack of operational capacity. In the
southern part of the country, insecurity and administrative restrictions continued to
prevent sustained access to areas formerly controlled by non-State armed groups,
particularly in western Dar‘a and Qunaytirah. No convoys have reached Rukban since
September 2019 owing to a lack of security guarantees from armed groups in Rukban.
Access to Rukban has been further limited by closures of informal commercial supply
routes during the reporting period, as well as the discontinuation by the Government
of Jordan of medical referrals without COVID-19 screening.
Access in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
30. In the north-east, the United Nations maintained regular and sustained
humanitarian access in most parts of Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates, while other
areas, including Manbij and Ayn al-Arab, remained difficult to access from
Damascus, owing to the lack of agreement between parties in control and insecurity.
Cross-line access constraints continued along the border between the Syrian Arab
Republic and Turkey, between Ra’s al-Ayn and Tall Abyad.
31. Following the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020), efforts continued with regard
to replacing the supply of critical medical items previously provided to the north -east
of the country through the Ya‘rubiyah border crossing. The process to gain approval
for deliveries of medical supplies by land or air to the north -east requires agencies to
provide a request to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Once the medical supplies are
imported into the Syrian Arab Republic, approval is required for each convoy and for
each agency that is part of the convoy. Each request requires a load list that identifies
the quantity of assistance due to be dispatched to each destination. The Ministry of
Health may then issue a signed facilitation letter for each agency. This approval
process usually takes one week. Once the facilitation letters have been received,
additional approvals from the Ministry of Health and security services must be
granted at the warehouses before the supplies can be loaded. Further clearances are
then required at the airport for shipments sent by air.
32. From January 2020, until the end of the reporting period, WHO delivered two
consignments of medicines to the north-east of the country by air; in February UNFPA
delivered a consignment of 54 reproductive health kits to the north -east by road; in
March UNICEF transported a consignment of medical supplies to the north-east, also
by road (there have been no WHO road convoys since all the necessary approvals
have not been obtained). The consignments delivered approximately 64 tons of health
supplies to the north-east, of which 58 per cent were delivered to facilities previously
supported by cross-border deliveries from Ya‘rubiyah and/or to cross-border partners.
However, supplies reached only 31 per cent of the medical facilities that had
previously been supported by cross-border deliveries from Ya‘rubiyah: 6 out of 13
hospitals, 24 out of 58 primary health centres, and 3 out of 37 mobile medical units
previously reached by cross-border operations. Multiple medical facilities previously
dependent on the cross-border operation reported acute shortages. At least seven
primary health centres in rural Raqqah reported gaps in reproductive health and
nutrition supplies. Other facilities reported critical items in danger of immediate
stock-out, including emergency medicines, anaesthetics and insulin. A primary health
centre in Raqqah, which treats over 3,900 patients per month, more than half of whom
are children, reported likely closure owing to loss of funds.
33. Efforts continued with regard to finalizing plans and approvals for an airlift from
Iraq of WHO medical supplies that was originally intended for transport to the north east of the Syrian Arab Republic through Ya‘rubiyah. These supplies have now been
20-05694

11/20

S/2020/327

stuck in Iraq for several months. As a result, some of them are no longer usable and
have had to be removed from the consignment. Further progress has been affected by
office closures as part of COVID-19 measures, as well as the closure of the Erbil airport
in Iraq. In the meantime, the presence of COVID-19 has been confirmed in the northeast of the country. Local capacity and supplies to handle an outbreak there are
minimal.
Access in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
34. In the north-west, the cross-border operation from Turkey continued at record
levels in line with escalating needs. The highest total number of United Nations truck
crossings per month since the establishment of the mechanism in 2014 was recorded
in March 2020, with 1,486 trucks crossing into the country from Turkey.
Humanitarian access was generally permissive for cross-border humanitarian actors,
with the exception of front-line areas affected by violence in southern Idlib and
western Aleppo. An increasing number of cross-border partners was authorized to
operate in Afrin, I‘zaz and Bab districts as of February 2020.
35. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as mandated under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2449 (2018) and 2504 (2020).
From 1 February to 31 March 2020, the Mechanism processed and confirmed the
humanitarian nature of 50 consignments consisting of 2,413 trucks that crossed into
the country from Turkey: 23 consignments from Bab al-Hawa (2,038 trucks) and 27
from Bab al-Salam (375 trucks). This brings the total number of trucks sent since the
beginning of operations to 34,906 (26,021 through Bab al -Hawa, 4,181 through Bab
al-Salam, 4,595 through Ramtha and 109 from Ya‘rubiyah). There were no concerns
or questions regarding the humanitarian nature of these consignments. The United
Nations provided 48-hour notice to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
regarding all shipments. The Mechanism continued to bene fit from the excellent
cooperation of the Government of Turkey.
36. On 19 March, a note verbale was submitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
requesting a joint cross-line mission by the United Nations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to Atarib, Darat Izzah
and surrounding locations in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic. The mission
was temporarily put on hold owing to concerns related to COVID -19, and a request
will be made when conditions are in place to conduct the mission.
Visas and registrations
37. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: February and March 2020
Type of request

Number
requested

Number
approved

Number
rejected

Number
pending

Visas requested during reporting period

137

81

3

53

Renewals requested during reporting period

185

128

3

54

Visas pending from before reporting period

55

36

3

16

Renewals pending from before reporting period

54

51

2

1

Note: The United Nations withdrew two visa requests submitted during the reporting period and
one pending request from before the reporting period.

12/20

20-05694

S/2020/327

38. A total of 32 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
39. The United Nations and NGOs continued to implement programmes in areas
affected by frequent clashes among parties to the conflict, by air strikes and by the
regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and other attacks. Humanitarian relief
personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance,
explosive remnants of war and landmines.
40. In February and March, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent faced interference in its
work in the north-east of the country, including confiscation of medical facilities and
a branch office in Raqqah.
41. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including: 24 staff members of the United Nations and of the
entities of the United Nations system, 19 of whom were staff members of UNRWA;
66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff
members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members
of international and national NGOs have also been killed. Two Oxfam staff members
were killed in Dar‘a on 19 February when their vehicle was attacked by an
unidentified armed group. An UNRWA staff member was killed in an outbreak of
violence in Jallayn, rural Dar‘a, on 18 March. These incidents had an impact on
humanitarian operations, limiting staff movement, and assessment and monitoring
missions, and prompting adapted modalities for the distribution of food parcels in the
Yarmouk Basin area.

III. Observations
42. In early March 2020, the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic entered its tenth
year. The suffering of the Syrian people over the course of a lmost a decade continues
to defy comprehension and belief. Hundreds of thousands of Syrians have lost their
lives. Over half the population has fled their homes. More than 11 million people
inside the country require humanitarian assistance, including near ly 5 million
children. Half a million children in the country are chronically malnourished.
Hundreds of thousands have been detained, abducted or are missing. Human rights
abuses, possible war crimes, destruction and destitution have been reported on a
monumental scale. Throughout February, as intensive hostilities continued, I
reiterated my call for a ceasefire in the north-west of the country. In March, I called
for an immediate global ceasefire to help to create corridors for life -saving aid, open
precious windows for diplomacy and bring hope to the places among the most
vulnerable to COVID-19. In view of the violence that has unfolded, and now the
potentially devastating impact of COVID-19, it is imperative that a complete and
immediate nationwide ceasefire be reached and implemented throughout the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is equally imperative that full, sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access to all parts of the country, using all modalities possible, including
scaled-up cross-line and cross-border access, be continued and authorized to ensure
that humanitarians on the ground reach all people in need, wherever they are located,
in a timely and direct manner.
43. I commend the work of humanitarian organizations taking all feasible measures
to address the needs across the Syrian Arab Republic. Their work continues despite
the new challenges and risks presented by the global COVID-19 pandemic. These add
to the immense existing challenges posed by hostilities and a highly complex
operating environment.
20-05694

13/20

S/2020/327

44. Reaching all people in need, regardless of what side of a front line they find
themselves on, remains the overarching goal for humanitarian action in the Syrian
Arab Republic, and the United Nations continues its efforts to use all possible avenues
to reach those in need. In the north-west of the country, the massive cross-border
operation remains an essential lifeline for millions of civilians whom the United
Nations currently cannot reach through other means. The cross -border operation will
require further scale-up to respond to needs related to COVID-19. Cross-line access
from within the country would play an important role in augmenting these efforts,
and I urge all parties to cooperate with the United Nations and its partners to reach
people in need through all modalities.
45. Three months after the removal of Ya‘rubiyah as an authorized border crossing,
the remaining gaps in assistance in the north-east underscore the importance of using
all modalities, cross-border and cross-line, for sustaining assistance at the required
levels. As noted in my report on alternative modalities for the border crossing of
Ya‘rubiyah (S/2020/139), in order for all humanitarian needs to be met, the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic would need to facilitate greater cross -line
access to the north-east of the country, in particular for medical assistance. This
remains valid.
46. I remain alarmed by the large numbers of deaths and injuries of civilians,
including many children. I remain particularly concerned about the appar ent
indiscriminate attacks in densely populated areas, including inside busy markets, near
schools and hospitals, and within the vicinity of camps for internally displaced
persons. Civilian infrastructure, and in particular that which is indispensable for the
survival of civilians, must be protected in accordance with international humanitarian
law, and constant care must be taken to spare it in the conduct of military operations.
Attacking, or rendering useless, objects indispensable for the survival of th e civilian
population, such as access to a clean water supply, is prohibited under international
law.
47. The impact of the hostilities on civilian objects and sites used for humanitarian
purposes in the north-west of the country is a clear reminder of the importance for all
parties to the conflict to respect and ensure respect for international humanitarian law,
in particular: the obligations at all times to distinguish between civilians and
combatants and between civilian objects and military objectives and to direct attacks
only against combatants and military objectives; the obligation to take all feasible
precautions to avoid, and in any event to minimize, the incidental loss of civilian life,
injury to civilians and damage to civilian objects; the obligation not to conduct attacks
that may be expected to cause incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians,
damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in
relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated; and the prohibition
of indiscriminate attacks, including the indiscriminate use of high explosive
weaponry in populated areas. According to numerous reports, the parties have failed
to do this. I emphasize in this connection, as the Security Coun cil has done, that any
measures that Member States may take to counter terrorism, including those against
terrorist groups designated as such by the Security Council, must be consistent with
their obligations under international law, in particular internat ional humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international refugee law.
48. Continued impunity for alleged serious violations and abuses of human rights
and international humanitarian law by parties to the conflict remains of grave concern.
Perpetrators of serious violations and abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law must be held accountable. I remind all States, particularly those
with direct influence over parties to the conflict, that they must take proactive steps
to ensure respect for international humanitarian law, including as it relates to the
protection of civilians. I call upon all parties to the conflict, in particular the
14/20

20-05694

S/2020/327

Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, all States, civil society and the United
Nations system to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, in particular by providing relevant information and
documentation. Accountability for serious violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law is both a legal requirement and central to achieving
sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in
the country to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
49. The mandate of the United Nations Headquarters board of inquiry to investigate
certain incidents in the north-west of the country concluded in March with a series of
recommendations, which I am considering carefully. On 6 April I transmitted a
summary of the board’s report to the Security Council. In order to help to work out
how best to address the recommendations of the board, I am p lanning to appoint a
senior independent adviser with expertise and experience in this area.
50. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the Syrian Arab Republi c,
I continue to strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with
Human Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with OHCHR,
including through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect
and promote human rights.
51. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, extensive levels of diplomatic
cooperation and fortitude continue to be needed to refocu s on the political process,
ensure a nationwide ceasefire and bring an end to this conflict. My Special Envoy for
Syria, Geir O. Pedersen, will work on preparations to reconvene the Syrian -owned
and Syrian-led, United Nations-facilitated Constitutional Committee. The parties
must meaningfully engage in the political process, which is larger than the
Constitutional Committee. The international community must demonstrate a renewed
sense of urgency in supporting the Syrians in finding a United Nations-facilitated
political solution as set out in resolution 2254 (2015), after almost a decade of
conflict.
52. We cannot allow the tenth year of the conflict to result in the same carnage, the
same flouting of human rights and international humanitarian law, the same
inhumanity. The suffering on the Syrian people must end.

20-05694

15/20

S/2020/327

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: February
and March 2020 *
Idlib Governorate
• On 9 February, 1 boy was killed and 13 other civilians were injured in reported
ground-based strikes in Jisr al-Shughur city.
• On 10 February, one boy was killed and three other civilians were injured in a
reported air strike near the “Shaykh Idris” camp for internally displaced persons
in the outskirts of Kafr Uruq village.
• On 11 February, two civilians were arrested from their workplace in Salqin city.
Their fate and whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 11 February, at least 9 civilians, including 7 boys, were killed and 40 other
civilians, including 2 women, 7 boys and 2 girls, were injured by a reported air
strike in Idlib city.
• On 13 February, seven displaced civilians, including four boys and one girl,
were injured after a reported air strike impacted close to a makeshift shelter near
Idlib city.
• On 14 February, three civilians were injured by a reported ground -based strike
that landed in proximity of a makeshift camp for internally displaced persons
near Sarmada.
• On 15 February, one civilian man was killed and six civilians were injured in a
reported ground-based strike that hit the “Muthanna” camp for internally
displaced persons near Sarmada.
• On 17 February, one civilian was killed and three other civilians were injured
by reported ground-based strikes that landed in local market in Dana town.
• On 19 February, one civilian woman was injured after a reported ground -based
strike hit near “Sarut” camp for internally displaced persons in Dayr Hasan.
• On 25 February, at least 11 civilians, including 1 woman, 1 girl and 6 boys, were
killed and more than 40 civilians were injured by a reported air strike that hit
Munib Kamisha school in Ma‘arratmisrin. The school hosted displaced
civilians.
• On 25 February, five civilians, including four teachers and one student, were
killed after reported ground-based strikes damaged several schools in Idlib city.
On the same day, 3 civilians were killed and 15 other civilians were injured after
reported air strikes and ground-based strikes hit parts of Idlib city. Idlib Central
Hospital was reportedly damaged in the hostilities.
• On 27 February, 3 civilian men were killed and 11 civilians were injured by
reported ground-based strikes that hit Binnish town.
• On 27 February, two women and two girls from the same family were killed by
a reported air strike that reportedly hit their house in Shaleh village. On the same
* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations Hig h
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
16/20

20-05694

S/2020/327

day, four civilians from the same family, including a woman and her two sons,
were killed and a girl was injured by a reported ground-based strike that
reportedly hit their house in Idlib city.
• On 28 February, four civilians from the same family, including a woman and her
two sons, were killed inside their car on the road between Barah and Balyun
towns reportedly by either an air strike or a ground-based strike.
• On 29 February, a boy and a girl were killed and four other civilians, including
three boys, were injured by a reported ground-based strike in Binnish.
• On 3 March, at least 13 civilians, including 7 boys and 1 girl, were killed and at
least 18 civilians, including 3 women and 6 boys, were injured by a reported
ground-based strike that landed in Idlib city.
• On 5 March, at least 13 civilians, including 5 women and 2 girls, were killed
and 21 civilians, including 4 women, 1 boy and 1 girl, were injured by a reported
air strike that hit near a shelter for internally displaced persons in Ma‘arratmisrin
town.
• On 14 March, armed actors reportedly raided two offices of the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent in Idlib city and Ariha city. Perpetrators were reported by the
organization to have destroyed office property, confiscated all humanitarian aid
items and closed down both offices.
• On 15 March, fighters of Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham executed a civilian detained
since July 2019 reportedly due to affiliation with the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
• On 17 March, two displaced civilians (one woman and one boy) were killed and
four civilians were injured after armed clashes reportedly broke out in “Qatari”
camp for internally displaced persons in Kafr Lusin village.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 1 February, one civilian was injured after reported ground -based strikes hit
several residential areas in Aleppo city. Several strikes reportedly hit the
University of Aleppo.
• On 3 February, nine family members, including three women and four children,
were killed by a reported air strike that hit a bus travelling near Urum al -Kubra
town.
• On 5 February, five family members, including one woman, one girl and one
boy, were killed after reported ground-based strikes landed in a residential area
of Aleppo city.
• On 5 February, five family members, including three women and one girl, we re
killed after a reported air strike reportedly hit their house in Jadraya village.
• On 6 February, one civilian was killed and five other civilians were injured by
reported ground-based strikes that reportedly hit a school in Afrin city. On the
same day, two women, four boys and two girls were injured in further reported
ground-based strikes.
• On 6 February, the Anadan high school reportedly sustained structural damage
after reported ground-based strikes hit near the school in Anadan city.
• On 9 February, at least six civilians, including one woman, were killed, and Kafr
Nuran school sustained structural damage when several reported air strikes hit
Kafr Nuran village.

20-05694

17/20

S/2020/327

• On 10 February, 6 civilians, including 1 boy, were killed and 12 civilians,
including 3 women, were injured after a reported vehicle-born improvised
explosive device detonated in Afrin city.
• On 10 February, at least 14 civilians, including 4 women, 3 girls and 3 boys,
were killed and 23 civilians, including 10 women, 5 boys and 3 girls, were
injured after reported air strikes hit various areas in Abyan Sim‘an town.
• On 15 February, “Linado” health centre was destroyed as a result of a reported
air strike that hit the facility in Taqad village.
• On 17 February, “Kinanah” hospital was destroyed and the adjacent “Firdous”
hospital was damaged in reported air strikes in Darat Izzah city.
• On 25 February, two civilian men were reportedly killed after an unidentified
improvised explosive device detonated near their car in Aleppo city. On the
same day, two civilians were reportedly killed by an unidentified improvised
explosive device that detonated in Aleppo city.
• On 24 February, a civilian was killed and two civilians were injured when a
reported ground-based strike hit the village of Burj al-Qas.
• On 25 February, three family members, including one woman and her daughter,
were killed by a reported ground-based strike that hit Aqibah village.
• On 1 March, five civilians including one boy were killed and six civilians were
injured after a reported air strike hit Kafr Tinah village.
• On 8 March, one civilian was killed and two civilians were injured when a
reported improvised explosive device attached to a motorbike detonated in
Afrin. On the same day, two civilian men were injured after another reported
improvised explosive device attached to a motorbike detonated in Afrin city.
• On 14 March, one boy was injured in a reported ground-based strike in Shaykh
Isa village.
• On 14 March, two civilians (one man and one boy) were injured after a reported
improvised explosive device detonated in Afrin.
• On 17 March, one boy was killed and his father was injured when a reported
landmine detonated in an agricultural field outside Ayn al -Arab.
• On 18 March, five civilians, including two boys, were killed and seven civilians,
including one boy, were injured by a reported ground -based strike that hit a
marketplace in Afrin.
• On 19 March, at least 2 civilian men were killed and 18 civilians, including 1
woman, 2 girls and 5 boys, were injured when a suspected vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device exploded in I‘zaz city.
• On 22 March, one civilian was killed and his son was injured after a reported
improvised explosive device detonated in front of Farabi Hospit al in Bab city.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 26 February, armed actors prevented repair workers from accessing the Aluk
water pump station, located east of the city of Ra’s al-Ayn, to restore service to
areas of western rural Hasakah and Hasakah city. On 22 March, water service
was interrupted again. Aluk relies on the electric supply from Tishrin Dam to
Ra’s al-Ayn. Electric supply was reportedly obstructed towards Ra’s al-Ayn
several times during the reporting period, between 8 and 26 February, between

18/20

20-05694

S/2020/327

2 and 4 March, on 21 March, between 23 and 25 March, and between 28 and
31 March.
• On 14 March, four boys were injured after a reported improvised explosive
device detonated in Nasiriyah village.
• On 16 March, at least two civilian men were injured when a reported improvised
explosive device attached to a motorcycle detonated in the city of Shaddadah.
• On 16 March, a civilian was injured when a reported ground -based strike hit
Umm al-Kayf village.
Hama Governorate
• On 9 March, two civilians were killed when a reported landmine detonated in
an agricultural land in Murak.
• On 17 March, two civilians, including one boy, were injured after a reported
landmine detonated in an agricultural land in Ma‘an.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 29 February, one civilian was killed and two other civilians were injured
after a reported improvised explosive device detonated inside a car parked in
Hajin.
• On 11 March, one civilian was killed and four civilians, including three boys,
were injured when a reported roadside improvised explosive device detonated
in Sha‘fah town.
• On 17 March, unidentified armed actors kidnapped and executed a man in
Hawayij.
Damascus Governorate
• On 16 February, one civilian was arrested at a checkpoint in Damascus. Reasons
for his arrest, his fate and whereabouts remain unknown.
• On 25 February, one civilian was killed and another was injured after a reported
improvised explosive device detonated in a car parked near Al-Sham Private
University.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 16 February, four civilians, including two women, one boy and one girl,
were killed and seven civilians, including three women and one girl, were
injured after a reported vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated in
Tall Abyad.
• On 7 March, one civilian man was injured in a reported ground -based strike that
hit the village of Khalidiyah.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 19 February, two Syrian humanitarian workers were killed and a third was
injured after unidentified gunmen opened fire on their vehicle on the road
between Yadudah and Muzayrib.
• On 28 February, two civilians were killed after a reported improvised explosive
device detonated in an electricity transformer in Dar‘a city.

20-05694

19/20

S/2020/327

• On 1 March, three civilians were killed and four civilians, including one woman
and her son, were injured in an armed clash in the city of Sanamayn.
• On 8 March, two civilians (one woman and her son) were injured after a reported
improvised explosive device detonated in the city of Sanamayn.
• On 11 March, two civilians were killed by unidentified gunmen in Umm
al-Mayadhin town.
• On 18 March, a staff member of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East was killed in an outbreak of violence in
Jallayn, rural Dar‘a.
• On 18 March, seven civilians, including one girl and one boy, were killed, and
nine civilians, including one woman and three boys, were injured in Jallayn in
reported ground-based strikes on the areas of Tasil, Tseel and Jallayn in western
rural Dar’a.
• On 25 March, one civilian man was killed by unidentified gunmen in Dar‘a city.

20/20

20-05694
