United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
TENTH SPECIAL SESSION

Official Records

26th

•

President: Mr. Lazar MOJSOV (Yugoslavia).

PLENARY MEETING
Wednesday, 28 June 1978,
at 5.20 p.m.
NEW YORK

Statement by the representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

AGENDA ITEM 3
8. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United Kingdom, who wishes to make a statement.

Credentials of representatives to the tenth special session of the General Assembly:
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee

9. Sir Derick ASHE (United Kingdom): I have asked to
be allowed to speak not in order to comment on the course
of our work at this special session, but in order to make a
short statement on a related matter which I think will be of
interest to representatives and which I hope will be welcomed by them. My remarks will parallel a statement
made by my Government in London yesterday.

1. The PRESIDENT: Since no representative has asked
to speak on this item, I invite members to tum their attention to the draft resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee in paragraph 18 of its report [A/S-IO/22].

2. In the Committee, the draft resolution was adopted
without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft resolution?

10. In the draft programme of action which my Government sponsored on 1 February [A/S-IO/ I, vol. VI, document A/AC.187/96], we included a call on nuclear-weapon
States to give· appropriate assurances to increase the confidence of non-nuclear-weapon States in their security from
nuclear attack.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S-IO/I).
3. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly has concluded its
consideration of agenda item 3.

11. Following that proposal, the United Kingdom discussed this matter with various nuclear and other Powers.
In his address to the General Assembly at the 14th meeting
of the special session, the British Prime Minister recognized that States which have renounced nuclear weapons
are entitled to look for assurances that such weapons will
not be used against them. Mr. Callaghan said then that
Britain wanted action to meet these expectations. He
placed on record the fact that Britain would be prepared to
take part, with other nuclear Powers, in giving firm, farreaching and permanent assurances to the non-nuclear
States. During this special session, other nuciear Powers
have made statements and given undertakings on this subject of negative security assurances.

Organization of work
4. The PRESIDENT: I should like to consult the Assembly about the date of closure of this session, which had
been originally set for today.

5. As members are aware, everybody in the Ad Hoc
Committee, the working groups, the drafting groups, the
informal groups under their co-ordinators, and the Secretariat has been working very hard at all hours of the day
and night to reach agreement on the text of the finai document. Although substantial progress has been achieved,
there is need for further intensive consultations and negotiations. I wish to take this opportunity to ask for the cooperation of all Member States in bringing the session to a
successful conclusion, and to appeal to all who take part in
the ongoing negotiations to co-operate fully in order to
conclude their work in finalizing the remaining parts of the
text of the final document.

12. The United Kingdom is now ready formally to give
such an assurance. I accordingly give the following assurance, on behalf of my Government, to non-nuclearweapon States which are parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373(XXII),
annex] and to other internationally binding commitments
not to manufacture or acquire nuclear explosive devices:
Britain undertakes not to use nuclear weapons against such
States except in the case of an attack on the United Kingdom, its dependent territories, its armed forces or its allies
by such a State in association or alliance with a nuclearweapon State.

6. The Ad Hoc Committee will meet tomorrow. In view
of the fact that the time of the conclusion of its work and
the time of finishing its report to the General Assembly are
not yet clear, I suggest that we postpone the closure of the
session by 24 hours or, if necessary, 48 hours.
7. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides to accept this suggestion.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

It was so decided.
463

AlS-lO/PV .26

;\
'I
