61

General Auembly-Twenty-fifth Senion

For this purpose, he should have authority, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, to frame such staff rules, consistent with the relevant principles laid down by the General
Assembly, as he considers necessary to meet the special
problems which arise in the service of the Programme.
62. With respect to the organization of the Programme at
the country level, the resident representative will be redesignated resident director of the Programme. His appointment
by the Administrator will be subject to the prior approval
of the Government concerned.
63. There should be the maximum possible delegation
of authority to the resident director. His role therefore needs
to be greatly strengthened. In this context, his relations with
the representatives of other United Nations organizations in
the field are of crucial importance. The resident director
should be recognized as having full over-all responsibility for
the programme in the country concerned and his role in
relation to the representatives of the other United Nations
organizations, where they are posted with the prior approval
of the Government concerned, should be that of the leader
of the team, taking into account the professional competence
of these United Nations organizations and their relations with
appropriate organs of the Government. This role of leadership and over-all responsibility should extend to all contacts
with the governmental authorities concerned in connexion
with the programme, in regard to which he will be the
principal channel of communication between the Programme
and the Government. The resident director should have ultimate authority on behalf of the Administrator for all aspects
of the programme at the country level and should, subject
to the agreement of the organizations concerned, be the
central co-ordinating authority on their behalf for the other
development assistance programmes of the United Nations
system. In this connexion, the organizations in the United
Nations system are requested to ensure that the resident
directors of the Programme are consulted on the planning
and formulation of development projects with which those
organizations are concerned and that they are supplied with
reports on the execution of those projects, as requested by
the Economic and Social Council in resolution 1453 (XLVII)
of 8 August 1969.
64. The creation of new field offices or the enlargement
of the existing ones should depend on the volume of Programme operations in the particular country and should be
undertaken with due regard to the need for economy. In
the strengthening of field offices, priority should be given to
effective redeployment of existing staff.
65. The Inter-Agency Consultative Board should continue
to be the forum for interagency consultation and coordination relating to the Programme. However, the Board
should undertake a thorough review of its basic functions
and methods of work and its relations with the Governing
Council in the light of the new system of country programming
of Programme assistance and the need for the efficient implementation of the country programmes.

2689 (XXV), Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme on its ninth46 and tenth47 sessions.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2690 (XXV), United Nations Capital Development
Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2186 (XXI) of 13 December 1966 and 2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1967,
46 Ibid.,

Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4782).
6A (E/4884/Rev.1).

41 Ibid., Supplement No.

Recalling further its resolution 2525 (XXIV) of
5 December 1969, in which it decided, inter alia, to
continue the provisional arrangements for the operation of the United Nations Capital Development Fund,
Noting that it has not been possible for the Governing
Coun.::il of the United Nations Development Programme to undertake the exploratory study requested
by the General Assembly in resolution 2525 (XXIV),
Taking note of the statement by the SecretaryGeneral at the 1970 United Nations Pledging Conference on the United Nations Capital Development Fund
in which he called on the General Assembly to carry
out a searching review of the whole question, 48
1. Reaffirms its resolution 2525 (XXIV) and requests Member States to offer suggestions, within the
framework of the exploratory study, so as to expedite
the beginning of the effective operation of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund;
2. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to consider, within
the framework of the study mentioned above and
taking into account the observations made by Member
States during the twenty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, all possibilities for reaching the objectives
of the United Nations Capital Development Fund, including the desirability and feasibility of providing
follow-up investment projects of the Fund in country
programmes;
3. Decides to preserve the original functions of the
United Nations Capital Development Fund until 31 December 1971, in accordance with the measures set
forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution
2321 (XXII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to contribute separately, at the same pledging
conference, to the United Nations Development Programme and to the United Nations Capital Development Fund;
5. Appeals to Member States, and in particular to
developed countries, to provide substantial contributions to the United Nations Capital Development Fund
so as to make the Fund operational and effective.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2691 (XXV). International university

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraphs 196 and 197 of the introduction to the report of the Secretary-General on the work
of the Organization submitted to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fourth session, 49
Recalling its resolution 2573 (XXIV) of 13 December 1969,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1542 (XLIX) of 30 July 1970,
Believing that the establishment of an international
university, truly international in character, could contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Believing further that the studies on the establishment of an international university must be undertaken
48 See A/CONF.51/SR.1.
4 9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/7601/Add.1).
