United Nations

A/RES/65/229

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 March 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 105

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2010
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/65/457)]

65/229. United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women
Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women
Offenders (the Bangkok Rules)
The General Assembly,
Recalling the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and
criminal justice primarily related to the treatment of prisoners, in particular the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, 1 the procedures for the
effective implementation of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners, 2 the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of
Detention or Imprisonment 3 and the Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners, 4
Recalling also the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention
and criminal justice primarily related to alternatives to imprisonment, in particular
the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo
Rules) 5 and the basic principles on the use of restorative justice programmes in
criminal matters, 6
Recalling further its resolution 58/183 of 22 December 2003, in which it
invited Governments, relevant international and regional bodies, national human
rights institutions and non-governmental organizations to devote increased attention
to the issue of women in prison, including the children of women in prison, with a
view to identifying the key problems and the ways in which they can be addressed,
Considering the alternatives to imprisonment as provided for in the Tokyo
Rules, and taking into consideration the gender specificities of, and the consequent
need to give priority to applying non-custodial measures to, women who have come
into contact with the criminal justice system,
_______________
1
Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part), Universal Instruments
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
2
Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/47, annex.
3
Resolution 43/173, annex.
4
Resolution 45/111, annex.
5
Resolution 45/110, annex.
6
Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/12, annex.

10-52628

*1052628*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/229

Mindful of its resolution 61/143 of 19 December 2006, in which it urged States
to, inter alia, take positive measures to address structural causes of violence against
women and to strengthen prevention efforts that address discriminatory practices
and social norms, including with regard to women who need special attention in the
development of policies to address violence, such as women in institutions or in
detention,
Mindful also of its resolution 63/241 of 24 December 2008, in which it called
upon all States to give attention to the impact of parental detention and
imprisonment on children and, in particular, to identify and promote good practices
in relation to the needs and physical, emotional, social and psychological
development of babies and children affected by parental detention and
imprisonment,
Taking into consideration the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice:
Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty-first Century, 7 in which Member States
committed themselves, inter alia, to the development of action-oriented policy
recommendations based on the special needs of women as prisoners and offenders,
and the plans of action for the implementation of the Declaration, 8
Calling attention to the Bangkok Declaration on Synergies and Responses:
Strategic Alliances in Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, 9 as it relates
specifically to women in detention and in custodial and non-custodial settings,
Recalling that, in the Bangkok Declaration, Member States recommended to
the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice that it give consideration
to reviewing the adequacy of standards and norms in relation to prison management
and prisoners,
Having taken note of the initiative of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to designate the week from 6 to 12 October 2008 as Dignity and
Justice for Detainees Week, which placed particular emphasis on the human rights
of women and girls,
Considering that women prisoners are one of the vulnerable groups that have
specific needs and requirements,
Aware of the fact that many existing prison facilities worldwide were designed
primarily for male prisoners, whereas the number of female prisoners has
significantly increased over the years,
Recognizing that a number of female offenders do not pose a risk to society
and, as with all offenders, their imprisonment may render their social reintegration
more difficult,
Welcoming the development by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
of the Handbook for Prison Managers and Policymakers on Women and
Imprisonment, 10
Welcoming also the invitation, contained in Human Rights Council resolution
10/2 of 25 March 2009, 11 to Governments, relevant international and regional
_______________
7

Resolution 55/59, annex.
Resolution 56/261, annex.
9
Resolution 60/177, annex.
10
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.08.IV.4.
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/64/53),
chap. II, sect. A.
8

2

A/RES/65/229

bodies, national human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations to
devote greater attention to the issue of women and girls in prison, including issues
relating to the children of women in prison, with a view to identifying and
addressing the gender-specific aspects and challenges related to this problem,
Welcoming further the collaboration between the World Health Organization
Regional Office for Europe and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
taking note of the Kyiv Declaration on Women’s Health in Prison, 12
Taking note of the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children, 13
Recalling Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution
18/1 of 24 April 2009, 14 in which the Commission requested the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to convene in 2009 an open-ended
intergovernmental expert group meeting to develop, consistent with the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and the Tokyo Rules, supplementary
rules specific to the treatment of women in detention and in custodial and
non-custodial settings, welcomed the offer by the Government of Thailand to act as
host to the expert group meeting, and requested the expert group meeting to submit
the outcome of its work to the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, subsequently held in Salvador, Brazil, from 12 to
19 April 2010,
Recalling also that the four regional preparatory meetings for the Twelfth
Congress welcomed the development of a set of supplementary rules specific to the
treatment of women in detention and in custodial and non-custodial settings, 15
Recalling further the Salvador Declaration on Comprehensive Strategies for
Global Challenges: Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Systems and Their
Development in a Changing World, 16 in which Member States recommended that the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice consider the draft United
Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures
for Women Offenders as a matter of priority for appropriate action,
Takes note with appreciation of the work of the expert group to develop
1.
supplementary rules specific to the treatment of women in detention and in custodial
and non-custodial settings at its meeting, held in Bangkok from 23 to 26 November
2009, and of the outcome of the meeting; 17
Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Thailand for having acted
2.
as host to the meeting of the expert group and for the financial support provided for
the organization of the meeting;
Adopts the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners
3.
and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders, annexed to the present
resolution, and approves the recommendation of the Twelfth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice that the rules should be known
as “the Bangkok Rules”;
_______________
12
See World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe and United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Women’s Health in Prison: Correcting Gender Inequity in Prison Health (Copenhagen, 2009).
13
Resolution 64/142, annex.
14
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 10 (E/2009/30), chap. I,
sect. D.
15
See A/CONF.213/RPM.1/1, A/CONF.213/RPM.2/1, A/CONF.213/RPM.3/1 and A/CONF.213/RPM.4/1.
16
Resolution 65/230, annex.
17
See A/CONF.213/17.

3

A/RES/65/229

4.
Recognizes that, in view of the great variety of legal, social, economic and
geographical conditions in the world, not all of the rules can be applied equally in all
places and at all times; and that they should, however, serve to stimulate a constant
endeavour to overcome practical difficulties in their application, in the knowledge that
they represent, as a whole, global aspirations amenable to the common goal of
improving outcomes for women prisoners, their children and their communities;
Encourages Member States to adopt legislation to establish alternatives
5.
to imprisonment and to give priority to the financing of such systems, as well as to
the development of the mechanisms needed for their implementation;
Encourages Member States having developed legislation, procedures,
6.
policies or practices for women in prison or on alternatives to imprisonment for women
offenders to make information available to other States and relevant international,
regional and intergovernmental organizations, as well as non-governmental
organizations, and to assist them in developing and implementing training or other
activities in relation to such legislation, procedures, policies or practices;
Invites Member States to take into consideration the specific needs and
7.
realities of women as prisoners when developing relevant legislation, procedures,
policies and action plans and to draw, as appropriate, on the Bangkok Rules;
Also invites Member States to collect, maintain, analyse and publish, as
8.
appropriate, specific data on women in prison and women offenders;
9.
Emphasizes that, when sentencing or deciding on pretrial measures for a
pregnant woman or a child’s sole or primary caretaker, non-custodial measures
should be preferred where possible and appropriate, with custodial sentences being
considered when the offence is serious or violent;
10. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to provide
technical assistance and advisory services to Member States, upon request, in order
to develop or strengthen, as appropriate, legislation, procedures, policies and
practices for women in prison and on alternatives to imprisonment for women
offenders;
11. Also requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to take
steps, as appropriate, to ensure broad dissemination of the Bangkok Rules, as a
supplement to the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners1 and the
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo
Rules),5 and to ensure the intensification of information activities in this area;
12. Further requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
increase its cooperation with other relevant United Nations entities, intergovernmental
and regional organizations and non-governmental organizations in the provision of
relevant assistance to countries and to identify needs and capacities of countries in
order to increase country-to-country and South-South cooperation;
13. Invites specialized agencies of the United Nations system and relevant
regional and international intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
engage in the implementation of the Bangkok Rules;
14. Invites Member States and other donors to provide extrabudgetary
contributions for such purposes, in accordance with the rules and procedures of the
United Nations.
71st plenary meeting
21 December 2010
4

A/RES/65/229

Annex
United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules)
Preliminary observations
1.
The Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners1 apply to all
prisoners without discrimination; therefore, the specific needs and realities of all
prisoners, including of women prisoners, should be taken into account in their
application. The Rules, adopted more than 50 years ago, did not, however, draw
sufficient attention to women’s particular needs. With the increase in the number of
women prisoners worldwide, the need to bring more clarity to considerations that
should apply to the treatment of women prisoners has acquired importance and
urgency.
2.
Recognizing the need to provide global standards with regard to the distinct
considerations that should apply to women prisoners and offenders and taking into
account a number of relevant resolutions adopted by different United Nations
bodies, in which Member States were called upon to respond appropriately to the
needs of women offenders and prisoners, the present rules have been developed to
complement and supplement, as appropriate, the Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners and the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules)5 in connection with the treatment of
women prisoners and alternatives to imprisonment for women offenders.
3.
The present rules do not in any way replace the Standard Minimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners or the Tokyo Rules and, therefore, all relevant provisions
contained in those two sets of rules continue to apply to all prisoners and offenders
without discrimination. While some of the present rules bring further clarity to
existing provisions in the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
and in the Tokyo Rules in their application to women prisoners and offenders, others
cover new areas.
4.
These rules are inspired by principles contained in various United Nations
conventions and declarations and are therefore consistent with the provisions of
existing international law. They are addressed to prison authorities and criminal
justice agencies (including policymakers, legislators, the prosecution service, the
judiciary and the probation service) involved in the administration of non-custodial
sanctions and community-based measures.
5.
The specific requirements for addressing the situation of women offenders have
been emphasized at the United Nations in various contexts. For example, in 1980, the
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders adopted a resolution on the specific needs of women prisoners, 18 in which it
recommended that, in the implementation of the resolutions adopted by the Sixth
Congress directly or indirectly relevant to the treatment of offenders, recognition
should be given to the specific problems of women prisoners and the need to provide
the means for their solution; that, in countries where it was not yet done, programmes

_______________
18
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Caracas,
25 August–5 September 1980: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.81.IV.4), chap. I, sect. B, resolution 9.

5

A/RES/65/229

and services used as alternatives to imprisonment should be made available to women
offenders on an equal basis with male offenders; and that the United Nations, the
governmental and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with it and
all other international organizations should make continuing efforts to ensure that the
woman offender was treated fairly and equally during arrest, trial, sentence and
imprisonment, particular attention being paid to the special problems which women
offenders encounter, such as pregnancy and child care.
6.
The Seventh Congress, the Eighth Congress and the Ninth Congress also made
specific recommendations concerning women prisoners. 19, 20, 21
7.
In the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the
Twenty-first Century,7 adopted by the Tenth Congress, Member States committed
themselves to taking into account and addressing, within the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme, as well as within national crime
prevention and criminal justice strategies, any disparate impact of programmes and
policies on women and men (para. 11); and to the development of action-oriented
policy recommendations based on the special needs of women as prisoners and
offenders (para. 12). The plans of action for the implementation of the Vienna
Declaration8 contain a separate section (sect. XIII) devoted to specific recommended
measures to follow up on the commitments undertaken in paragraphs 11 and 12 of
the Declaration, including that of States reviewing, evaluating and, if necessary,
modifying their legislation, policies, procedures and practices relating to criminal
matters, in a manner consistent with their legal systems, in order to ensure that
women are treated fairly by the criminal justice system.
8.
The General Assembly, in its resolution 58/183 of 22 December 2003 entitled
“Human rights in the administration of justice”, called for increased attention to be
devoted to the issue of women in prison, including the children of women in prison,
with a view to identifying the key problems and ways in which they could be
addressed.
9.
In its resolution 61/143 of 19 December 2006 entitled “Intensification of
efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women”, the General Assembly
stressed that “violence against women” meant any act of gender-based violence
resulting in, or likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or
suffering to women, including arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in
public or in private life, and urged States to review and, where appropriate, revise,
amend or abolish all laws, regulations, policies, practices and customs
discriminating against women or having a discriminatory impact on women, and
ensure that provisions of multiple legal systems, where they existed, complied with
_______________
19

See Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Milan, 26 August–6 September 1985: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.86.IV.1), chap. I, sect. E, resolution 6 (on the fair treatment of women by the criminal justice
system).
20
See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Havana, 27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. A.5 (Basic Principles for the Treatment of Prisoners (see also General
Assembly resolution 45/111, annex)); and ibid., sect. C, resolutions 17 (on pretrial detention), 19 (on the
management of criminal justice and development of sentencing policies) and 21 (on international and
interregional cooperation in prison management and community-based sanctions and other matters).
21
See A/CONF.169/16/Rev.1, chap. I, resolutions 1 (on recommendations on the four substantive topics of
the Ninth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders), 5 (on the
practical implementation of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners) and 8 (on the
elimination of violence against women).

6

A/RES/65/229

international human rights obligations, commitments and principles, including the
principle of non-discrimination; to take positive measures to address structural
causes of violence against women and to strengthen prevention efforts addressing
discriminatory practices and social norms, including with regard to women in need
of special attention, such as women in institutions or in detention; and to provide
training and capacity-building on gender equality and women’s rights for law
enforcement personnel and the judiciary. The resolution is an acknowledgement of the
fact that violence against women has specific implications for women’s contact with
the criminal justice system, as well as their right to be free of victimization while
imprisoned. Physical and psychological safety is critical to ensuring human rights and
improving outcomes for women offenders, of which the present rules take account.
10. Finally, in the Bangkok Declaration on Synergies and Responses: Strategic
Alliances in Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, adopted by the Eleventh United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on 25 April 2005,9
Member States declared that they were committed to the development and
maintenance of fair and efficient criminal justice institutions, including the humane
treatment of all those in pretrial and correctional facilities, in accordance with
applicable international standards (para. 8); and they recommended that the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice should give consideration to
reviewing the adequacy of standards and norms in relation to prison management
and prisoners (para. 30).
11. As with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, in view
of the great variety of legal, social, economic and geographical conditions
worldwide, it is evident that not all of the following rules can be equally applied in
all places and at all times. They should, however, serve to stimulate a constant
endeavour to overcome practical difficulties in how they are applied, in the
knowledge that they represent, as a whole, the global aspirations considered by the
United Nations as leading to the common goal of improving outcomes for women
prisoners, their children and their communities.
12. Some of these rules address issues applicable to both men and women
prisoners, including those relating to parental responsibilities, some medical
services, searching procedures and the like, although the rules are mainly concerned
with the needs of women and their children. However, as the focus includes the
children of imprisoned mothers, there is a need to recognize the central role of both
parents in the lives of children. Accordingly, some of these rules would apply
equally to male prisoners and offenders who are fathers.
Introduction
13. The following rules do not in any way replace the Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners and the Tokyo Rules. Therefore, all provisions
contained in those two sets of rules continue to apply to all prisoners and offenders
without discrimination.
14. Section I of the present rules, covering the general management of institutions,
is applicable to all categories of women deprived of their liberty, including criminal
or civil, untried or convicted women prisoners, as well as women subject to
“security measures” or corrective measures ordered by a judge.
15. Section II contains rules applicable only to the special categories dealt with in
each subsection. Nevertheless, the rules under subsection A, applicable to prisoners
under sentence, shall be equally applicable to the category of prisoners dealt with in
subsection B, provided they do not conflict with the rules governing that category of
women and are for their benefit.
7

A/RES/65/229

16. Subsections A and B both provide additional rules for the treatment of juvenile
female prisoners. It is important to note, however, that separate strategies and
policies in accordance with international standards, in particular the United Nations
Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the
Beijing Rules), 22 the United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile
Delinquency (the Riyadh Guidelines), 23 the United Nations Rules for the Protection
of Juveniles Deprived of Their Liberty 24 and the Guidelines for Action on Children
in the Criminal Justice System, 25 need to be designed for the treatment and
rehabilitation of this category of prisoners, while institutionalization shall be
avoided to the maximum possible extent.
17. Section III contains rules covering the application of non-custodial sanctions
and measures for women and juvenile female offenders, including on arrest and at
the pretrial, sentencing and post-sentencing stages of the criminal justice process.
18. Section IV contains rules on research, planning, evaluation, public
awareness-raising and sharing of information, and is applicable to all categories of
female offenders covered in these rules.
I.

Rules of general application

1.

Basic principle

[Supplements rule 6 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners]
Rule 1
In order for the principle of non-discrimination embodied in rule 6 of the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners to be put into practice, account shall
be taken of the distinctive needs of women prisoners in the application of the Rules.
Providing for such needs in order to accomplish substantial gender equality shall not
be regarded as discriminatory.
2.

Admission

Rule 2
1.
Adequate attention shall be paid to the admission procedures for women and
children, due to their particular vulnerability at this time. Newly arrived women
prisoners shall be provided with facilities to contact their relatives; access to legal
advice; information about prison rules and regulations, the prison regime and where
to seek help when in need in a language that they understand; and, in the case of
foreign nationals, access to consular representatives as well.
2.
Prior to or on admission, women with caretaking responsibilities for children
shall be permitted to make arrangements for those children, including the possibility
of a reasonable suspension of detention, taking into account the best interests of the
children.

_______________
22

Resolution 40/33, annex.
Resolution 45/112, annex.
24
Resolution 45/113, annex.
25
Economic and Social Council resolution 1997/30, annex.
23

8

A/RES/65/229

3.

Register

[Supplements rule 7 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners]
Rule 3
1.
The number and personal details of the children of a woman being admitted to
prison shall be recorded at the time of admission. The records shall include, without
prejudicing the rights of the mother, at least the names of the children, their ages
and, if not accompanying the mother, their location and custody or guardianship
status.
2.
All information relating to the children’s identity shall be kept confidential,
and the use of such information shall always comply with the requirement to take
into account the best interests of the children.
4.

Allocation

Rule 4
Women prisoners shall be allocated, to the extent possible, to prisons close to their
home or place of social rehabilitation, taking account of their caretaking
responsibilities, as well as the individual woman’s preference and the availability of
appropriate programmes and services.
5.

Personal hygiene

[Supplements rules 15 and 16 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
Rule 5
The accommodation of women prisoners shall have facilities and materials required
to meet women’s specific hygiene needs, including sanitary towels provided free of
charge and a regular supply of water to be made available for the personal care of
children and women, in particular women involved in cooking and those who are
pregnant, breastfeeding or menstruating.
6.

Health-care services

[Supplements rules 22 to 26 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
(a)

Medical screening on entry

[Supplements rule 24 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners]
Rule 6
The health screening of women prisoners shall include comprehensive screening to
determine primary health-care needs, and also shall determine:
(a) The presence of sexually transmitted diseases or blood-borne diseases;
and, depending on risk factors, women prisoners may also be offered testing for
HIV, with pre- and post-test counselling;
(b) Mental health-care needs, including post-traumatic stress disorder and
risk of suicide and self-harm;
(c) The reproductive health history of the woman prisoner, including current
or recent pregnancies, childbirth and any related reproductive health issues;

9

A/RES/65/229

(d)

The existence of drug dependency;

(e) Sexual abuse and other forms of violence that may have been suffered
prior to admission.
Rule 7
1.
If the existence of sexual abuse or other forms of violence before or during
detention is diagnosed, the woman prisoner shall be informed of her right to seek
recourse from judicial authorities. The woman prisoner should be fully informed of
the procedures and steps involved. If the woman prisoner agrees to take legal action,
appropriate staff shall be informed and immediately refer the case to the competent
authority for investigation. Prison authorities shall help such women to access legal
assistance.
2.
Whether or not the woman chooses to take legal action, prison authorities shall
endeavour to ensure that she has immediate access to specialized psychological
support or counselling.
3.
Specific measures shall be developed to avoid any form of retaliation against
those making such reports or taking legal action.
Rule 8
The right of women prisoners to medical confidentiality, including specifically the
right not to share information and not to undergo screening in relation to their
reproductive health history, shall be respected at all times.
Rule 9
If the woman prisoner is accompanied by a child, that child shall also undergo
health screening, preferably by a child health specialist, to determine any treatment
and medical needs. Suitable health care, at least equivalent to that in the community,
shall be provided.
(b)

Gender-specific health care

Rule 10
1.
Gender-specific health-care services at least equivalent to those available in
the community shall be provided to women prisoners.
2.
If a woman prisoner requests that she be examined or treated by a woman
physician or nurse, a woman physician or nurse shall be made available, to the
extent possible, except for situations requiring urgent medical intervention. If a
male medical practitioner undertakes the examination contrary to the wishes of the
woman prisoner, a woman staff member shall be present during the examination.
Rule 11
1.
Only medical staff shall be present during medical examinations unless the
doctor is of the view that exceptional circumstances exist or the doctor requests a
member of the prison staff to be present for security reasons or the woman prisoner
specifically requests the presence of a member of staff as indicated in rule 10,
paragraph 2, above.
2.
If it is necessary for non-medical prison staff to be present during medical
examinations, such staff should be women and examinations shall be carried out in a
manner that safeguards privacy, dignity and confidentiality.

10

A/RES/65/229

(c)

Mental health and care

Rule 12
Individualized, gender-sensitive, trauma-informed and comprehensive mental health
care and rehabilitation programmes shall be made available for women prisoners
with mental health-care needs in prison or in non-custodial settings.
Rule 13
Prison staff shall be made aware of times when women may feel particular distress,
so as to be sensitive to their situation and ensure that the women are provided
appropriate support.
(d)

HIV prevention, treatment, care and support

Rule 14
In developing responses to HIV/AIDS in penal institutions, programmes and
services shall be responsive to the specific needs of women, including prevention of
mother-to-child transmission. In this context, prison authorities shall encourage and
support the development of initiatives on HIV prevention, treatment and care, such
as peer-based education.
(e)

Substance abuse treatment programmes

Rule 15
Prison health services shall provide or facilitate specialized treatment programmes
designed for women substance abusers, taking into account prior victimization, the
special needs of pregnant women and women with children, as well as their diverse
cultural backgrounds.
(f)

Suicide and self-harm prevention

Rule 16
Developing and implementing strategies, in consultation with mental health-care
and social welfare services, to prevent suicide and self-harm among women
prisoners and providing appropriate, gender-specific and specialized support to
those at risk shall be part of a comprehensive policy of mental health care in
women’s prisons.
(g)

Preventive health-care services

Rule 17
Women prisoners shall receive education and information about preventive
health-care measures, including on HIV, sexually transmitted diseases and other
blood-borne diseases, as well as gender-specific health conditions.
Rule 18
Preventive health-care measures of particular relevance to women, such as
Papanicolaou tests and screening for breast and gynaecological cancer, shall be
offered to women prisoners on an equal basis with women of the same age in the
community.

11

A/RES/65/229

7.

Safety and security

[Supplements rules 27 to 36 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
(a)

Searches

Rule 19
Effective measures shall be taken to ensure that women prisoners’ dignity and
respect are protected during personal searches, which shall only be carried out by
women staff who have been properly trained in appropriate searching methods and
in accordance with established procedures.
Rule 20
Alternative screening methods, such as scans, shall be developed to replace strip
searches and invasive body searches, in order to avoid the harmful psychological
and possible physical impact of invasive body searches.
Rule 21
Prison staff shall demonstrate competence, professionalism and sensitivity and shall
preserve respect and dignity when searching both children in prison with their
mother and children visiting prisoners.
(b)

Discipline and punishment

[Supplements rules 27 to 32 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
Rule 22
Punishment by close confinement or disciplinary segregation shall not be applied to
pregnant women, women with infants and breastfeeding mothers in prison.
Rule 23
Disciplinary sanctions for women prisoners shall not include a prohibition of family
contact, especially with children.
(c)

Instruments of restraint

[Supplements rules 33 and 34 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
Rule 24
Instruments of restraint shall never be used on women during labour, during birth
and immediately after birth.
(d)

Information to and complaints by prisoners; inspections

[Supplements rules 35 and 36 and, with regard to inspection, rule 55 of the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners]
Rule 25
1.
Women prisoners who report abuse shall be provided immediate protection,
support and counselling, and their claims shall be investigated by competent and
independent authorities, with full respect for the principle of confidentiality.
Protection measures shall take into account specifically the risks of retaliation.
12

A/RES/65/229

2.
Women prisoners who have been subjected to sexual abuse, and especially
those who have become pregnant as a result, shall receive appropriate medical
advice and counselling and shall be provided with the requisite physical and mental
health care, support and legal aid.
3.
In order to monitor the conditions of detention and treatment of women
prisoners, inspectorates, visiting or monitoring boards or supervisory bodies shall
include women members.
8.

Contact with the outside world

[Supplements rules 37 to 39 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
Rule 26
Women prisoners’ contact with their families, including their children, and their
children’s guardians and legal representatives shall be encouraged and facilitated by
all reasonable means. Where possible, measures shall be taken to counterbalance
disadvantages faced by women detained in institutions located far from their homes.
Rule 27
Where conjugal visits are allowed, women prisoners shall be able to exercise this
right on an equal basis with men.
Rule 28
Visits involving children shall take place in an environment that is conducive to a
positive visiting experience, including with regard to staff attitudes, and shall allow
open contact between mother and child. Visits involving extended contact with
children should be encouraged, where possible.
9.

Institutional personnel and training

[Supplements rules 46 to 55 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
Rule 29
Capacity-building for staff employed in women’s prisons shall enable them to
address the special social reintegration requirements of women prisoners and
manage safe and rehabilitative facilities. Capacity-building measures for women
staff shall also include access to senior positions with key responsibility for the
development of policies and strategies relating to the treatment and care of women
prisoners.
Rule 30
There shall be a clear and sustained commitment at the managerial level in prison
administrations to prevent and address gender-based discrimination against women
staff.
Rule 31
Clear policies and regulations on the conduct of prison staff aimed at providing
maximum protection for women prisoners from any gender-based physical or verbal
violence, abuse and sexual harassment shall be developed and implemented.

13

A/RES/65/229

Rule 32
Women prison staff shall receive equal access to training as male staff, and all staff
involved in the management of women’s prisons shall receive training on gender
sensitivity and prohibition of discrimination and sexual harassment.
Rule 33
1.
All staff assigned to work with women prisoners shall receive training relating
to the gender-specific needs and human rights of women prisoners.
2.
Basic training shall be provided for prison staff working in women’s prisons
on the main issues relating to women’s health, in addition to first aid and basic
medicine.
3.
Where children are allowed to stay with their mothers in prison,
awareness-raising on child development and basic training on the health care of
children shall also be provided to prison staff, in order for them to respond
appropriately in times of need and emergencies.
Rule 34
Capacity-building programmes on HIV shall be included as part of the regular
training curricula of prison staff. In addition to HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment,
care and support, issues such as gender and human rights, with a particular focus on
their link to HIV, stigma and discrimination, shall also be part of the curriculum.
Rule 35
Prison staff shall be trained to detect mental health-care needs and risk of self-harm
and suicide among women prisoners and to offer assistance by providing support
and referring such cases to specialists.
10.

Juvenile female prisoners

Rule 36
Prison authorities shall put in place measures to meet the protection needs of
juvenile female prisoners.
Rule 37
Juvenile female prisoners shall have equal access to education and vocational
training that are available to juvenile male prisoners.
Rule 38
Juvenile female prisoners shall have access to age- and gender-specific programmes
and services, such as counselling for sexual abuse or violence. They shall receive
education on women’s health care and have regular access to gynaecologists, similar
to adult female prisoners.
Rule 39
Pregnant juvenile female prisoners shall receive support and medical care equivalent
to that provided for adult female prisoners. Their health shall be monitored by a
medical specialist, taking account of the fact that they may be at greater risk of
health complications during pregnancy due to their age.

14

A/RES/65/229

II.

Rules applicable to special categories

A.

Prisoners under sentence

1.

Classification and individualization

[Supplements rules 67 to 69 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
Rule 40
Prison administrators shall develop and implement classification methods
addressing the gender-specific needs and circumstances of women prisoners to
ensure appropriate and individualized planning and implementation towards those
prisoners’ early rehabilitation, treatment and reintegration into society.
Rule 41
The gender-sensitive risk assessment and classification of prisoners shall:
(a) Take into account the generally lower risk posed by women prisoners to
others, as well as the particularly harmful effects that high-security measures and
increased levels of isolation can have on women prisoners;
(b) Enable essential information about women’s backgrounds, such as
violence they may have experienced, history of mental disability and substance
abuse, as well as parental and other caretaking responsibilities, to be taken into
account in the allocation and sentence planning process;
(c) Ensure that women’s sentence plans include rehabilitative programmes
and services that match their gender-specific needs;
(d) Ensure that those with mental health-care needs are housed in
accommodation which is not restrictive, and at the lowest possible security level,
and receive appropriate treatment, rather than being placed in higher security level
facilities solely due to their mental health problems.
2.

Prison regime

[Supplements rules 65, 66 and 70 to 81 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners]
Rule 42
1.
Women prisoners shall have access to a balanced and comprehensive
programme of activities which take account of gender-appropriate needs.
2.
The regime of the prison shall be flexible enough to respond to the needs of
pregnant women, nursing mothers and women with children. Childcare facilities or
arrangements shall be provided in prisons in order to enable women prisoners to
participate in prison activities.
3.
Particular efforts shall be made to provide appropriate programmes for
pregnant women, nursing mothers and women with children in prison.
4.
Particular efforts shall be made to provide appropriate services for women
prisoners who have psychosocial support needs, especially those who have been
subjected to physical, mental or sexual abuse.

15

A/RES/65/229

Social relations and aftercare
[Supplements rules 79 to 81 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
Rule 43
Prison authorities shall encourage and, where possible, also facilitate visits to
women prisoners as an important prerequisite to ensuring their mental well-being
and social reintegration.
Rule 44
In view of women prisoners’ disproportionate experience of domestic violence, they
shall be properly consulted as to who, including which family members, is allowed
to visit them.
Rule 45
Prison authorities shall utilize options such as home leave, open prisons, halfway
houses and community-based programmes and services to the maximum possible
extent for women prisoners, to ease their transition from prison to liberty, to reduce
stigma and to re-establish their contact with their families at the earliest possible
stage.
Rule 46
Prison authorities, in cooperation with probation and/or social welfare services,
local community groups and non-governmental organizations, shall design and
implement comprehensive pre- and post-release reintegration programmes which
take into account the gender-specific needs of women.
Rule 47
Additional support following release shall be provided to released women
prisoners who need psychological, medical, legal and practical help to ensure their
successful social reintegration, in cooperation with services in the community.
3.

Pregnant women, breastfeeding mothers and mothers with children in
prison

[Supplements rule 23 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners]
Rule 48
1.
Pregnant or breastfeeding women prisoners shall receive advice on their health
and diet under a programme to be drawn up and monitored by a qualified health
practitioner. Adequate and timely food, a healthy environment and regular exercise
opportunities shall be provided free of charge for pregnant women, babies, children
and breastfeeding mothers.
2.
Women prisoners shall not be discouraged from breastfeeding their children,
unless there are specific health reasons to do so.
3.
The medical and nutritional needs of women prisoners who have recently
given birth, but whose babies are not with them in prison, shall be included in
treatment programmes.

16

A/RES/65/229

Rule 49
Decisions to allow children to stay with their mothers in prison shall be based on the
best interests of the children. Children in prison with their mothers shall never be
treated as prisoners.
Rule 50
Women prisoners whose children are in prison with them shall be provided with the
maximum possible opportunities to spend time with their children.
Rule 51
1.
Children living with their mothers in prison shall be provided with ongoing
health-care services and their development shall be monitored by specialists, in
collaboration with community health services.
2.
The environment provided for such children’s upbringing shall be as close as
possible to that of a child outside prison.
Rule 52
1.
Decisions as to when a child is to be separated from its mother shall be based
on individual assessments and the best interests of the child within the scope of
relevant national laws.
2.
The removal of the child from prison shall be undertaken with sensitivity, only
when alternative care arrangements for the child have been identified and, in the
case of foreign-national prisoners, in consultation with consular officials.
3.
After children are separated from their mothers and placed with family or
relatives or in other alternative care, women prisoners shall be given the maximum
possible opportunity and facilities to meet with their children, when it is in the best
interests of the children and when public safety is not compromised.
4.

Foreign nationals

[Supplements rule 38 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners]
Rule 53
1.
Where relevant bilateral or multilateral agreements are in place, the transfer of
non-resident foreign-national women prisoners to their home country, especially if
they have children in their home country, shall be considered as early as possible
during their imprisonment, following the application or informed consent of the
woman concerned.
2.
Where a child living with a non-resident foreign-national woman prisoner is to
be removed from prison, consideration should be given to relocation of the child to
its home country, taking into account the best interests of the child and in
consultation with the mother.
5.

Minorities and indigenous peoples

Rule 54
Prison authorities shall recognize that women prisoners from different religious and
cultural backgrounds have distinctive needs and may face multiple forms of
discrimination in their access to gender- and culture-relevant programmes and
17

A/RES/65/229

services. Accordingly, prison authorities shall provide comprehensive programmes
and services that address these needs, in consultation with women prisoners
themselves and the relevant groups.
Rule 55
Pre- and post-release services shall be reviewed to ensure that they are appropriate
and accessible to indigenous women prisoners and to women prisoners from ethnic
and racial groups, in consultation with the relevant groups.
B.

Prisoners under arrest or awaiting trial

[Supplements rules 84 to 93 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners]
Rule 56
The particular risk of abuse that women face in pretrial detention shall be
recognized by relevant authorities, which shall adopt appropriate measures in
policies and practice to guarantee such women’s safety at this time. (See also
rule 58 below, with regard to alternatives to pretrial detention.)
III. Non-custodial measures
Rule 57
The provisions of the Tokyo Rules shall guide the development and implementation
of appropriate responses to women offenders. Gender-specific options for
diversionary measures and pretrial and sentencing alternatives shall be developed
within Member States’ legal systems, taking account of the history of victimization
of many women offenders and their caretaking responsibilities.
Rule 58
Taking into account the provisions of rule 2.3 of the Tokyo Rules, women offenders
shall not be separated from their families and communities without due
consideration being given to their backgrounds and family ties. Alternative ways of
managing women who commit offences, such as diversionary measures and pretrial
and sentencing alternatives, shall be implemented wherever appropriate and
possible.
Rule 59
Generally, non-custodial means of protection, for example in shelters managed by
independent bodies, non-governmental organizations or other community services,
shall be used to protect women who need such protection. Temporary measures
involving custody to protect a woman shall only be applied when necessary and
expressly requested by the woman concerned and shall in all cases be supervised by
judicial or other competent authorities. Such protective measures shall not be
continued against the will of the woman concerned.
Rule 60
Appropriate resources shall be made available to devise suitable alternatives for
women offenders in order to combine non-custodial measures with interventions to
address the most common problems leading to women’s contact with the criminal
justice system. These may include therapeutic courses and counselling for victims of
domestic violence and sexual abuse; suitable treatment for those with mental
18

A/RES/65/229

disability; and educational and training programmes to improve employment
prospects. Such programmes shall take account of the need to provide care for
children and women-only services.
Rule 61
When sentencing women offenders, courts shall have the power to consider
mitigating factors such as lack of criminal history and relative non-severity and
nature of the criminal conduct, in the light of women’s caretaking responsibilities
and typical backgrounds.
Rule 62
The provision of gender-sensitive, trauma-informed, women-only substance abuse
treatment programmes in the community and women’s access to such treatment
shall be improved, for crime prevention as well as for diversion and alternative
sentencing purposes.
1.

Post-sentencing dispositions

Rule 63
Decisions regarding early conditional release (parole) shall favourably take into
account women prisoners’ caretaking responsibilities, as well as their specific social
reintegration needs.
2.

Pregnant women and women with dependent children

Rule 64
Non-custodial sentences for pregnant women and women with dependent children
shall be preferred where possible and appropriate, with custodial sentences being
considered when the offence is serious or violent or the woman represents a
continuing danger, and after taking into account the best interests of the child or
children, while ensuring that appropriate provision has been made for the care of
such children.
3.

Juvenile female offenders

Rule 65
Institutionalization of children in conflict with the law shall be avoided to the
maximum extent possible. The gender-based vulnerability of juvenile female
offenders shall be taken into account in decision-making.
4.

Foreign nationals

Rule 66
Maximum effort shall be made to ratify the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime 26 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United

_______________
26

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.

19

A/RES/65/229

Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 27 to fully implement
their provisions so as to provide maximum protection to victims of trafficking in
order to avoid secondary victimization of many foreign-national women.
IV.

Research, planning, evaluation and public awareness-raising

1.

Research, planning and evaluation

Rule 67
Efforts shall be made to organize and promote comprehensive, result-oriented
research on the offences committed by women, the reasons that trigger women’s
confrontation with the criminal justice system, the impact of secondary
criminalization and imprisonment on women, the characteristics of women
offenders, as well as programmes designed to reduce reoffending by women, as a
basis for effective planning, programme development and policy formulation to
respond to the social reintegration needs of women offenders.
Rule 68
Efforts shall be made to organize and promote research on the number of children
affected by their mothers’ confrontation with the criminal justice system, and
imprisonment in particular, and the impact of this on the children, in order to
contribute to policy formulation and programme development, taking into account
the best interests of the children.
Rule 69
Efforts shall be made to review, evaluate and make public periodically the trends,
problems and factors associated with offending behaviour in women and the
effectiveness in responding to the social reintegration needs of women offenders, as
well as their children, in order to reduce the stigmatization and negative impact of
those women’s confrontation with the criminal justice system on them.
2.

Raising public awareness, sharing information and training

Rule 70
1.
The media and the public shall be informed about the reasons that lead to
women’s entrapment in the criminal justice system and the most effective ways to
respond to it, in order to enable women’s social reintegration, taking into account
the best interests of their children.
2.
Publication and dissemination of research and good practice examples shall
form comprehensive elements of policies that aim to improve the outcomes and the
fairness to women and their children of criminal justice responses to women
offenders.
3.
The media, the public and those with professional responsibility in matters
concerning women prisoners and offenders shall be provided regularly with factual
information about the matters covered in these rules and about their implementation.
4.
Training programmes on the present rules and the results of research shall be
developed and implemented for relevant criminal justice officials to raise their
awareness and sensitize them to their provisions contained therein.
_______________
27

20

Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
