S/PRST/2012/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6876th meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 November 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Sierra Leone”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the briefing from the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General in Sierra Leone, Mr. Jens ToybergFrandzen, on 28 November 2012.
“The Security Council commends Sierra Leone for the conduct and successful
conclusion of Presidential, Parliamentary, district, and local elections, in particular
acknowledging the important role played by Sierra Leone’s electoral institutions,
political parties, civil society groups, international partners, and domestic and
international observers. The Council congratulates the people of Sierra Leona for
their large turnout in the elections, which showed their strong commitment to
democracy. The Council welcomes the formal announcement of polling results from
the National Electoral Commission and positive reports from observers on the
conduct of the elections.
“The Security Council recognises the important role played by the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), the United
Nations Country Team, and bilateral and international partners in supporting Sierra
Leone during the electoral process.
“The Security Council calls upon all political parties and candidates to accept
the results and to work with the Government of Sierra Leone in a constructive
manner through national dialogue and reconciliation. The Council urges all parties
to resolve any grievances peacefully through the appropriate legal means in
accordance with Sierra Leone’s national laws.
“The Security Council underscores the significance of these elections and the
wide acceptance of the results as a key benchmark of consolidating peace in Sierra
Leone. They were the third set of elections to have been held in Sierra Leone since
the end of the civil war and the first to be run entirely by Sierra Leone’s democratic
institutions.
“The Security Council stresses that there is important work ahead to further
embed peace and secure equitable prosperity for the benefit of all Sierra Leoneans.
The Security Council notes the importance of the formulation and implementation
of a robust development and peace consolidation programme that is inclusive and
12-62186 (E) 301112

*1262186*

S/PRST/2012/25

improves the lives of all Sierra Leoneans, and urges the new administration and all
political parties to finalise the programme in a balanced and inclusive manner.
“The Security Council urges the international community and development
partners to continue to provide coordinated and coherent support to Sierra Leone to
meet its peacebuilding and development priorities.
“In addition, the Security Council requests the Peacebuilding Commission to
continue to provide support to Sierra Leone, in particular in international resource
mobilisation efforts and coordination of international development partners.
“The Security Council recalls its request in Resolution 2065 (2012) for the
Secretary-General to deploy an inter-agency technical assessment mission to Sierra
Leone, and in particular for this mission to consider detailed proposals and a
recommended timeline for the transition, drawdown, and exit strategy for UNIPSIL
by no later than 15 February 2013.”

2

12-62186
