UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECbRDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2229”

MEETING:

12 JUNE 1980

A’EW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (SIAgenda/2229/Rev

.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Masayoshi Ohira, Prime Minister of Japan . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13969) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2229

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OjJkial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2229th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 12 June 1980, at 11 a.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philip
pines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2229/Rev.2)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charg6
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13969)
The meeting
Tribute

was called to order at 11.45 a.m.

to the memory of Mr. Masayoshi Ohira,
Prime Minister of Japan

1. The PRESIDENT: It is with great sorrow that
the members of the Secur@yCouncil have learned of
the sudden death today of the Prime Minister of Japan,
Mr. Masayoshi Ohira. For many years, Mr. Ohira
served as a member of the Japanese Government in
various capacities, including the position of Foreign
Minister. Mr. Ohira was deeply committed to the ideals
of the United Nations and strongly supported its work.
His loss will be deeply mourned by the international
community. On behalf of the Council, I wish to express
profound condolences to the- Government and people
of Japan and heartfelt sympathy to the bereaved family.
On the proposal of the President, the members of
the Council observed a minute of silence in tribute
to the memory of Mr. Masayoshi Ohira, Prime Minister
of Japan.
Adoption

of the agenda
.
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 ‘from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Morocco to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13969)

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with previous
decisions [2225th, 2227th and 2228th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Botswana,
Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Nigeria,
Seychelles, Yugoslavia and Zaire to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Bouzarbia
.(Algeria), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. L6pet Paz
(Cuba),
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Zbrahim
(Ethiopia),
Mr. Lobo (Mozambique),
Mr. Clark
(Nigeria),
Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda (Zaire)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives of Bahrain, Benin, Guyana,
Romania and Viet Nam in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Al-Sajj%r
(Bahrain),
Mr. Houngavou
(Benin), Mr. Sinclair
(Guyana), Mr. Marinescu (Romania) and Mr. Ha Van
Lau (Viet Nam) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

4.’ Mr. MUfiOZ LED0 (Mexico) (interpretation
Mr. President, Norway’s devotion to
the cause of peace need not be stressed. In our
common support of the principles of the Charter we
have been inspired by the excellent relations that my
country and yours maintain and have maintained for
decades, relations that are strengthened daily. My
delegation welcomes your presidency of the Council
for this month, and we are certain that your
undeniable experience and clarity of purpose will continue to be reflected in your balanced conduct of our
work. You may rest assured that you have the forthright co-operation of our delegation.

from Spanish):

5. We sincerely thank the representative of the
Niger for the work he accomplished. The dignified
and perspicacious manner in which he carried out his
mandate reflects his profound sense of justice, which
is shared by his people.

6. Once again, the Council turns its attention to the
question of South Africa. Concrete facts may have led
to this series of meetings, but there is also the widespread international conviction that the time has come
to take thorough action to complete the process of
decolonization of southern Africa.
7. The facts have been set forth with legitimate
indignation. There have been repeated acts of aggression against the enemies of apartheid, persistent violations of human rights and an obvious intention to curb
any political expression of commitment to the struggle
for racial equality.
8. The circumstances underlying this attitude are
known to everyone. The victories won by the national
liberation movements are irreversible advances but
they also explain the events which we deplore.. The
Government of Pretoria has suddenly found free
nations, governed by majority regimes, appearing as
its neighbours and it has therefore decided to reinforce
the machinery that it employs to dominate and repress.
9. The rapid development of political events in
southern Africa has demonstrated the possibilities of
armed struggle, the effectiveness of international
action and the ability of the peoples that today are
exercising self-determination to behave with firmness,
prudence and a genuine desire for independence.
10. All of this gives the lie to the pretexts which the
Pretoria regime has been using to cultivate its intemational network of accomplices. South Africa has thus
far managed to have its own interests included in the
global strategies and the fears of various Powers,
thereby securing for itself extensive economic relations and a continuing supply of war mate’rief, without
which it would be unable to commit acts of aggression
against its neighbours or to put down its opponents
at home.
‘11. Even the most reluctant must now face the facts.
To support apartheid is not only immoral; it is contrary
to any intelligent long-term strategy. There can be no
possible mistake: one side entails co-operation with
the most stubborn bastion of colonialism; the other,
solidarity in the struggle for human dignity.
12. A few days ago, at the extraordinary plenary
meeting of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
held at Algiers, it became perfectly clear that we have
reached a critical stage in our handling of the case
of South Africa. Two convergent processes require
that we take action without delay. One is internal and
the other one is external, but both are expressions of
the same reality. The external process to which I have
referred is expressed in the Pretoria regime’s hostility
to the United Nations plan for the independence of
Namibia and in its desperate efforts to consolidate
its domination over the Territory.
13. Whatever measures we take now should be
considered one more step in a clear course of action

aimed at the complete isolation of South Africa. We
must be willing to use the legal powers that are
available to us in order to end the system of alliances
which has made it possible for South Africa to hold
sway as it has. As suggested in the United Nations
Council for Namibia, if it is necessary to take action
under Chapter VII of the Charter, then we should
do so.
14. The Security Council must be consistent in its
own decisions, and in particular with resolution 418
(1977). It must strengthen the arms embargo and close
any door through which South Africa can continue to
receive the war matt!riel that it uses for its own support. Secondly, we must systematically suppress
whatever support and supplies are given to that regime.
15. We repeat that the continuation of that way of
life, which is akin to slaverv. is an anachronism which
can be explained only by <he immediate benefits that
many derive from it. The natural resources of South
Africa and its geographical location have made the
country a focal point of transnational strategic
interests.
16. The position that each State adopts on the question of South Africa requires a careful definition for
its own people of its political attitude. A nation is
democratic not only because of the political and social
systems which it has established within its own
boundaries, but also in terms of the international
attitude it promotes and in terms of its support for
freedom and justice in other countries.
17. The international community has reached a level
of awareness which makes it impossible to repeat the
errors of the past. For centuries some countries supported freedom and equality on the domestic front,
while at the same time they exported the traditional
means of exploitation and no discrepancy was found in
that policy. The purpose of the United Nations is to
prevent a recurrence of such behaviour.
18. The Government of Mexico wishes to reaffirm
the decision that it recently adopted not to entertain
relations of any kind with the Pretoria regime and not
to allow South African nationals into our country. We
have vigorously implemented all the measures adopted
by the international community in this connexion, but
we feel that those measures are not yet sufficiently
effective to resolve the problem before us. Once again
we should like to state that we have decided to support any action the United Nations may adopt along
these lines.
19. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Benin. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
20. Mr.

HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation
Mr. President, the delegation of the
People’s Republic of Benin would like to thank you

from

French):

and your colleagues on the Council most sincerely
for permitting me to take part in this debate on the
question of South Africa. I should also like to convey
to you our congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We know you
as a brilliant diplomat and we have no doubt as to the
excellent results that we are entitled to expect from
these deliberations. We are particularly encouraged
at seeing you preside, because Africa very much appreciates the position of Norway, your own country,
on racism and on white South African fascism, which
is known as apartheid. Your sympathy, understanding
and support for the oppressed South African people
are well known to the African masses.

condemn their selfishness, their mean and petty shortsighted calculations. These direct allies of apartheid
have been most outrageous in their cynicism. By its
resolution 418 (1977), the Council imposed an embargo
on arms for the Pretoria regime. But the studies that
have been carried out and the case that has been
assembled by the Committee that has the task of
overseeing that embargo are overwhelming proof that
we are witnessing an organized violation of the resolution in question by the very same Powers that took part
in the preparation and adoption of that document-so
much as that we wonder what has happened to their
good faith and the pledges they gave.
26. The silence that some would rather preserve
around this debate is eloquent in itself. Their selfishness, their hypocrisy and their cynicism are well known
and make of them the real subject of this debate, if
the truth were told. It is those Powers that strengthen
apartheid
economically, politically, militarily and
strategically, in defiance of the international community which, more than 25 years ago, decided to
eliminate that system, which has no place among
mankind.

21. I should also like to express my delegation’s
appreciation of and Benin’s pride in the performance
of Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger as President of
the Council for the month of May. He did some
remarkable work in that post.
22. For more than 25 years now the Organization
has been dealing with the question of apartheid, a
shameful system of colonialist domination, political
oppression and .economic and social exploitation
whose inhumane and brutal methods-arbitrary
arrests, detention and torture, assassinations, murders
and massacres such as those of Sharpeville and
Soweto-are so familiar to the Council.

27. The people of Benin, its party and its Govemment, are convinced that no one can stop the wheel
of history turning; no system of domination and
oppression, no matter how powerful it may be, can
withstand the determination of the oppressed people
for ever. That people is itself an inexorable force,
and no weapon, not even an atomic one, could overcome it. Contemporary history is full of cogent
examples of this.

23. All these barbarous and cruel methods, inherited
from the worst times of the various colonial systems
and from Hitler’s nazism, have permitted a white
minority imported into Africa to dominate, exploit
and massacre the indigenous African people.

28. The repression which followed the protests of the
schoolchildren, students, workers and clergymen of
South Africa against the educational system of apartheid did not prevent and will never prevent the people
of South Africa from stepping up their struggle against
that system of shameful exploitaion of man by man.
The repression of the valiant people of Soweto in 1976,
still fresh in their memories, in June the children of
the Cape and other areas of South Africa once again
raised a sizeable movement of protest which the international community should support, as should the
Council, and with all its authority.
29. The flames of the coal refinery attacked in the
course of the valiant and even bold operation carried
out by the armed wing of ANC in spite of the repressive measures taken by the regime, reveal the determination of the people to yield to nothing in their
struggle. The international community supports that
guerrilla action, which inaugurates a new era in the
national liberation struggle of South Africa. The Council should support this new form of struggle, which
will become even more intense and which the weapons
of apartheid, even atomic ones, will never be able to
hold back. All peoples that love peace and justice
should increasingly provide material means to ANC
so that it may develop that guerrilla war, which has
now become inevitable.

24. In spite of its being condemned, apartheid has
only been strengthened, and the arrogant minority
regime is defying the United Nations by daring to claim
rights as a State and a nation. The imperialist Western
Powers and their acolytes, which collaborate in so
many ways with the inhumane Pretoria regime, are
those most responsible for the ineffectualness of
United Nations action to eliminate apartheid from
Africa. Those Powers, with their right of veto in the
Council, have been blocking any radical action that
could be taken under Chapter VII of the Charter. Wellcoordinated sanctions respected by all would make it
possible in a few months to make profound changes by
peaceful means in South Africa so as to make of that
country a prosperous and democratic State for the
benefit of all its inhabitants without distinction as to
race, sex or religion, as is so clearly proclaimed in
the Freedom Charter’ of the African National Congress
(ANC).
25. All those Powers that have by direct or indirect
methods thwarted such a peaceful evolution tend to
identify themselves with the shameful system of
apartheid,
with white racism, with scorn for human
beings as such. We loudly denounce all kinds of cooperation on their part with the Botha regime. We
3

30. As we have said, almost 25 years ago the United
Nations condemned and denounced apartheid.. What
have the adherents of apartheid done so far? For some
months now, they have seemed to be speaking in
moderate tones. But we should never allow ourselves
to be misled by that. We should like to tell Mr. Botha
and his acolytes that this is not a matter for reforms
but a problem of eradicating a system of exploitation
of man by man.

poses a threat to peace and security not only in Africa
but in the world at large. My delegation sincerely
hopes that on this occasion the Council will respond in
a manner consistent with the seriousness and urgency
of that situation.
38. The threat posed by South Africa has assumed
even graver proportions of late, as the Pretoria rdgime
has displayed increasingly the unmistakable signs of a
regime under siege, of a regime on the defensive.
For as insecurity mounts with the approach of the
inevitable, the first surrender is to despair; that in turn
leads to, and manifests itself in, acts of wild desperation. That is the situation that we face in South
Africa today.

3 1. Inside and outside,apartheid
constitutes a serious
danger and a threat to peace and security in Africa.
Acts of aggression against the front-line States, in particular the People’s Republic of Angola, constitute a
matter of serious concern for us all. That is why my
country, the People’s Republic of Benin, stands solidly
behind those waging the struggle for justice and
solidarity and associates itself with all men of good
will in demanding the release of Nelson Mandela and
all the other patriots who are languishing in the gaols
of the repressive, barbarous and racist regime of South
Africa.

39. The myth of domestic stability of which South
Africa has been so proudly boasting has been blown
sky-high. Left with no opportunities for constitutional
political opposition, the oppressed peoples have turned
defiant and are now unafraid to take their protest into
the streets: churchmen are protesting against continuing repression and students are protesting against
racist education. What is very significant about this
protest is that it is no longer based on lines of race;
blacks, Indians and Coloured have all come together
as an oppressed class protesting against white domination. The oppressed people of South Africa are saying
in language loud and clear that they have had enough of
apartheid, enough of the regulation of every aspect
of their lives, enough of repression. Their bitterness,
frust.at.io.n and hatreddmotions
spawned by the
social; economic atid political.conditions in which they
have been forced to live for generations--can no longer
be contained and are boiling over.

32. If the Council really wants to stop the violence,
it must immediately impose on South Africa the economic sanctions provided for in Chapter V!l of the
Charter. If it does not adopt that course, the Council
will leave only one choice to the oppressed people of
South Africa: armed struggle.
33. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Guyana. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.
34. Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana): Mr. President, the
warm and friendly relations which exist between
Norway and Guyana give me special pleasure in
extending congratulations to you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of June. Your rich experience and well-known
diplomatic skills constitute for us an assurance of a
positive outcome to the deliberations of the Council
during the month of June.

40. South Africa’s response has been more repression, more police brutality, more fear. It is through
just such fear and repression within, and continued
support from certain external quarters, that the Pretoria
minority regime has been enabled to perpetuate its
subjugation over the majority of the people of South
Africa.
41. This crisis afflicting South Africa was easily
predictable; the very system of apartheid has carried
within itself the seeds of such a crisis. There must be
something fundamentally wrong in a society where
blacks outnumber whites by more than four to one,
yet continue to be subjected by that white minority
regime to the most cruel social, economic and pohtical
oppression, with every aspect of their lives controlled
and regulated by the State. Peoples have always fought
against such oppression. Indeed, the struggle forliberation has been constant throughout history. The African
National Congress of South Africa and the Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania, today banned from
South Africa, are natural products of that system, and
their liberation struggles will not diminish in the future;
on the contrary, they will intensify.

35. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express my delegation’s appreciation to Ambassador
Oumarou of the Niger for the very efficient manner in
which he conducted the business of the Council during
the month of May.
36. Mr. President, I wish to thank you, and through
you the other members of the Council, for giving my
delegation the opportunity to address the Council on
the matter of which it is now seized.
37. It is very appropriate that the Council should be
considering the situation in South Africa at this time.
It is a service to humanity that the African States
should have requested this meeting of the Council to
consider the development of a situation to which they
and other States that love peace and freedom have
been calling attention for decades, a situation which

42. The independence of Mozambique, then of
Angola, deprived South Africa of a vital defe~nce
4

,

perimeter for its odious apartheid system and constituted the first such serious and direct threat to the
perpetuation of white rule in southern Africa-to such
an extent that one of the charges laid against Steve
Biko and his comrades in that notorious Terrorism
Act trial in 1976 was that they had organized proFRELLMO [Mozambique Liberufion Front] rallies at
Durban in 1974.

46. The price will be high indeed, but it need not be
so. If South Africa’s friends and partners in the West
would cease collaborating with that regime; if they
would join with States that love peace and freedom in
working for the total and effective isolation of South
Africa; if they would bring pressure to bear on that
regime to abandon its policies of repression; if they
would cease encouraging the belief in the Pretoria
regime that it can forever escape the judgement of the
international community; if they would give concern to
the wider interests of humanity and of peace and
stability above those of commerce or of perceived
strategic interests-that price would be considerably
reduced and they would at the same time be demonstrating genuine friendship for white South Africa.

43. What is more, there came later the spectacle of
South African troops withdrawing from Angola with
troops of the MPLA [people’s Movement for the
Liberation
of Angola] on their heels and the MPLA
is still in power in Luanda. The clear lesson of that
withdrawal was that South African military power was
not invincible, a lesson which has not been lost either
on the people of South Africa or on the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO). In fact,
South Africa’s conventional military means are being
engaged by SWAP0 with such telling effect that South
Africa has even resorted to the threat of use of nonconventional means against the neighbouring independent States which support SWAPO.

47. It is a puzzling contradiction that, even when
respect for human rights is being noisily proclaimed
as a basic tenet of Western policy both domestically
and internationally, it is precisely Western investment,
Western collaboration, that sustains a regime which
commits the most massive outrages against human
dignity, and it is precisely the threat of Western
vetoes which has so far been shielding South Africa
from the decisive actions which justice and dignity
demand and for which the non-aligned States and
peace-loving States in general have consistently called.
Nineteen million blacks have been held hostage in
South Africa for more than 50 years. Yet when we
call for sanctions against the hostage-holders, we are
told to wait. Why is there this double standard?

44. The independence of Zimbabwe in April this year
has been traumatic for the Pretoria regime, not only
because it brought freedom to the very doorstep of
South Africa, not only because of the profound
psychological impact of the Patriotic Front victory on
the people of Namibia under the leadership of SWAPO,
their sole authentic representative, or indeed.on the
people of South Africa itself, even among the very
whites themselves; but-alsobecause, to the extentthat
Prime Minister Mugabe shows the people across the
border that blacks and whites can live together on a
basis of equality, to that extent his regime constitutes
a reproach and a challenge to the upurrheid regime and
all that it stands for.

48. The Security Council is the’united Nations body
charged with the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Council must not be found fiddling
while fires are raging in South Africa. It will have
abdicated its responsibility if it is found merely trading
words and making condemnatory noises while
Pretoria’s terrorism snuffs out the lives of South
Africa’s oppressed and endangers international peace
and security. It is my delegation’s fervent hope that the
Council will be allowed to take the action which we
all know so well to be required. That action must be
firm; it must include the imposition of a comprehensive
regime of mandatory sanctions against South Africa,
including an oil embargo; and it must include the
complete isolation of the Pretoria racist regime. The
Council must forthrightly condemn South Africa’s
acts of oppression and terrorism against its people and
the neighbouring independent States. The Security
Council must declare its support for and solidarity with
the efforts of a peaceful people which has been left
by the South African racists with no choice but to
express itself in the militant manner we are now
witnessing. No one who stands in the way of such
action by the Council can escape responsibility for the
increased bloodshed which will most assuredly follow
such inaction.

45. Obstinate and tough though the Pretoria regime
may appear, my delegation hasno fear of the lessons
of history being lost on it. The regime must recognize
that ultimately any white Administration in South
Africa must come to terms with the political and
other aspirations of the black ma,jority. Botha has said,
“We must adapt or die”. Yet it is amazing how the
regime still continues to avoid adapting or making any
accommodations. Instead, there is talk of going ahead
with plans to give electricity to Soweto; there is talk
of eliminating unnecessary and offensive aspects of
petty upurrheid; there is talk also of enlarging and
consolidating the tribal homelands. Of course, all this
is irrelevant to blacks; it is totally inadequate, even
insulting. Steve Biko did not die for such unworthy
goals. That was not what Mangaliso Sobukwe lived
and died for; Nelson Mandela languishes in Robben
Island for much more than Botha wishes to offer to
blacks. Before we can see the changes which the
oppressed people of South Africa are demanding,
many more must die both in South Africa and beyond
it; there must be many more bannings, jailings and
tortures. Yes, there must be many more
,. Sowetos.

49. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
5

”

50. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (interpretation
French): I should like to be allowed, first, to
thank the Council for giving me this opportunity to
participate in the debate on the very serious situation
currently prevailing in South Africa. I also wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. May
I express the sincere hope that the Council, with
the help of your experience and dedication, will fully
discharge its difficult task in considering one of the
gravest problems of our times, that of apartheid in
South Africa. I should like also to congratulate
Ambassador Idt Oumarou of the Niger on the effective
manner in which he conducted the Council’s proceedings last month.

of independence was raised over the territory of
Zimbabwe, they have displayed even greater arrogance
and sworn that they would not tolerate in South Africa
a repetition of the events of Zimbabwe. Their reply
to the claims of the South African people is: “Prison
or the scaffold”. They’ have tired on thousands of
defenceless young people and schoolchildren; their
aircraft have indiscriminately bombed communications links, hospitals and populated areas in the
neighbouring countries of Zambia and Angola, causing
the death of hundreds of people and producing
material losses in the hundreds of mihions of dollars.
Their troops have invaded Namibia in preparation for
separate elections and the setting up there of a puppet
regime, in defiance of the Namibian people’s legitimate
right to self-determination. Crimes have been added to
crimes, such is the hideous face of the racist and
bellicose apartheid regime of Pretoria, one of the
most dangerous threats to peace and security in
southern Africa, in the entire African continent and
throughout the world.
55. A further cause of that situation is the support
given by international imperialist and reactionary
forces, particularly the United States, which has used
the Pretoria regime as an instrument of repression
against the total independence of Africa. Certain
Western countries, while shutting their eyes to relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, have been intensifying their trade with South Africa and continuing
to exploit the natural resources of that country in order
to serve their own economic and strategic interests.
They have been supplying South Africa with sophisticated equipment, giving it significant assistance in
the devetopment of nuclear weapons and protecting it
against intemationa1 sanctions. That is decisive support
for the Pretoria regime which, not only locally but
intemationahy, constitutes encouragement in the
criminal actions that regime has perpetrated in utter
scorn for international law and ethics. It is also an
expression of the hypocrisy of those who claim to be
the ardent defenders of human rights but who actually
are accomplices of the criminals and impudently
trample underfoot all the rights of South African
citizens.
56. In order to put an end to the grave situation
in South Africa, we must eliminate its root cause: we
must abolish the policy of apartheid from that
country and put an end to foreign support for and
complicity with South Africa. That is an objective
assessment of what is needed in this situation-the
only correct and reasonable solution in order to put
an end to apartheid in southern Africa. Yet, it is not
surprising that some who boast of their support of
the national liberation movement and for the struggle
of the South African people nevertheless remain silent
over the conspiratorial acts of certain Western Powers
in support of the apartheid regime. Once again, this is
irrefutable proof that they are really pseudo-revolutionaries and that there is collusion between intemational reactionary forces and imperialism within the
framework of their strategy for global hegemony.

from

5 1. It is a well-known fact that apartheid is a policy
which has been pursued for dozens of years now and
which has been condemned severely by all progressive
mankind. Yet the Pretoria regime has become even
more entrenched in its racist course, notwithstanding
the resolutions of the international community and the
condemnation of world opinion. The entire world has
witnessed so many massacres: in Sharpeville in 1960,
in Soweto in 1976, and recently, the barbaric repression of students and schoolchildren. These are milestones in the history of the Fascist policy pursued by
the apartheid regime against the people of South
Africa, as well as being crimes against humanity.
52. In a state of ferment, all of South Africa has
embarked upon a new struggle against apartheid and
savage repression. For nearly two months now, tens
and, at times, even hundreds of thousands of students
and primary schoolchildren have been organizing
boycotts of their classes, sit-ins and demonstrations
and have asked the authorities to release all students
arrested without justification and to carry out reforms
in the racist educational system. They set 6 June as
the deadline for the Government to meet their demands
or face a general strike. It should be pointed out that
thousands of schoolchildren and white teachers also
took part in these demonstrations to support the
African schoolchildren. Racist policemen have indiscriminately thrown grenades, killed scores of schoolchildren and wounded and captured hundreds more.
But young people in South Africa, determined to
regain their rights, continue to forge ahead.
53. Why has this grave situation in southern Africa
continued and even been constantly worsening?
54. The cause resides primarily in the very nature
of the apartheid regime in Pretoria. Panicked by the
victory of the Zimbabwe revolution, the racist colonialists have reacted frantically to the firm resistance
of the people of South Africa and have spared no
effort and stopped at no criminal action to put down
the growing movement of patriotic struggle. After
the Soweto uprising, they strengthened their army,
purchased new weapons and carried out much more
savage counter-attack operations. Ever since the flag
6

57. The acts of repression perpetrated by the advocates of the policy of uparrheid add fuel to the fire
and result only in provoking a chain reaction. The
huge rally of thousands upon thousands of Coloured
students and schoolchildren in Durban in April, commemorating the Soweto riots, started a mass movement of desertion at the Universities of Cape Town,
Johannesburg and Pretoria. The fighters of SWAP0
are crying out their intentions to the Fascists: “We
are ready to take up arms to put an end to the racist
r&ime”; “Freedom for Namibia**. The peoples of
Zambia and Angola vigorously denounce the crimes of
the apartheid regime and are committed to stand by the
brave South African people.

racist regime of South Africa, forcing it into unprecedented political isolation and submitting it to the
harshest condemnation of all mankind. If the racists
deliberately ignore this situation and continue with
their crimes, this heedless course will inevitably lead
them to the fate meted out to so many other oppressors
and dictators already swept out of Asia, Africa and
Latin America.
63. The people and the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam once again pledge their unfailing
solidarity to the valiant peoples of South Africa and
Namibia in their heroic struggle to liquidate the
colonialist racist regime of apartheid and win their
right to independence, liberty, dignity and equality.

58. ,The patriotic people and the youth of South
Africa are not alone in their struggle. The Special
Committee against Aparrheid resolutely demands the
vigorous implementation of sanctions against the
minority leaders in South Africa. The International
Seminar on Women and Apartheid, which just ended
its work in Helsinki,‘declared its total support for the
struggle being waged by the women and the people of
South Africa against the criminal policy of the Pretoria
racists. The sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana, rearmed that freedom, peace, security and
progress cannot be achieved in southern Africa unless
uparzheid is crushed and replaced by a democratic
State.

64. Together with the international community, we
most vigorously condemn the Fascist regime of
Pretoria for its hideous crimes against the peoples
and the youth of South Africa and Namibia.
65. We also reaffirm our complete solidarity with
the front-line States, which are sparing no effort and
no sacrifice in their support for the liberation movements in southern Africa.
66. We firmly uphold the legitimate claims of ANC,
which is calling for the immediate release of patriot
Nelson Mandela, the political detainees and the
schoolchildren in South Africa who have been illegally
imprisoned, as well as an end to repression, the arrest
of patriots, workers, clergymen, students and schoolchildren in South Africa. We support the demand of
previous speakers that the embargoes on arms and
petroleum destined for South Africa should be
categorically implemented.

59. All of Africa and the revolutionary and progressive forces of the world have just once again before
this lofty international body demonstrated their militant
solidarity with and firm support for the people and the
youth of South Africa; The struggle continues, victory
is certain-that is the slogan which has always inspired
the victorious struggle of the oppressed peoples of
Africa.

67. Finallv. I should like to call on the Securitv
Council, given its lofty responsibilities vis-ci-&
history and the international community, to take
further decisions and adopt the effective measures
required, including the application of Chapter VII of
the Charter against the racist rigime of South Africa.

60. The objective law governing the forward march
of peoples is demonstrating that, where there is repression, a struggle will result the scope of which will be
proportional to the degree of the repression. In the
end, the just cause of the oppressed peoples will win
out.

68. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bahrain. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

61. The heroic struggle waged by the African people
has given eloquent proof of this truism which has the
value of historical law. In spite of the most brutal
form of domination and in spite of prisons, torture and
repression, the peoples of southern Africa have risen
up and are bringing about the gradual retreat of
imperialism and colonialism with a view to installing
true national independence and freedom, as was once
again demonstrated by the recent resounding victory
of the people of Zimbabwe.

69. Mr. AGSAFFAR (Bahrain): Mr. President, at
the outset I should like to thank you and, through you,
all the other members of the Council, for having given
my delegation the opportunity to participate in this
debate on behalf of its Government and in its capacity
as current Chairman of the Group of Arab States. Last
week I congratulated you, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. Permit me
today to convey to you my personal congratulations
as well as those of the Arab Group for your wise
guidance of the Council’s deliberations. The Arab
Group, which I have the honour to represent, is fully
confident that your wisdom and diplomatic skills will
lead this debate to a responsive, decisive and unam-

62. The patriots of South Africa, under the banner
of the national liberation movement, are successfully
rallying the most powerful forces of the country in their
struggle against the policy of apartheid of the
7

biguous solution of the alarming situation in South
Africa.

The Sharpeville massacre.continues to be the symbol
of the struggle of the black people in South Africa
against iniquitous and discriminatory laws. The population, which was maintained in a state of slavery,
revolted again in 1976 and decided to give no respite
to the white racist leaders. But, whereas the Sharpeville massacre in March 1%0 had the effect of
checking the resistance movement against the upurtheid regime, the ferocious repression of the first wave
of rioting which originated in Soweto in 16 June 1976
and spread like wildfire through many other black
ghettos of South Africa merely exacerbated rage,
mobilized energies and roused people to militancy.

70. The participation of my delegation, on behalf of
the Group of Arab States, is not only a manifestation
of the Afro-Arab solidarity that has been expressed
on several occasions and at the highest level but also
part and parcel of our joint struggle against racism,
exploitation and foreign domination.
71. The question of South Africa has always had an
important place in the deliberations of the Security
Council and in the General Assembly debates. After
more than three decades, the United Nations is still
discussing the question of upurtheid and adopting
resolutions condemning the atrocities of the racist
policy of the Government of South Africa. Not only
is the policy of upurrhcid repugnant to the conscience
of mankind but it also constitutes a real threat to
peace and security in the world.

77. The events that have recently taken place in
South Africa should be viewed within the same context. Once again the racist regime of Pretoria has been
confronted with resistance to the system of uparfheid imposed upon the millions of black Africans and
other Africans of colour. The black African youth
have defiantly protested against the racist policy in
education. To these protests the Pretoria regime has,
as usual, responded with terror that have led to killings
and massarrests. Peaceful protests are the only means
for weak and innocent people to express their rejection of injustices and oppressive systems. We have
learnt from recent history that oppression never lasts,
for a policy of oppression will lead to militancy and
the strengthening of forces of resistance.

72. Today the Security Council is once again compelled to take up the question of the policy of upurthcid pursued and practised by the racist regime in
Pretoria. 1 wonder if the Council will this time be
able to take the effective measures that are urgently
needed to put an end to the dangerous and tragic
situation in South Africa.
Apurthc4d is not only the official ideology of a
State; it is also a system of oppression and exploitation of.a people, by .a racist minority. It is. not only
a policy which denies to millions of persons their most
elementary human rights, but is also a form of
twentieth-century slavery.

73.

78. The Government of South Africa continues its
illegal occupation of Namibia and persists in carrying
out its policy of upurtheid and bantustanization,
despite the decisions of the International Court of
Justice, the General Assembly and the Security Council. The Pretoria regime arrogantly refuses to withdraw
from that region and is thus preventing the people of
Namibia from achieving self-determination. South
African forces are even using Namibia as a base for
attacking other neighbouring countries, such as
Angola and Zambia.

74. The existence of such a system more than three
decades after the signing of the Charter of the United
Nations in San Francisco and 32 years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is
an outright challenge to the international community
and the principles on which the United Nations was
founded.
75. Such a regime, based on the oppression of the
majority by a white minority, cannot be maintained
because it is in contraventton of the principles of
freedom, equality and justice, which are international
principles enshrined in the Charter. We are convinced
that the racist regime in South Africa cannot survive
without the economic and financial assistance and
military support provided by certain Western Powers.
It is regrettable to note that some Powers which have
great inff uence in the international community--and,
in particular, certain permanent members of the
Security Council-continue
to support the racist
Government of South Africa.

79. We believe that the duty and responsibility of
the Security Council in accordance with the Charter
are very clear. The Council must find a solution to the
tragedy of the African people, who have been suffering
for so many years at the hands of a racist, murderous
minority regime. It would have been impossible for
that regime to survive had it not been for the support
and encouragement of certain Powers, including a
similar racist regime, that is, Israel. Israel is a country
that has a long history of collaboration with the
Government of South Africa. In fact, it goes much
further than the traditional co-operation between the
two racist regimes. It exceeds the common identity of
these two States practising colonialism, racism and
exploitation.

76. Twenty years ago the blacks who revolted in
Sharpeville against the discriminatory -laws which
prevented them from travelling from one place to
another without special authorization were massacred.

80. Our concern focuses on two different systems.
The first is the system of upurthrid, which exists in
South Africa. The second, without which. the first
could not survive, is the international system that
8

supports countries like South Africa and Israel,
enabling them to continue their policies in violation
of the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. The international community bears the responsibility for the existence of such racist systems
that practise persecution and impose oppressive
policies upon other peoples in modem times.

tion. Romania has constantly expressed its support
of the efforts of the international community and of the
peoples and the national liberation movements of
southern Africa for the elimination of imperialist,
colonialist, and racist policies and any form of domination and oppression.
The ill effects of the policy ofuparrheid and racial
discrimination, the extremely tense situation in
southern Africa and its serious implications for peace,
co-operation and security on the African continent
and throughout the world have frequently been discussed here in the Security Council. The African
countries and many other States, including Romania,
have more than once addressed the Council and called
for measures to put an end to the policy of apartheid,
which is the most degrading form of inequality and
oppression of people of colour and suppression of
human rights and liberties, and has generated violence,
acts of intervention and aggression against neighbouring independent States.
87.

81. The continued flow of arms and material and
military technology through sales or transfer to South
Africa not only helps to maintain the status quo but
will definitely increase the level of violence in that
region. It is rather important to witness the similarity
between the Israeli and South African regimes. Both
countries maintain their colonialism through the
escalation of their military capabilities, including
nuclear armament. In South Africa you are superior
because you are white; in Israel you are superior
because you are Jewish-though we do not know the
place of the black Jews in Israeli society, as a matter
of fact. Both regimes practise oppression, discrimination and racism against the indigenous people.

88. Past debates and the measures adopted by the
Council so far have not been enough to improve the
situation in South Africa. The danger flowing from
the policy of apartheid, which has been described as
a crime. against mankind, has only grown. Today the
situation of tension in South Africa has reached an
unprecedented level. The recent political, economic
and social measures taken by the rulers of Pretoria
within the framework of the so-called total strategy,
whereby they are seeking to create the impression
that the apartheid policy is-so they would have us
believe-changing, is aimed in the final analysis at
dividing the non-white majority population which is
forced in its own country to live according to racial
criteria in bantustans. These measures serve only to
highlight the fundamental contradictions between the
small usurping minority in power and the majority
of the population, the coloured people, who have been
stripped of their most elementary rights and freedoms.

82. This series of meetings of the Council is drawing
the attention of international public opinion to the
inhuman and degrading conditions imposed by the
racist regime on millions of Africans struggling to
regain the freedom and human dignity of which they
have been deprived. We hope that during its meetings
the Council will be able to adopt measures to implement an effective oil embargo, such as that declared
by the countries of the Organization of Petroleum
Exportirig Countries. We also hope that the Council
will take a decision that puts an end to economic
cohaboration and nuclear co-operation with the
minority tigime of South Africa. These measures will
enable the international community to deal a heavy
blow to the racist regime of the white minority and
bring about the destruction of the policies of uparrhrid in South Africa.
83. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Romania. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

89. Accordingly, the African delegations have shown
in the course of this debate that the racist regime has
even intensified its repressive actions and has had
recourse to demonstrations of strength against the
majority black population and the other segments of
the South African population who are struggling
for the implementation of their legitimate rights and
calling for the elimination of the racist system. Massive racist acts of repression have been accompanied
by the intensification of acts of violence against the
Namibian people which, under the leadership of
SWAPO, is struggling for the elimination of the illegal
occupation of its country by South Africa, as well
as by repeated acts of aggression against the front-line
States, particularly Angola and Zambia, acts which
have been condemned and continue to be condemned
by Romania and the whole of the international community.

84. Mr. MARINESCU (Romania) (interpretation
from French): Permit me, Mr. President, before turning
to the problem which is the subject of this debate,
to express the particular pleasure of my delegation at
seeing you, the representative of Norway, presiding
over the work of the Council for this month and to
wish you every success in the performance of your
important functions.
85. I should also like to express my gratitude to you
and the other members of the Council for having given
the Romanian detegation the opportunity to take part
in this debate.
86. The participation of my delegation in this debate
derives from Romania’s active and determined opposition to the policy of apartheid and racial discrimina-

90. It is obvious that today the racist regime is facing
one of the most serious crises of its history. The
9

victory of the people of Zimbabwe, which has such farreaching significance for future developments in
southern Africa, has thrown even further into relief
the isolation of the Pretoria racist regime and has
brought even closer the inevitable end of the outdated
system of apartheid.

Council and General Assembly resolutions aimed at
prevailing upon South Africa to give up its policy of
apartheid. As is we!! known, Romania strictly applies
the sanctions decreed by the United Nations against
South Africa and maintains no relations whatsoever
with that country.

91. The present revival of repressive measures of the
armed forces and police against the anti-apartheid
protests which has spread throughout the country,
against the student movements and students who are
protesting against the discriminatory educational
system, once again confirms the fact that the racist
Government, in the face of the stepped-up struggle for
equality and social justice, is becoming ever more
brutal and inhumane.

95. Recalling the guidelines of the foreign policy of
Romania, President Nicolae Ceausescu recently
firmly reaffirmed the militant position of the Romanian
people, one of support for the national liberation
struggle. He stressed that
*‘Romania has supported and will continue always
to support the national liberation struggle of peoples against imperialism, colonialism and neocolonialism, against the racist and apartheid policy
and against a!! forms of foreign domination and
oppression, because it believes that the most sacred
right of every people is to be master of its own
destiny, in its own country.”

92. That is why, in our view, the Council should
shoulder its responsibilities and take resolute and
urgent action to meet the demands of the African
peoples for a cessation of the violence and repression
against the oppressed people, including South African
students, for an end to the arrests and detention of
‘those opposing the policy of apratheid, and for the
release of political detainees, in particular the leader
Nelson Mandela. In this regard, the Charter provides
for measures that can and must be taken when peace
and security are endangered, and African representatives and other speakers have made suggestions which
deserve attentive consideration by the Security Council. New measures should play a major role in the
elimination of the state of tension, in support of the
African people. They should ensure the participation
of the whole population of South Africa, without
distinction as to colour, race or religious belief, in
the building of its own future and should support the
free and independent development of the peoples of
that part of the world.

96. In a message recentlv sent to the President of
Romania, the President - of ANC, Mr. Tambo,
expressed his appreciation of this militant solidarity
of the Romanian people, his gratitude and that of the
leadership of ANC for the active support given by
Romania to the national liberation movements of
southern Africa.
97. The Romanian delegation is convinced that, as a
result of this debate, the Council will adopt measures
strong enough to provide new momentum for the
genera! efforts aimed at eliminating once and for a!!
the policy of apartheid and racial discrimination and
meeting the aspirations of the South African people
for liberty, human dignity and social progress.
98. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a !etter.from
the representative of Japan, in which he requests to be
invited to make a statement in connection with the
tribute paid at this meeting to the memory of the
Prime Minister of Japan. In accordance with the usual
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representative of Japan to make a
statement.

93. The delegation of Romania has on repeated occasions reaffirmed in the Council the firm position of
Romania with regard to the policy of apartheid.
Romania continues energetically to condemn the
policy of apartheid and racial discrimination, which
constitutes a defiance of mankind and is a brutal
violation of the rights of the majority black people of
South Africa, of the Charter and of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. It is a policy which
breeds considerable danger for international peace and
security. We believe that, in the present circumstances
where the aspiration to liberty and independence
on the part of the peoples is being asserted ever more
vigorously, the abolition of a system of domination and
oppression is a major imperative. The realization of
that imperative requires the solidarity of a!! progressive, democratic and anti-imperialist forces in the
world which support the just struggle of the people of
South Africa for their freedom and human dignity.

It was so decided.

99. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of
Japan to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
100. Mr. NISIBORI (Japan): We deeply appreciate
the expressions of condolence andsympathy that you, .
Mr. President, have conveyed to the Government
and people of Japan on the demise of Prime Minister
Ohira. I am very grateful for this opportunity to thank
the President and a!! the other members of the Council.

94. I should like to stress the firm support offered by
Romania for United Nations actions and the fact that
my country has joined in sponsoring many Security

101. At a time when a!! the Japanese people are
experiencing a sense of deep sorrow and*!oss, these
10

expressions of sympathy provide us with encouragement to pursue resolutely the efforts of our late
Prime Minister in promoting the realization of the lofty
ideals that are enshrined in the Charter.

delegation and indeed the succeeding Government will
continue to work, as we have done in the past, to
promote peace and prosperity throughout the world.
.
103. I shall convey these condolences and expressions of sympathy to the Government and the people of Japan and to the members of the family of Prime
Minister Ohira, who will find in them a source of
encouragement, consolation and inspiration.

102. Mr. Ohira attached great importance to the work
of the United Nations and particularly of the Security
Council. During his tenure as Japan’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs, and later as Prime Minister, he participated in numerous United Nations forums, most
notably the General Assembly and the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development. Throughout
his long public career, Mr. Ohira demonstrated a
steadfast dedication to the ideals of world peace and
prosperity. I should like at this time to assure you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council,
that the demise of our revered leader will in no way
diminish my country’s devotion to those ideals. This

The meeting

rose at 1.05 p.m.

NOTE
I Ojjkiul
Records
of the General
plement
No. 14, pan. 295.

11

Assembly,

Tenth

Session.

Sup

1’

r_

!
i’

; ;j

1

HOW TO OBTAIN UNTIED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, gales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en ventedans les libtaities et la agences d@ositaires du
monde entier. lnformez-vous auprh de votre libraire ou adressez-vous8 : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Gcnh.
KAK

IIOJIYPEITh

UBAAHHR

OPI-AHH

SAI&HH

OIi%EAHHEHHhIX

HA4BH

EI3AaRHR OpraHnaauuH O6’beJg!HeHAblX
Ha&
anna% n arenTcTBax IIO scex patiomax uspa.
saureH
HaquR.

KH~XCKHOM

CexIuiR

xarasme

XnX

nmuXfe

MO%HO XyUHTb
Ei XHHHcHbIX
YaraHaEOJWTe
enpaaxn
06 H3AUIHRX
B
no anpecy : OpraHH38UHR
06%eJwPexHblx

no npoxarte Ha~aRHR, Hbm-FfOpX

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

mu

XG?.HeBa.

DE WS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&t en venta en hire&s y casas distribuidoms en
todas partes de4 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones U&as. Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United Nations. New York

00306

83-61462-8eptember 19862.050
