VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 112
Recalling that, since its establishment, the United Nations

Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization has constantly striven for the effective realization of the right to
education and equality of educational opportunities for all,
without distinction as to race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin,
economic status or birth, and that, for many years past,
activities directed towards securing the right to education
and the extension and improvement of educational and training systems in member States, more particularly in the developing countries, have occupied a central place in that
organization's programme,
Aware of the important contribution of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to the implementation of the International Development Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade with a view
to fostering full implementation of the right to education,
Taking note with satisfaction of the interest shown by the
Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the implementation of
General Assembly resolutions 341170, 35/191 and 36/ 152.
L Takes note of the conclusions contained in the report
of the Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization on the right to
education; 113
2. Commends the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for including on a permanent
basis, in its medium-term plan. the issue of the implementation of the right to education.
3. Again invites all States to consider the adoption of
appropriate legislative, administrative and other measures,
including material guarantees, in order to ensure full implementation of the right to universal education through,
inter alia, free and compulsory primary education, universal
and gradually free-of-charge secondary education, equal access to all educational facilities and the access of the young
generation to science and culture;
4. Invites all States to give all necessary attention to
defining and determining in a more precise manner the means
for implementing the provisions concerning the role of education in the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade;
5. Invites all specialized agencies to co-operate with the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to ensure education a high priority in the implementation of various programmes and projects within the
framework of the International Development Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade;
6. Appeals once again to all States, in particular the
developed countries, to support actively, through fellowships and other means, including the general increasing of
resources for education and training, the efforts of the developing countries in the education and training of national
personnel needed in industry, agriculture and other economic and social sectors;
7. Expresses its thanks to the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for his report on the right to education, submitted
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 36/152;
8. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization to continue its intensive efforts for
111 See resolution 35/56, annex. secl 0.
"' See A/37/521, annex.

201

the promotion at the uni versa! level of the right to education
and to inform the General Assembly, in appropriate forms.
of the progress achieved in this field.
I 10th plenary meeting
17 December /982

37/179.

Measures to be taken against Nazi, Fascist and
neo-Fascist activities and all other forms of
totalitarian ideologies and practices based on
racial intolerance, hatred and terror

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the United Nations emerged from the struggle against nazism, fascism, aggression and foreign occupation, and that the peoples expressed their resolve in the
Charter of the United Nations to save future generations
from the scourge of war,
Bearing in mind the suffering, destruction and death of
millions of victims of aggression, foreign occupation. nazism and fascism,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles laid down in the
Charter, which are aimed at maintaining international peace
and security, developing friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples, and achieving international cooperation in promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Emphasizing that all totalitarian or other ideologies and
practices, in particular Nazi, Fascist and neo-Fascist, based
on racial or ethnic exclusiveness or intolerance, hatred, terror, systematic denial of human rights and fundamental freedoms, or which have such consequences, may jeopardize
world peace and constitute obstacles to friendly relations
between States and to the realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Reaffirming that the prosecution and punishment of war
crimes and crimes against peace and humanity, as laid down
in General Assembly resolutions 3 (I) of 13 February 1946
and 95 (I) of 11 December 1946, constitute a universal
commitment for all States,
Recalling its resolutions 2331 (XXII) of 18 December
1967, 2438 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2545 (XXIV)
of 11 December 1969, 2713 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
2839 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 , 34/24 of 15 November
1979, 35/200 of 15 December 1980 and 36/ 162 of 16 December 1981 .
Recalling also the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, 114 the United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 115 the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples' 16 and the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination
Based on Religion or Belief. 117
Underlining the importance of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 118 the International Covenants on Human
Rights, 119 the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 120 the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide 121 and other relevant international instruments.
Resolution 2542 (XXIY)
'" Resolution 1904 (XYIII).
"" Resolution 1514 (XV)
117
Resolution 36/55.
11 • Resolution 217 A (III)
''" Resolution 2200 A ( XXI). annex
"" Resolution 2l06 A (XX). annex.
"' Resolution 260 A (111). annex.
114

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

202

Acknowledging the fact that a number of States have
established legal regulations which are suited to prevent the
activities of Nazi, Fascist and neo-Fascist groups and
organizations,
Noting again with deep concern that the proponents of
Fascist ideologies have, in a number of countries, intensified
their activities and are increasingly co-ordinating them on
an international scale,
I. Again condemns all totalitarian or other ideologies
and practices, in particular Nazi, Fascist and neo-Fascist,
based on racial or ethnic exclusiveness or intolerance, hatred,
terror, systematic denial of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, or which have such consequences;
2. Urges all States to draw attention to the threats to
democratic institutions by the above-mentioned ideologies
and practices and to consider taking measures, in accordance
with their national constitutional systems and with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the International Covenants on Human Rights, to prohibit
or otherwise deter activities by groups or organizations or
whoever is practising those ideologies;
3. Calls upon the appropriate specialized agencies, as
well as intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations, to initiate or intensify measures against
the ideologies and practices described in paragraph I above;
4. Invites Member States to adopt, in accordance with
their national constitutional systems and with the provisions
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenants on Human Rights, as a matter of high
priority, measures declaring punishable by law any dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred and of
war propaganda, including Nazi, Fascist and neo-Fascist
ideologies;
5. Appeals to all States that have not yet done so to
ratify or to accede to the International Covenants on Human
Rights, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the
Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity 122 and
the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid; 123
6. Calls once again upon all States to provide the
Secretary-General with their comments on this question;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat pays
attention to the dissemination of information exposing the
ideologies and practices described in paragraph 1 above;
8. Reiterates its request to the Commission on Human
Rights to consider this question at its thirty-ninth session
under the title: "Measures to be taken against all totalitarian
or other ideologies and practices, including Nazi, Fascist
and neo-Fascist, based on racial or ethnic exclusiveness
or intolerance, hatred, terror, systematic denial of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, or which have such
consequences";
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, in the light of the
discussion that will take place in the Commission on Human
Rights and on the basis of comments provided by States
and international organizations.
110th plenary meeting
17 December 1982
122
123

Resolution 2391 (XXIII), annex.
Resolution 3068 (XXVIII). annex.

37/180.

Question of enforced
disappearances

or

involuntary

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978,
entitled "Disappeared persons", and its resolution 36/163
of 16 December 1981 on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution
1982/24 of 10 March 1982, 124 by which the Commission
decided to extend for one year the term of the mandate of
the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, and Economic and Social Council decision 1982/131
of 7 May 1982, by which the Council approved the Commission's decision,
Convinced that the action taken, in consultation with the
Governments concerned, to promote the implementation of
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 33/173 and
other United Nations resolutions relevant to the plight of
missing or disappeared persons should be continued,
Expressing its emotion at the anguish and sorrow of the
families concerned, who should know the fate of their
relatives,
1. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on Human
Rights to extend for one year the term of the mandate of
the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, as laid down in Commission resolution 1982/24;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Working Group for
the work it has done and to those Governments that have
co-operated with it;
3. Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to study this question as a matter of priority and
to take any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of the
task of the Working Group when it considers the report to
be submitted by the Group at its thirty-ninth session;
4. Appeals to all Governments to provide the Working
Group and the Commission on Human Rights with the full
co-operation warranted by their strictly humanitarian objectives and their working methods based on discretion;
5. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Working Group with all necessary
assistance.
110th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/181.

Missing persons in Cyprus

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question of missing persons in Cyprus,
Reaffirming the basic need of families to be informed,
without further delay, about the fate of their missing relatives,
Expressing concern that the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus, the establishment of which was announced
on 22 April I 981, 125 has failed to overcome procedural
difficulties and has achieved no progress towards the commencement of its investigative work,
Emphasizing the need for a speedy resolution of this humanitarian problem,
I. Invites the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the Commission on Human Rights
124 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /982.
Supplement No. 2 (El 1982/ 12 and Corr. I), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
125 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-sixth Year, Supplement for April. Mav and June /98/. document S/14490, para. 46.
