S/PV.7875

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7875th meeting

Thursday, 2 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2017/73)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2299 (2016) (S/2017/75)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-02809 (E)
*1702809*

S/PV.7875

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

strong support and cooperation with the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of February, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Olof Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Council for the month of January. I am sure I speak
for all the members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Skoog and his delegation
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirteenth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2017/73)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 2299 (2016) (S/2017/75)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/73, which contains the thirteenth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), as well as
to document S/2017/75, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2299 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: At the oustet, allow me to congratulate
the new members of the Security Council on assuming
their responsibilities, as well as to thank those that left
the Council at the end of last year for their continuous
2/7

02/02/2017

Let me start my briefing by applauding the
bravery of the Iraqi security forces, including the
popular mobilization forces, the Peshmerga and tribal
volunteers, as well as the endurance of the Iraqi people.
Three months after the Mosul liberation operation
began, combat operations in the eastern part of Mosul
have come to an end. The steady progress should not
serve to conceal the fact that fighting has been — and
will continue to be — a massive challenge, in particular
inside the old city, in western Mosul. With significant
support from international partners, especially the
United States, Iraqi forces will remain engaged in
complex urban operations. Yet the liberation operations
in Iraq are coming to an end in the near foreseeable
future. The days of the so-called caliphate of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) are numbered. I take
this opportunity to honour the martyrs who sacrificed
their lives in the fight against the ISIL international
terrorists for the sake of a free and united Iraq and in
defence of human values shared by the world, as strong
allies of the United States and a steadfast part of the
international anti-ISIL coalition.
In the post-Da’esh period Iraq will need continuous
substantial and substantive support and assistance from
the international community, including its regional
partners. Any abrupt scaling down of engagement or
support would mean repeating mistakes of the past —
mistakes that have had grave consequences for stability
and security well beyond the borders of Iraq.
The humanitarian concept of operations adopted by
the Government of Iraq and the Iraqi security forces,
including the popular mobilization forces, prioritizes
the protection of civilians in an unprecedented manner,
in both the planning and the conduct of military
operations, based on the lessons learned from mistakes
of the previous liberation operations. The conduct of
all security forces during the liberation operations has
mitigated much, but not all, of the fear that existed
among the population of Mosul prior to the operation.
I note that UNAMI has received no evidence of any
systematic or widespread violations of international
humanitarian law or human rights law on the part of
the security forces. Regrettably, however, criminal acts
against civilians and prisoners of war still occur. There
are most often quickly investigated, with measures
taken to prevent such acts in the future. I furthermore
17-02809

02/02/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

note that security screenings of civilians leaving
areas controlled by Da’esh appear to be conducted in
a transparent manner and in general observance of
international standards. However, I express my concerns
about disturbing reports of looting and destruction of
civilian property and looting of humanitarian aid by
armed groups operating in support of the Iraqi security
forces, in particular by some local resistance groups.
Protecting civilians, avoiding steps that could
incite sectarian tensions and preventing looting and
revenge attacks in Mosul, but also in other liberated
areas of the country, are of vital importance for
winning the hearts and minds of the population. They
constitute the first steps in the process of national and
community-based reconciliation and in building a truly
unified and united Iraq in which all its people will feel
like equal citizens, be treated fairly and be protected
by the State. I am pleased to note here that, during its
meeting on 30 January, the Council of Representatives
supported the Prime Minister’s proposed candidates
for the positions of Minister of Defence and Minister
of the Interior. Swift action to agree on the selection
and appointment of ministers for the remaining vacant
posts, including the Ministers of Trade, Industry and
Finance, is necessary.
The world will not forget the horrendous crimes
committed by Da’esh. Provisional justice for the
victims of human rights abuses and violations requires
the re-establishment of the formal justice system, the
effective and efficient documentation of violations
and abuses and the establishment of non-formal
justice mechanisms, such as truth-telling, specialized
care and rehabilitation programmes for women and
deradicalization programmes for children subjected
to extremist indoctrination. There is also a need for
broader intra- and inter-community dialogue on justice
and human rights.
Attention should also be given to the needs of
ethnic and religious minorities, which have been
disproportionately affected by the conflict. Since 2003,
Iraq has lost more than half of its ethnic and religious
minority population. It is my fear that, without an
adequate response, that process will continue even after
the defeat of Da’esh. Special attention should therefore
be paid to arrangements that address the specific
security and other concerns of minorities in order to
enable them to return to their homes.

S/PV.7875

Over the past months, I have engaged with the
leadership of the Iraqi National Alliance, the largest
parliamentary block, on the way forward in post-Da’esh
Iraq. The National Alliance submitted its national
settlement initiative to UNAMI on 30 October 2016.
I welcome and support that encouraging move. The
National Alliance initiative is a good starting point in
the Iraqi-owned and -led. but United Nations-facilitated,
process of national settlement and reconciliation and
has already sparked a wave of interest in all sectors of
Iraqi society. UNAMI is currently working with those
groups, including the Sunni and Turkmen components,
the Kurdistan region of Iraq, civil society, minority
communities, tribal leaders and youth and women’s
groups, with the aim of soliciting their views and vision
on how to build a post-ISIL united Iraq based on the
principles of equality and citizenship. Let me emphasize
that, for national reconciliation to succeed, it must
be supported by grassroots initiatives. I am therefore
glad to announce that UNAMI has launched a series of
events under the theme “Iraq: Youth and Coexistence”.
The first such event took place on 28 January in Basra,
where 120 youth from the four southern governorates
participated.
After months of uncertainty regarding the timing of
the Provincial Council elections in Iraq, Prime Minister
Al Abadi announced on 17 January that governorate
and district council elections were scheduled to be
held on 16 September. It is now up to the Council of
Representatives to urgently put in place the appropriate
legal and institutional framework for those elections
to take place. A clear and comprehensive electoral
legal framework is essential to enable preparations
by the Independent High Electoral Commission. I
also encourage the Government of Iraq to provide
the requisite funding for the Commission in order to
facilitate its regulatory and operational planning and
preparations for the elections. In addition, on 23 January,
the Kurdistan Regional Government announced that
the parliamentary and presidential elections would be
conducted on 11 November.
During the previous phase of the Mosul operation,
an estimated 825,000 civilians remained in their homes
in the areas retaken by the Iraqi security forces. Nearly
190,000 people have been displaced since mid-October,
far fewer than humanitarians had feared. Thirty
thousand of those people have already returned to their
homes and more are doing so every day. Although the
military campaign to oust ISIL from Iraq is nearly

17-028093/7

S/PV.7875

The situation concerning Iraq

won, the humanitarian crisis is expected to continue for
months, if not years. In December 2016, humanitarian
partners presented an advanced summary of the 2017
humanitarian response plan. At least $985 million
is required this year to reach the 5.8 million most
vulnerable Iraqis. Of that total $331 million is being
sought specifically for the Mosul response.
A great deal is already being done. More than
1.4 million displaced Iraqis have returned to their homes,
including 1 million in the past 12 months throughout the
country. The United Nations Development Programme
Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization is
currently operational in 21 liberated towns and districts.
Hundreds of thousands of people have returned to the
cities and districts facilitated by that activity.
Allow me now to turn the issue of missing Kuwaiti
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives. The Government of Iraq has shown
determination to pursue the important work of locating
missing persons. Through the proactive efforts of the
Iraqi Ministry of Defence, the number of witnesses
coming forward to give information has increased
dramatically. Field visits and excavation work continue,
both in Iraq and in Kuwait.
Separately, efforts in recovering Kuwait’s missing
patrimony are ongoing. Over 6,000 Kuwaiti books have
been located and itemized from the libraries of the Kufa
and Babil Universities, and are being prepared for an
official handover to Kuwait. Yet time is not on our side.
As time passes, it makes locating burial sites all the
more difficult. We owe it to the families of the deceased
to continue supporting Iraq in this humanitarian
process and to continue employing a multidimensional
and innovative approach, which Iraq requires to honour
and fulfil its international obligations in this area.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
The representative of Uruguay has asked for the
floor to make a statement.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of
Ukraine on your country’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Sweden and his
entire team for their outstanding management of the
work of the Council in January — Ambassador Skoog
and his staff have indeed set the bar very high. I also
4/7

02/02/2017

wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ján Kubiš for his briefing.
It is clear that Iraq still faces several major
humanitarian, political, economic and security
challenges, but the main one, without a doubt, is the
fight against terrorism. Uruguay recognizes the arduous
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, which, in close coordination with
the Iraqi Government, have been carrying out very
important and effective work to address the various
crises affecting the country.
We reiterate that combating the terrorist scourge
should take place in the framework of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and must be
coordinated within the United Nations. We also support
the efforts made by the Iraqi Government, with the
support of the global coalition to counter the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham, in the fight against the grave
threat posed by the Islamic State to Iraq’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and its civilian population.
We need to underscore the fact that Iraqi authorities
have placed the highest priority on the protection of
civilians and on achieving an immediate response to the
humanitarian emergency in the context of their military
offensive in Mosul. We are obviously concerned about
the situation of civilians who are trapped in Mosul, in
particular the most vulnerable groups, and the fact that
Da’esh is using civilians as human shields, which is one
more example of their utter cowardice.
We urge the parties to the conflict to respect
and protect civilians, in particular women, children,
disabled persons and older persons, and to respect
human rights and allow access to emergency assistance,
in accordance with international humanitarian law. It
is of particular concern that there are now more than
160,000 persons who have been displaced as a result of
the fighting, and there could soon be even more.
Repairing civilian infrastructure, the normal
provision of services and the gradual return of the
internally displaced to their homes must be priorities
following the liberation of Mosul. It continues to be
clear that military operations alone will not eliminate
the threat of terrorism in Iraq. Iraqi political leaders
must overcome their divisions and mistrust and reach an
agreement on a single vision for national reconciliation.
Without such a vision it will be very difficult in the
17-02809

02/02/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

future to heal the wounds that continue to drain the life
out of the Iraqi people.
The President: The representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia has asked for the floor to
make a statement.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by wishing
you, Sir, and your team every success in presiding over
the work of the Security Council during the month of
February. I would also like to echo your comments, Sir,
and of those who spoke before me, in congratulating
the Swedish presidency on its work during the month
of January.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia recognizes
and encourages the brave and determined work being
carried out by the Iraqi people and Government in the
fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham
and terrorism and underscores that the provision of
humanitarian assistance that the Iraqi Government
has ensured in all its military tasks is in accordance
with international humanitarian law. At the same
time, Bolivia reiterates its vigorous condemnation
of the terrorism and violence that have been wrought
upon women and children in Mosul. Similarly, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia recognizes the efforts
and will of the Iraqi people to reach a historic political
and social agreement by consensus and with mutual
respect among all parties involved that establishes and
strengthens peace, in accordance with respect for the
principles of sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States.
We add our voice to the calls for support for the
rebuilding of hospitals, schools and State universities
destroyed during the conflict, as well as for the
requests for support to carry out electoral processes
in various regional Governments, in particular with
regard to the biometric voter registry. We believe that
the international community must recognize the efforts
carried out by the Iraqi Government and, in particular
the Iraqi people, in the common struggle against
terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate the Republic of Ukraine on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council

S/PV.7875

this month. I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
efforts to ensure transparency. I would also like to
congratulate the Kingdom of Sweden on its presidency
of the Council in January. We are pleased to welcome
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Iraq (UNAMI). We appreciate his efforts, both in
Baghdad and in New York, and those of his team.
We would also like to welcome Mrs. Nikki Haley,
who is assuming her position on the Security Council.
We wish her every success. We are keen to work on
issues of common interest.
The Government of Iraq highly commends
the sacrifices made by Iraqi forces under the joint
supervision of the international alliance. We welcome
the successful liberation of Mosul. The western part
of that city has been fully liberated, and that includes
87 neighbourhoods. Iraqi forces are completing the
preparations for taking over the eastern part of the
city. Mr. Al Abadi, who is President of the Governing
Council of Ministers, has signed a memorandum to
launch reconstruction projects in the various liberated
neighbourhoods and to undertake demining. That will
open the way for the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and for the provision of services to the
Iraqi people so that life can resume as normal.
More than 2,000 Iraqi families have been able to
return to their homes in the western part of the city,
which has been freed from Da’esh criminals. Their
return is continuing following the removal of explosives
and mines. We also thank the local population for their
active participation in the cleanup of the streets in the
liberated neighbourhoods.
The President of the Council of Ministers and Head
of the Armed Forces has issued urgent decrees, which
are to be implemented immediately. Those decrees go
to the relevant authorities to ensure security and the
provision of emergency aid and shelter to those displaced
from Mosul. This is based on the Ninawa liberation
humanitarian plan, which was a joint operation for the
liberation of Ninawa. They have informed the ministry
responsible for IDPs and immigration on the expected
number of IDPs before beginning the liberation of the
eastern side of Mosul so that the necessary steps can be
taken with regard to providing shelter and emergency
assistance.
The Ministry of Trade has quickly provided food
in the liberated areas, in cooperation with the local

17-028095/7

S/PV.7875

The situation concerning Iraq

02/02/2017

Governments of Ninawa. I am pleased to inform the
Security Council that the Council of Representatives of
Iraq intends to approve the candidates for the positions
of the Minister of Defence and the Minister of the
Interior. This will allow the success achieved on the
ground to be consolidated.

not part of the coalition, for the efforts undertaken to
combat terrorism, particularly the provision of military
and logistical support to Iraqi security forces, within
the context of strict respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq and in cooperation with the
security forces.

The Government of Iraq welcomes the joint
communiqué adopted following the visit to Iraq of the
Head of the Turkish Government, Mr. Binali Yıldırım,
particularly as concerns the Bashiqa camp in Iraq.
The communiqué also refers to the need for respect
for the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq, and we look forward to its implementation as
soon as possible with a view to strengthening bilateral
relations in various areas, including the combat against
terrorism, so as to ensure security and stability along
the border between the two countries.

We welcome the election and inauguration of
Mr. Donald Trump, President of the United States.
However, we deeply regret the executive order of
27 January last, which includes restrictions on citizens
of seven countries travelling to the United States,
including Iraqis. This order is affecting a friendly,
allied State that is linked with the United States by
a strategic partnership. Given that it comes at a time
when our brave fighters have achieved major progress
in combating Da’esh in Mosul, we call on the United
States Government to rethink its position. In this
regard, we reiterate our resolve to enhance the strategic
partnership between our two countries and to broaden
the possibilities for cooperation, particularly in the
combat against terrorism.

My Government calls upon all countries worldwide
to implement resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2199
(2015) and 2253 (2015), in particular with respect to
putting an end to the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The
Security Council sanctions Committees must shoulder
their responsibilities fully under their prerogatives in
order to neutralize these terrorist groups and dry up
their sources of funding. By this I mean follow-up with
respect to those States that provide financial support
and arms to terrorist groups, including Da’esh, thereby
enabling them to engage in the trafficking of Iraqi oil
and Iraqi archaeological treasures.
Iraq welcomes the actions of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, under the
chairmanship of Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, which have
provided Iraq with the means to combat terrorism,
including during the coordination meeting held in
Baghdad in the presence of UNAMI. In order to
coordinate international efforts aimed at providing
technical support to Iraq in the combat against terrorism,
we urge donors and international organizations to
provide the relevant technical support. We welcome
UNAMI’s efforts in this regard, particularly its work
to promote national reconciliation and enhance the
role played by young people, as reflected in the youth
conference held in Basra, to which Mr. Ján Kubiš
referred in his briefing.
The Government and the people of Iraq would like
to thank all of the States of the international coalition,
in particular the United States of America and the States
of the European Union, as well as other States that are
6/7

Iraq thanks and attaches great importance to the
efforts of those friendly countries that have worked
to restore stability and ensure reconstruction in those
areas retaken from terrorist groups linked to Da’esh,
with a view to alleviating the humanitarian crisis
affecting displaced persons. This requires demining
and the provision of basic services and employment to
the local population. We deeply appreciate the efforts
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies in
supporting displaced persons, and we call upon all
States to provide funding in that respect.
For our part, we are doing everything in our power
to enhance our relations with neighbouring Arab
states, particularly Kuwait, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Iran
and Turkey; we have a close relationship also with the
Syrian Government. In the context of enhancing our
brotherly ties to Kuwait, the high-level joint ministerial
commission met in Baghdad on 28 December 2016,
under the joint chairmanship of Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, and Sheikh Sabah
Khalid Al Hamad Al Sabah, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait. At that meeting, a number of issues
of common interest were discussed, and in this regard
the Iraqi Government reaffirms its commitment to
sparing no effort to achieve progress on the issue of
disappeared Kuwaiti citizens and Kuwaiti archives.
17-02809

02/02/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

The joint commission as well as the national
commissions are interviewing witnesses to determine
the fate of disappeared persons, not only Kuwaiti
citizens but also nationals of other countries. The
Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs have stepped up their efforts to disseminate
information on this issue via television, satellite
stations and Government publications in order to
obtain testimony and reliable information, with a
view to carrying out visits on the ground and achieve
concrete results. A number of technical meetings
have been held, and excavations have taken place in a
number of regions; 158 trenches were dug in Karbala
recently, in the presence of witnesses, but no human
remains were found. The Iraqi Ministry of Defence
is providing the funding necessary for 2017 so as to
ensure that excavations can continue in many areas,
including Khamisiyah, Radwaniyah, Ayn_al-Tamr,
Sulaymaniyah and Salman Pak.
The Iraqi Government attaches great importance to
the sincere relations that link us to the brotherly Kuwaiti
State. We greatly appreciate the tireless support from
that brotherly country, in particular the provision of
ready-made schools in liberated areas, which allows
students to return to classes until their permanent
schools have been rebuilt.
We welcome the efforts and the good offices of
Russia, Iran and Turkey to reach a comprehensive Syrian
settlement that can be accepted by all Syrian parties.

S/PV.7875

We thank them for the efforts they are undertaking
to eradicate terrorist groups in Syria, to put an end
to regional and international support for those groups
and to put an end to the recruitment of more terrorists.
We also thank them for their efforts to ensure respect
for the sovereignty of Syria, and to assist that country
in such a way that it can be freed from the scourge of
terrorism, destruction, death and displacement, thereby
ensuring that stability and security can finally return
to the region.
We would like to thank Kazakhstan for the efforts
that country is making to ensure that the dialogue
is successful. We also wish to thank its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Kairat Abdrakhmanov, for his
efforts to ensure the principles of peace and to reconcile
the various points of views of the Syrian people under
the auspices of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we extend our sincere thanks to
Special Representative Kubiš for the efforts that he
has continuously made on behalf of Iraq. We also wish
to thank his team for its valuable advice to the Iraqi
Government. Finally, we thank UNAMI for the efforts
it has undertaken to ensure that Iraq is unified, stable
and free of terrorists.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

17-028097/7
