Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Notes with satisfaction that the SecretaryGeneral's consideration for the needs of economy,
without prejudice to the success of the Conference,
has already led to reductions in the costs for 1972 and
expresses the hope that the same consideration will be
applied to the costs for 1971.
1916th plenary-meetin!{,
3 December 1970.

2655 (XXV). Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received and examined the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to the General
Assembly for the year 1969/1970,10
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Appreciates the increasingly dynamic and constructive role that the International Atomic Energy
Agency is playing in the peaceful application of nuclear
energy for the welfare of Member States;
3. Commends the work being undertaken by the
International Atomic Energy Agency to meet its safeauards responsibilities in accordance with its statute;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to llransmit to the
Director-General of the International Atomic Energy
~ncy the records of the twenty-fifth session of the
General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities;
S. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency
to take these records into account in its future work.
1917th plenary meeting,
4 December 1970.

2699 (XXV). Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16 July
1969 to 15 June 1970.11
1927th plenary meeting,
12 December 1970.

2708 (XXV). Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Inde-pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
m its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolutions 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969 and
10 International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report
of the Board of Governors to the General Conference, 1 July
1969-30 June 1970 (Vienna, July 1970) and supplementary
report; transmitted to the Members of the General Assembly
by notes of the Secretary-General (A/8034 and A/8034/
Add.1).
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/8002).

1

2554 (XXIV) and 2555 (XXIV) of 12 December
1969,
Noting with grave concern that ten years after the
adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still
under colonial domination and racist regimes,
Deploring the continued refusal of the colonial
Powers, especially Portugal and South Africa, to
implement the Declaration and other relevant resolutions on the question of decolonization, particularly
those relating to the Territories under Portuguese
domination, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia,
Reiterating its conviction that the continuation of
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations-including racism, apartheid and activities of foreign economic
and other interests which exploit colonial peoplesand the attempts of some colonial Powers to suppress
national liberation movements by repressive activities
against colonial peoples are incompatible with the
Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and pose a threat to international peace and
security,
Strongly deploring the attitude of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, continue to
co-operate with the Governments of Portugal and South
Africa and with the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 1514 (XV) and all its
other resolutions on the question of decolonization;
2. Notes with satisfaction the work accomplished
by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee for its efforts to secure the complete and effective
implementation of the Declaration;
3. Approves the report of the Special Committee
covering its work durmg 1970,12 including the programme of work envisaged for 1971;
4. Urges all States, in particular the administering
Powers, and the specialized a~encies and other organizations within the United Nations system to give effect
to the recommendations contained in the report of the
Special Committee for the speedy implementation of
the Declaration and the relevant United Nations resolutions;
5. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the colonial peoples and peoples under
alien domination to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence by all the necessary
means at their disposal and notes with satisfaction the
progress made in the colonial Territories by the national
liberation movements, both through their struggle and
through reconstruction programmes;
6. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
to provide, in consultation, as appropriate, with the
Organization of African Unity, moral and material
assistance to national liberation movements in the
colonial Territories;
12 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.1).
