A/62/PV.122

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

122nd plenary meeting
Monday, 15 September 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly
(A/62/952)
Draft resolution (A/62/952, para. 46)
The President: With regard to the report of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
General Assembly, I would like to inform members that
the annex to the report, in English only, is available in
the General Assembly Hall and will be issued in all
official languages at a later stage, as agreed.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 46 of the report of
the Ad Hoc Working Group.
Before giving the floor to speakers wishing to
speak in explanation of vote before the vote, I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
As I see no requests for the floor, the Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution entitled
“Revitalization of the General Assembly”, which is
contained in paragraph 46 of the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the General
Assembly. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt the draft resolution?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/276).
The President: I should like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Eladio Loizaga of
Paraguay and Ambassador Andrzej Towpik of Poland,
the two Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group, who
have so ably conducted the Group’s discussions and
complex negotiations. I am sure the members of the
Assembly join me in extending to them our sincere
appreciation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14
Prevention of armed conflict
The President: Members will recall that, at its
3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2007, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-second session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer the consideration of this item to the sixty-third
session. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer the consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-third session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 14.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-50581 (E)

*0850581*

A/62/PV.122

Agenda items 15 and 22 to 28

Agenda item 124

The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development

Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
and internal oversight of the Independent Inquiry
Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food
Programme

Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
Declaration of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity on
the aerial and naval military attack against the
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the
present United States Administration in April 1986
The President: Members will recall that, at its
3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2007, the
Assembly decided to include item 15 in the agenda of
the sixty-second session, in accordance with its decision
60/508, of 31 October 2005. Members will further recall
that, at the same plenary meeting of 21 September 2007,
the Assembly decided to include items 22 to 28 in the
agenda of the sixty-second session, in accordance with
paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to its resolution 58/316, of
1 July 2004. In resolution 58/316, of 1 July 2004, and
decision 60/508, of 31 October 2005, the Assembly
decided that those items shall remain on the agenda for
consideration upon notification by a Member State.
Accordingly, those items have been included in the
draft agenda of the sixty-third session.
The Assembly has thus concluded
consideration of agenda items 15 and 22 to 28.

2

its

The President: Members will recall that, at its
3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2007, the
General Assembly decided to include this item in the
agenda of the sixty-second session.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica would like to request that we retain this
item in the agenda of the General Assembly. The report
of the Independent Inquiry Committee made a series of
recommendations that we believe continue to be
relevant. The Assembly may be able to take action on
those recommendations in the future. Along those
lines, we would like to repeat our request to retain this
item on the agenda.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to defer consideration of this
item and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixtythird session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 124.
Agenda item 145
Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
The President: Members will recall that, at its
3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2007, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-second session. It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item
to the sixty-third session of the General Assembly. May
I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
defer consideration of this item and to include it in the
draft agenda of its sixty-third session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 145.

08-50581

A/62/PV.122

Agenda item 116 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolutions (A/62/L.51 and A/62/L.52)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/62/L.51 and A/62/L.52. Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote
before the vote, may I remind speakers that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Amorós Núñez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
With regard to the draft resolution that we are about to
adopt, the delegation of Cuba, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77, and
specifically their Joint Coordinating Committee, would
like to reiterate that the preference of the Group
throughout the process of discussions on this issue has
been to maintain the integrity of that process. We
would also like to stress that we would prefer that,
when a decision is taken, we adopt a single decision in
the process. We know, of course, that mention is made
in the draft resolution of voting on those issues, but we
would like to reaffirm that it is of primary importance
for the Committee that this issue be very clear.
With regard to the topic mentioned in the last
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution, the Group
would also like to stress its hope that a discussion will
take place once the relevant assessment of the
implementation of those programmes has been made.
Only such an assessment will make it possible for an
intergovernmental evaluation of the “Delivering as
one” pilot programmes for a unified presence on the
ground to be carried out.
We would also like to acknowledge the work
carried out by the Co-Chairmen of the process, the
representatives of Tanzania and Ireland, and their
efforts in the consultation process.
But above all, we would like to stress the issues
we just highlighted: the integrity of the process, the
need for a single decision to be taken when the time
comes to decide on this subject, and the importance of
completing the assessment I mentioned previously so
that a proper intergovernmental evaluation of the pilot
programmes can be carried out.
The President: The Assembly will first take
action on draft resolution A/62/L.51, entitled “System-

08-50581

wide coherence”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/62/L.51?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/277).
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/62/L.52, entitled “Mandate
review”. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt draft resolution A/62/L.52?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/278).
The President: I call on those representatives
who wish to make statements of position on the
resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Cumberbatch Miguén (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Before we conclude our consideration of this
item on the agenda, I would like to record the position
of Cuba on this subject in a general statement.
My delegation applauds the conclusion of a
process that should never have begun, since, as we
have stated more than once, it was flawed from the
outset. As a matter of fact, the initial report of the
Secretary-General on this matter was simply discarded
as a basis for the consultations that began in early
2006. The format of the mandate review that is
concluding today was the result of an attempt by a
group of delegations to undermine the democratic
nature of the United Nations, not of a genuine interest
in reforming its structure so that the Organization can
respond, at each historic point, to the problems that our
societies face. The last stage of the negotiating process
made that clear.
The initial rhetoric, at the conclusion of the 2005
World Summit, stressed the need to consider the way in
which the intergovernmentally agreed guidelines were
being implemented. However, it later became an
obvious exercise to try and prevent Member States
from presenting initiatives, according to their rights
under the Charter of the United Nations and the rules
of procedure of the intergovernmental organs of the
system, while the self-granted prerogatives of the
powerful would not be questioned under any
circumstances.
The most worrisome aspect of this is that there
are subsidiary bodies of the Assembly with a clear
mandate to review the status of the implementation of
intergovernmental decisions and their enforcement by

3

A/62/PV.122

the Secretariat and to make recommendations in that
regard to the States Members of the Organization.
Cuba is convinced that the United Nations, like
any other institution, must constantly improve its
functioning. But it will never accept that, in that guise,
there should be attempts to silence the concerns of
developing countries and to suppress the democratic
nature of the decision-making process on the various
items on the Organization’s agenda. Our delegation
will continue to closely watch for any future effort to
distort the principles and purposes that guide the work
of the United Nations.
Mr. Cooper (United States of America): Our
delegation would like to make a statement and to offer
extended remarks on agenda item 116 and resolution
62/278.
My delegation is very grateful for the diligent
efforts and the 8 August 2008 report of the Co-Chairs
for the informal plenary on mandate review. We
supported the Co-Chairs’ conclusion that, given the
obstacles identified, it was not worthwhile to continue
the mandate review process in which we engaged
during the recent sessions of the General Assembly.
However, in doing so, we must acknowledge our
failure to accomplish the goal of the 2005 World
Summit of substantively reviewing the 9,000 or so
mandates of the Organization to weed out obsolete and
redundant mandates.
It is inevitable that, over the years, an organization
of this size will accumulate such mandates, and it is our
fiduciary responsibility to identify and weed out such
mandates. Unfortunately, we have been unable to fulfil
those responsibilities in the manner our leaders
anticipated. We welcome resolution 62/278, which
notes the Co-Chairs’ report’s findings and recognizes
the usefulness and need of the online mandate registry.
The United States welcomes paragraph 4 of
resolution 62/278, which provides an opportunity for
the General Assembly to consider alternative, more
limited or even more forward-looking ways to review
mandates. Such alternatives could include a review
focused on the mandate-generation cycle. Member
States will recall that the Secretary-General identified
such a possible approach in his report launching the
comprehensive review of mandates.
Having concluded that we cannot conduct the
comprehensive review of mandates originally

4

contemplated in the 2005 World Summit, the United
States looks forward to taking up the opportunity to
consider more limited and focused alternatives in the
first resumed meeting of the sixty-third session of the
General Assembly.
The President: Before proceeding further, I wish
to inform members that negotiations on the report of
the Open-Ended Working Group on Security Council
Reform are still taking place.
I should like, therefore, to propose to the
Assembly that it suspend this meeting until after the
conclusion of the negotiations of the Working Group.
The Assembly will take up the remaining items at the
resumption of the meeting.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to suspend the meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: I would like now to inform
members that following the suspension of this plenary
meeting, the Open-Ended Working Group on Security
Council Reform will convene in Conference Room 2 at
11 a.m.
The meeting was suspended at 10.25 a.m. and
resumed at 7.10 p.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and
related matters
Report of the Open-ended Working Group on
the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security
Council and Other Matters related to the
Security Council (A/62/47)
Draft decision (A/62/47, para. 23)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a joint debate on agenda items
9 and 122 at its 47th to 51st plenary meetings, on 12,
13 and 14 November 2007. In that connection, the
Assembly has before it a draft decision contained in
paragraph 23 of the report of the Open-ended Working
Group. For the time being, the draft decision is
contained in document A/AC.247/2008/L.1/Rev.2.
Bearing in mind the proceedings of the Openended Working Group, of which I am Chairman, I have

08-50581

A/62/PV.122

decided, as President of the General Assembly, to
reassume ownership of the document submitted to
members, which has been discussed and on which I
would like there to be a consensus among the States
members of the Assembly. In that regard, I shall read
out the following amendments to paragraph 23, under
part IV, entitled “Recommendations”.
In subparagraph (c), the words “and negotiables”,
after the word “modalities”, are deleted and replaced
with the words “in order to prepare and facilitate”
before the words “intergovernmental negotiations on
the question of equitable representation and increase in
the membership of the Security Council”, followed by
the following added sentence:
“The Chairman of the Open-ended Working Group
will present the results of these consultations to an
informal plenary session of the General Assembly
no later than 1 February 2009.”
In the first sentence of subparagraph (d), after the
words “also decides”, the words “taking into
consideration the results achieved so far in the Openended Working Group” are added. Later on in the same
subparagraph, after the words “not later than”, the words
“March 2009” are replaced with the words “28 February
2009”, as there will be no 29 February in 2009. At the end
of the subparagraph, the words “by the membership” are
replaced with the words “by Member States”. In
subparagraph (f), after the words “Open-ended Working
Group”, the words “to that end” are deleted.
Paragraph 22 will be revised to reflect the actual
dates of the proceedings and will read as follows: “At
its 13th meeting, on 15 September 2008, the Working
Group considered and adopted the present report.”
Paragraph 21 will also be revised to reflect the
actual dates of the proceedings, as follows: after the
words “At its 9th and 10th meetings, on 10 September
2008”, the words “as well as its 11th meeting, on
12 September, and 12th meeting, on 15 September 2008”
will be inserted before the words “the Working Group”.
As I stated earlier, I call on Member States to
adopt the draft decision by consensus.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft
decision contained in paragraph 23 of the report of the
Open-ended Working Group, as orally amended.
Before giving the floor to the representative of
Costa Rica to speak in explanation of position before

08-50581

action is taken on the draft decision, may I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Ballestero (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation has taken the floor to thank you,
Mr. President, the Working Group and all those directly
involved for their efforts to reach this agreement. Costa
Rica is prepared to follow your recommendation and to
adopt the agreement by consensus. However, I should like
to clarify three points.
First, my delegation understands that the Working
Group reached an agreement that did not previously exist
and that, as you clearly indicated in your initial
comments, it did so under your chairmanship. As you
have reassumed ownership of the draft decision and there
is no opposition to it in principle, it is a recommendation
that we, as a Working Group, are making to the Assembly.
Secondly, in the understanding that there is no
opposition on the part of any member of the Openended Working Group, Costa Rica is prepared to accept
the Group’s recommendation so long as it is clearly
established that there is a need for an agreement that
will ensure the broadest possible political agreement,
and that such an agreement will certainly be reached
through negotiations.
Thirdly, my delegation regrets in particular the
flexibility with which we dealt with the rules of procedure
on this occasion. We are especially concerned at the
precedent that we could be establishing with regard to
non-voting in working groups, which could cause
problems in the way all our working groups operate.
Finally, I wish to express once again my gratitude
to you, Sir, and all those who participated for their
efforts. I hope that, in the future, we can arrive at
agreements without having to be so creative in
applying the rules of procedure.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on the draft decision contained in paragraph 23
of the report of the Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation and Increase in
the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters related to the Security Council, as orally
amended. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt the draft decision, as orally amended?
The draft decision, as orally amended, was adopted.

5

A/62/PV.122

The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the decision just adopted.

where we are. I also wish to pay tribute to the more
than 60 delegations that were very quick and willing to
sign up in support of your report.

Mr. Takasu (Japan): The purpose of my
intervention is to express, on behalf of many of my
colleagues, our deepest appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for the leadership that you have
demonstrated throughout the sixty-second session of
the General Assembly in facilitating the process of
Security Council reform so as to move it forward.

I think today is a wonderful day for the United
Nations because we have all come together in a
commitment to go forward with intergovernmental
negotiations in February 2009. We could not have
arrived at this point without your help, Mr. President,
and I am sure that as you finish your assignment, you
can look back and watch on television and see that we
will still be fighting like we are fighting now, but at
least it will be for a common goal.

Particularly in the last couple of weeks, your
tireless efforts and extreme patience in listening to all
kinds of positions have made it possible to adopt a very
important decision by consensus. At the same time, I
would like to pay tribute to the members of the task
force — the Permanent Representatives of Bangladesh,
Chile, Djibouti and Portugal — for their able assistance
to you and your team.
All of us have joined the very important decision
to launch intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform early next year. It is clear that all of us
demonstrated extraordinary flexibility in coming to
that consensus agreement to start intergovernmental
negotiations comprising the positions of various
countries. In my opinion, it will be an important or
even historic decision to move the process of reform
from consultation to real, meaningful negotiations.
In order to make it possible, all of us have made
some compromise. There is no point in discussing who
received more and who received less. All of us are
winners because our realization of Security Council
reform to reflect the political reality of the world is in
the interests of all.
I would appeal to all delegations, despite all the
give and take of the past couple of days, to implement
the decision very deliberately and in good faith, and to
engage actively and constructively in the forthcoming
consideration of the matter in the Open-ended Working
Group and in the intergovernmental negotiations in the
plenary session.
Mr. President, your personal contribution in
launching intergovernmental negotiations after so
many years will be remembered in the annals of the
United Nations.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, I rise
to pay tribute to you and your facilitators for having
guided us in the very difficult task of leading us to

6

The President: I should now like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Ismat Jahan of
Bangladesh, Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz of Chile,
Ambassador João Manuel Guerra Salgueiro of Portugal
and Ambassador Roble Olhaye of Djibouti, who
conducted, on my behalf, the discussions and complex
negotiations of the Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase
in the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters related to the Security Council. I am sure that
members of the Assembly join me in extending to them
our sincere appreciation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 122?
It was so decided.
Agenda items remaining for consideration during the
sixty-second session of the General Assembly
The President: I should like to remind
delegations that the following agenda items on which
action has been taken at previous meetings have
remained open for consideration during the sixtysecond session of the General Assembly: items 10, 11,
16 to 18, 20, 43, 48, 53 (a), 54 (d), 57 (b), 86, 108 to
110, 113 (a) and (c), 115, 117, 123, 125 to 144, 146 to
156, 161 and 164.
As Members are aware, those items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the sixty-third
session of the General Assembly with the exception of
agenda item 11, entitled “Elimination of unilateral
extraterritorial coercive economic measures as a means
of political and economic compulsion”; agenda item
117, entitled “United Nations reform: measures and
proposals”; agenda item 127, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 2006-2007”; and agenda item

08-50581

A/62/PV.122

146, entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of those items
at the present session?
It was so decided.
Statement by the President
The President: As we are approaching the end of
the sixty-second session of the General Assembly,
allow me to make a few remarks.
At the beginning of the sixty-second session, I
asked members to consider the wise words of George
Bernard Shaw when he said that he did not believe in
circumstances: “The people who get on in this world
are the people who get up and look for the
circumstances they want, and, if they can’t find them,
make them” (Mrs. Warren’s Profession, Act II).
In order to create the right circumstances, I laid
out a framework of priorities for the session that all
Member States could own and drive forward —
including such issues as climate change, financing for
development, the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs),
countering
terrorism
and
renewing
management and effectiveness in reforming the
Organization. To allow the Assembly to deliver on
those worthy goals, I encouraged an atmosphere in
which we all had responsibilities to seek out and build
compromises through open and transparent working
practices and greater cooperation and by respecting the
dignity of all Member States. To energize substantive
discussions, I called on the Assembly to be more engaged,
insightful and dialogue-oriented. As new priorities
emerged, such as the food crisis, I challenged the
Assembly to demonstrate the flexibility and leadership
necessary to forge a global consensus for action.
Now, at the end of the session, can we say that we
have created the circumstances for progress and a more
vital, dynamic and influential Assembly that reaches
out and delivers results in the interests of all? Have we
silenced our critics by demonstrating that the United
Nations is able to rise to the challenges of the twentyfirst century and that it can empower individuals and
communities to take charge of their own destinies? Are
we moving in the right direction so that, together, we
can chart the course that the Organization must take for
a new culture of international relations to flourish?

08-50581

The year 2008 has emphasized that a divided
approach to international relations and the interdependent
challenges we face is not in the interest of the global
public we serve. It has been a year of controversies,
conflict, climate change and crises, man-made and
natural alike. Sovereignty and territorial integrity have
come under threat. Although we have taken tentative
steps to define our responsibility to protect and the
nature of legitimate humanitarian interventions, the
role of the United Nations remains unclear. There
remains serious work to be done on those issues, and
on human security, during the next session.
The financial system has been tested and found
wanting. A global downturn could yet undermine the
economic progress achieved over the past decade. Food
and energy prices rose to record highs, putting fragile
progress on the Millennium Development Goals under
exorbitant pressure. The reform of the global financial
architecture has been slow and overtaken by economic
events. Rather than dealing with the five priorities and
those emerging issues in an introspective way, I
challenged the General Assembly to use its influence
and voice to strengthen the capacity of the United
Nations to respond.
On climate change it did so with vigour. We held
three important debates to promote new partnerships
and the role of the private sector and to highlight the
special needs of the most vulnerable. The Assembly
sent a strong political message that it was time for
action. That provided the impulse necessary for success
in Bali. The Assembly also provided the political
backing necessary to create greater coherence in the
United Nations system’s response to climate change.
Those were among our greatest achievements.
The sixty-second session of the General
Assembly has had a strong focus on development.
Throughout the gruelling preparatory process in the
run-up to the Financing for Development Review
Conference in Doha, which began with the high-level
dialogue, Member States and the broader set of
stakeholders worked collaboratively on detail and
substance. The Assembly has set the stage for a new
deal to emerge. We now need leaders willing to take
the same bold decisions as were taken at Monterrey,
not just by keeping their promises but also by rising to
new challenges and the difficult economic outlook we
all face. The stakes could not be higher. Financing for
development
and
achieving
the
Millennium
Development Goals on time will lift 500 million people

7

A/62/PV.122

out of poverty, 300 million more people will be
adequately fed and 30 million young children’s lives
will have been saved.
Yet, as we all agreed during one of the highlights of
the session at the thematic debate on the MDGs midway
between the adoption of the Goals and the 2015 deadline
to achieve them, it is clear that the pace is too slow. We
must now use the opportunities ahead — at the highlevel event on 22 September on Africa’s development
needs and on 25 September on the Millennium
Development Goals — to accelerate progress.
Halting climate change, boosting financing for
development
and
achieving
the
Millennium
Development Goals have been and should remain our
top priorities. The nexus between those core issues is
fundamental to realizing our goal of long-term
economic and environmental sustainability. The
concept of sustainable development is the mantra that
should be embedded in our strategic approach to Doha,
as should the reshaping of the international financial
system’s institutions so that they are fit for the twentyfirst century.
A fairer and more equitable world with
opportunity for all will also be a safer, more stable and
secure world. That is why I would also like to
commend Member States for adopting by consensus a
resolution to review the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. That was a
huge achievement that sent a strong message that we
stand united against that scourge. In addition, members
participated in symposiums, strengthened the Task
Force, shared best practices and worked closely with
each other and the United Nations system to increase
our collective capability to counter terrorism. That was
just one aspect of our broader efforts to renew the
management and effectiveness of the Organization.
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon acknowledged
at the beginning of the session, the United Nations needs
a change in the international climate. It needs “to faster,
more flexible and more mobile” (A/62/PV.4, p. 2). To
some extent, our discussions on system-wide coherence
have realized that at the country level. We must now do
more at Headquarters, in particular on the issues of
governance, funding and gender. The resolution
adopted today set the way forward to make further
substantive progress during the sixty-third session.
We made important progress on management
reform. Building on the four nations’ initiative, we

8

used the thematic debate to raise its profile. More
important, it enabled, for the first time, an open,
transparent and strategic dialogue on what needs to be
done to allow the United Nations to become more
effective. It is now up to members to ensure that the
proposals made bear fruit.
Based on lessons learned during the review of the
two clusters of mandates — humanitarian assistance and
the development of Africa — today the Assembly adopted
a resolution on mandate review that lays the ground for a
broader debate on the relationship between mandates,
resources and measurable outcomes.
On the issue of Security Council reform, despite
tremendous difficulties, we managed to reach consensus.
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to all
Member States for the flexibility they showed throughout
the consultations until the very last second. I would like
to encourage them, at the next session, to begin preparing
for and commencing intergovernmental negotiations in
a spirit of common purpose and mutual respect.
How well the Assembly performs depends upon
Member States. We can only live up to our mandate if,
together, we continually strive to address contemporary
issues and emerging trends. That is the best way to
bolster the authority and international standing of the
Assembly. In that respect, we have made serious,
substantive and sustained progress on the five
priorities. There were also many positive practical
steps taken away from business as usual that I hope
will be carried on in future sessions.
Members assumed the mantle of responsibility to
become the driving force behind the Assembly. That
was evident in the manner in which elections to the
Security Council were conducted during the sixtysecond session and in the way Kyrgyzstan bravely
convinced the membership to adopt a resolution on
social justice.
Every Member State deserves equal treatment,
and for the first time Israel was able to bring about
consensus and contribute its technical expertise so that
a resolution on agriculture and development could be
adopted. Moreover, whether on civil and political rights,
the death penalty or climate change, the Assembly’s
resolutions demonstrated a more responsive approach
attuned to contemporary events.
The General Assembly also seized upon emerging
political developments. Members threw their support

08-50581

A/62/PV.122

behind the Annapolis initiative to better enable the
international community to fulfil the long-standing
obligation to establish a State of Palestine. Even
through difficult, lengthy — but worthwhile — budget
negotiations, they put all their differences behind them
to insist that the Secretariat demonstrate more
efficiency and effectiveness with their taxpayers’
contributions. We used panel discussions and thematic
debates to shift away from a series of monologues
towards interactive dialogue, innovative partnerships
and greater outreach. We focused on real and topical
issues with greater inclusion. On many occasions during
this session, over 100 member States took the floor.
Our work has been characterized by a broadbased, multi-stakeholder approach to contemporary
challenges. I have held regular briefings with civil
society and non-governmental organizations to keep
them involved and to gather their feedback. I visited
countries in every regional group to raise the
Assembly’s profile and connect with issues, views and
the United Nations system on the ground. I am
extremely grateful for all the kind invitations and
hospitality I received, including the very valuable
suggestions I heard there from the leaders of the
respective countries.
Throughout the session, I regularly met with the
President of the Security Council and the President of
the Economic and Social Council to ensure a more
joint approach to our collective work, particularly on
the Peacebuilding Commission. There was more
consultation with Member States, and our frequent
dialogue with the Secretary-General on topical political
issues, such as Myanmar or the food crisis, exemplified
our enhanced cooperation. All those strengths indicate
that the General Assembly is performing and that it is
more responsive and more action-oriented. The concept
of a General Assembly revitalization — to revitalize it,
to give it new life — is therefore malapropos. The
Assembly is certainly alive and kicking, as I can attest.
We are living up to the challenges of strengthening the
United Nations system. That is the main task of the
General Assembly.
Those are just some of the many important
examples of success that we achieved by raising issues
of real concern in an informal context and reaching out
beyond our traditional partners to civil society,
parliamentarians, academics and the private sector.
When Sir Richard Branson, Ted Turner or Mayor
Bloomberg address the General Assembly, whether on

08-50581

climate change or on the Millennium Development
Goals, we know we are attracting the right kind of
political attention on the issues that matter globally.
We broke new ground on human security,
building on the 2005 World Summit. Moreover, we
shed light on the deplorable phenomenon of human
trafficking and set out a vision on concerted global
action based on detailed specifics. The attendance of
presidents and prime ministers drew special attention
to the global HIV/AIDS pandemic and the rights of the
child. Committed celebrities — such as George Clooney,
Daryl Hannah, Ashley Judd and Angelina Jolie, to name
but a few — also helped to raise the profile of
important issues through the additional media exposure
they provided.
Moreover, we drew on the universal convening
power of the United Nations to strengthen dialogue and
promote interreligious and intercultural understanding
in cooperation for peace. Interfaith dialogue is a
critical instrument for disarming intolerance and
preventing conflict. During one of the most memorable
highlights of the sixty-second session, His Holiness
Pope Benedict XVI endorsed those principles as the
very foundation of human well-being when he
addressed the Assembly.
I believe that those achievements speak for
themselves. It is now for others to judge whether the
work of the General Assembly has become more
compelling and more relevant. Certainly, I have
witnessed a shift, an evolution in our collective
mindset, that can serve as the beginning of a move
towards a new culture of international relations — a
culture that originates in the founding values of this
Organization, of freedom, solidarity, equality, respect,
tolerance and shared responsibility. In today’s
uncertain world, those values are ever more relevant to
the global public we serve. They find real meaning
when they are embodied in the principles of human
security, respect for human rights, the responsibility to
protect and sustainable development.
As we close this session, I would like to
particularly thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his commitment to and support for the Assembly, and
especially in his leadership on climate change, the
MDGs and the overall reform agenda. Over the past 12
months of working together, I have also come to
admire his personal qualities and work ethic. During
this session, we have also demonstrated that when the

9

A/62/PV.122

General Assembly provides the strategic political
direction and the Secretary-General marshals the full
weight of the United Nations system, we can deliver
more than the sum of our parts.

It has been a great honour for me to serve the
Assembly throughout this session. I thank all members
from the bottom of my heart for their dedication and
support this year.

I would also like to extend my sincerest
appreciation to all the Vice-Presidents of the General
Assembly at the sixty-second session, and to thank the
chairpersons and the Bureaus of the Main Committees
for all their hard work. I would also highlight the
dedication
and
professionalism
of
all
the
representatives who have chaired, co-chaired or
facilitated important consultation processes.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Philippines.

Allow me to also take this opportunity to express
my long-lasting appreciation and sincere thanks to each
member of my team. We are a microcosm of the
diversity and professionalism of the United Nations.
I would also like to thank the many representatives
of civil society and the non-governmental organization
community, who are such great advocates for a
stronger United Nations and who continually challenge
us to do more.
Allow me to also express my appreciation to all
the Secretariat staff and the wider United Nations
family.
Finally, I would also like to extend a very warm
welcome to my successor as President, Mr. Miguel
d’Escoto Brockmann.
Before closing, allow me to make three more
short remarks. This has been a truly inspiring and
momentous year. Going forward, we must not wait for
inspiration to make further progress. Action always
generates inspiration; inspiration seldom generates
action. The issues confronting us are global and require
global action. The challenge is whether we have the
collective will to work together for the greater good.
If there is a lesson we can take from the sixtysecond session, it is that we need more effective
multilateralism — more of the United Nations and not
less of the United Nations. However, for the United
Nations to rise to the challenges ahead, serious, allencompassing institutional reform is both necessary
and overdue. The responsibility rests with Members as
to whether or not the United Nations can live up to the
high expectations and noble values it was founded
upon. This Organization can only be as effective as the
Member States wish it to be, for they are the masters of
the circumstances I mentioned in the very beginning.

10

Mr. Davide (Philippines): I take the floor to
remark on a personal and collective privilege. In his
acceptance speech upon his election as President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-second session on
24 May 2007, Mr. Srgjan Kerim pledged his
conscience, his compassion and his capabilities and
gave us a glimpse of the outline of his programme of
action for the sixty-second session.
At the opening of the sixty-second session of the
Assembly on 18 September 2007 he started by saying,
“You have asked me to show leadership, and I will do
it” (A/62/PV.1, p. 1). He continued by giving us the
five priority issues that he, in consultation with the
membership, had identified for the sixty-second
session. He ended by calling for the wholehearted
support of Member States in creating the circumstances
we need as we chart the course the United Nations
must take to build bridges towards a better future.
All of us were witnesses to the sacrifices made by
the President. He acted with utmost competence,
diligence, patience, dedication and loyalty to the
United Nations, and with vision, values and ideals.
There can be no doubt at all that, despite all the
difficulties, some of which would have been
insurmountable, and all the challenges, some of which
were daunting, that the sixty-second session faced,
especially in the last few hours of the session, reflected
in today’s meeting of the Open-Ended Working Group
on Security Council Reform, President Kerim, with his
pledged conscience, compassion and capabilities,
succeeded in steering the work of the sixty-second
session to its successful conclusion. He gave his all and
worked with a passion for excellence. He has left a
legacy that the history of the United Nations will
record in gold. He deserves our unanimous
congratulations as today he ends his brief tenure of one
session of the General Assembly.
Truly, the President can now say with confidence,
as Paul wrote to Timothy of the New Testament: “I
have competed well; I have finished the race; I have
kept the faith. From now on the crown of righteousness
awaits me” (The Holy Bible, 2 Timothy 4: 7-8).

08-50581

A/62/PV.122

Congratulations once again, and thank you for
everything, Mr. President. You deserve a standing
ovation from all of us.
Agenda item 2 (continued)
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: May I invite representatives to
stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or
meditation.

Closure of the sixty-second session
The President: Before proceeding further, I
would like to invite to the podium the President-elect
for the sixty-third session of the General Assembly, His
Excellency Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann, so that I may
hand over the gavel to him.
I declare closed the sixty-second session of the
General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 7.55 p.m.

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.

08-50581

11
