ITEMS RELATING TO THE SITUATION IN SOMALIA
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Somalia and expresses its concern with the
situation prevailing in that country;

Letter dated 20 January 1992 from the Chargé
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Somalia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Securlty Council

2. Requests the Secretary-General immediately to
undertake the necessary actions to increase humanitarian
assistance by the United Nations and its specialized agencies to
the affected population in ail parts of Somalia in liaison with
the other international humanitarian organizations and to this
end to appoint a c<X>rdinator to oversee the effective delivery
of this assistance;

Decision
At its 3039th meeting, on 23 J anuary 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Somalia to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "Letter dated
20 January 1992 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission ofSomalia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/23445)". 3

3. Afso requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in C<X>peration with the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity and the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, immediately to contact ail parties
involved in the conflict, to seek their commitment to the
cessation of hostilities in order to permit the humanitarian
assistance to be distributed, to promote a cease-fire and
compliance therewith, and to assist in the process of a political
settlement of the conflict in Somalia;

Resolution 733 (1992)
or 23 Januacy 1992
The Serurity Council,

4. Strongly urges al! parties to the conflict immediately to
cease hostilities and agree to a cease-fire and to promote the
process ofreconciliation and ofpolitical settlement in Somalia;

Considering the request by Somalia for the Security Council
to consider the situation in Somalia, 174
Having heard the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia and commending the initiative taken by
him in the humanitarian field,

5. Decides, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, that al! States shall, for the purposes of
establishing peace and stability in Somalia, immediately
implement a general and complete embargo on ail deliveries of
weapons and military equipment to Somalia until the Council
decides otherwise;

Gravely alarmed at the rapid deterioration of the situation
in Somalia and the heavy loss of human life and widespread
material damage resulting from the conflict in the country and
aware of its consequences on stability and peace in the region,

6. Calfs on ail States to refrain from any action which
might contribute to increasing tension and to impeding or
delaying a peaceful and negotiated outcome to the conflict in
Somalia, which would permit ail Somalis to decide upon and to
construct their future in peace;

Concemed that the continuation of this situation constitutes, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General, a threat
to international peace and security,
Recalling its primary responsibil ity under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security,

7. Calfs upon ail parties to c<X>perate with the SecretaryGeneral to this end and to facilitate the delivery by the United
Nations, its specialized agencies and other humanitarian
organizations of humanitarian assistance to ail those in need of
it, under the supervision of the c<X>rdinator;

Recalling afso the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter,

8. Urges all parties to take ail the necessary measures to
ensure the safety of personnel sent to provide humanitarian
assistance, to assist them in their tasks and to ensure full
respect for the rules and principles of international law
regarding the protection of civilian populations;

Expressing its appreciation to the international and regional
organizations that have provided assistance to the populations
affected by the conflict and deploring that personnel of these
organizations have lost their lives in the exercise of their
humanitarian tasks.

9. Calfs upon ail States and international organizations
to contribute to the efforts of humanitarian assistance to the
population in Somalia;

Taking note of the appeals addressed to the parties by the
Chairman of the Organization of the Islamic Conference on 16
December 1991, the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity on 18 December 1991 175 and the League of Arab
States on 5 January 1992,176

10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council as soon as possible on this matter;

55

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representative of Morocco, l&J to extend an
invitation to Mr. Engin Ansay, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United Nations,
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.

11. Decides to remain seized of the matter until a peaceful
solution is achieved.
Adopted unanimously at the 3039th
meeting.

Decisions

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representative of Morocco, 181 to extend an
invitation to Mr. Abou! Nasr, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States to the United Nations, under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

In a letter dated 3 Februacy 1992,177 addressed to the
President of the Security Council, for the attention of the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General enclosed a
letter dated 31 January 1992178 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission ofGermany to the United Nations
transmitting the text of a letter from the Federal Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Gennany addressed to the SecretacyGeneral, and requesting that that letter be brought to the
attention of the members of the Council. The letter referred to
the great danger which the mining of the entire territory of
northem Somalia constituted for the civilian population, and
stated that the German non-govemmental organization
Komitee Kap Anamur had asked the German Govemment to
support a mine-clearing programme which was already being
implemented by Komitee Kap Anamur. In particular, the
Committee had asked for the provision of two demilitarized
mine-clearing tanks. The German Govemment was ready to
grant that request and assumed that that humanitarian measure
did not conflict with the provisions of Council resolution 733
(1992).

Resolution 746 (1992)

or 17 Mardi 1992
The Security Council,
Considering the request by Somalia for the Security Council
to consider the situation in Somalia, 174
Reaffinning its resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January 1992,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
11 March 1992182 on the situation in Somalia,
Taking note of the signing at Mogadishu on 3 March 1992
of the cease-fire agreements, 183 including agreements for the
implementation of measures aimed at stabilizing the cease-fire
through a United Nations monitoring mission,

In a letter dated 5 Februaty 1992,179 the President of the
Security Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

Deeply regretting that the factions have not yet abided by
their commitment to implement the cease-fire and thus have
still not permitted the unimpeded provision and distribution of
humanitarian assistance to the people in need in Somalia,

"I have the honour to infonn you that your letter
dated 3 February 1992177 transmitting a communication
from the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany
bas been brought to the attention of the members of the
Council. They have taken note of the intention of the
German Govemment and have no objection thereto."

Deeply disturbed by the magnitude of the human suffering
caused by the conflict and concerned that the continuation of
the situation in Somalia constitutes a threat to international
peace and security,

The situation in Somalia

Bearing in mind that the factors described in paragraph 76
of the Secretary-General's report must be taken into account,

Decisions

Cognizant of the importance of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in the context of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,

At its 3060th meeting, on 17 March 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Italy, Kenya, Nigeria
and Somalia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
the item entitled:

Underlining the importance which it attaches to the
international, regional and non-govemmental organizations,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross,
continuing to provide humanitarian and other relief assistance
to the people of Somalia under difficult circumstances,

"The situation in Somalia:
(a) "l.etter dated 20 J anuary 1992 from the Chargé
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Somalia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/23445); 3

Expressing its appreciation to the regional organizations,
including the Organization of African Unity, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
for their cooperation with the United Nations in the effort to
resolve the Somali problem,

(b) "Report of the Secretary-General (S/23693 and
Corr.1)". 3

56
