V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

should advise, on request, the Secretary-General of
the Conference and the Preparatory Committee on
matters pertaining to the Conference and should assist
and collaborate, at the request of the Secretary-General
of the Conference, in the preparations for the Conference at the regional level;
13. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to seek the co-operation of intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council which may be in a position to contribute constructively to the preparation of the Conference;
14. Invites Governments to participate fully in
the preparations for the Conference, taking into account the provisions of Economic and Social Council
resolutions 2028 (LXI) and 2035 (LXI);
15. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to submit a report to the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session, through the Economic and
Social Council, on the implementation of the present
resolution.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/185.

United Nations Water Conference124

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3513 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and its decision 31/422 A of 21 December 1976 relating to the arrangements for the United
Nations Water Conference,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982 (LX) of 19 April 1976 and 1983 (LX)
of 23 April 1976,
Takes note with appreciation of the statement made
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Water
Conference 125 and of the report regarding the preparatory work for the Conference. 126
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/186.

Permanent sovereignty over national re•
sources in the o<·cupied Arah territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3336 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974 entitled "Permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Arab territories",
Recalling further its resolution 3516 (XXX) of 15
December 1975 on the same subject, in which it was
noted that the report of the Secretary-General on the
adverse economic effects on the Arab States and peoples resulting from repeated Israeli aggression and continued occupation of their territories 127 was inadequate
in that it did not incorporate the necessary substantive
and comprehensive studies required in conformity with
paragraph 5 of resolution 3336 (XXIX), the related
statements made at the twenty-ninth session of the
General Assembly on behalf of the co-sponsors of the
1 24 See also sect. X.B.3 below, decision 31/422 A.
1 25 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first

Session, Second Committee, 61st meeting, paras. 1-8.
1 26 A/31 /356.
121 A/10290 and Add.2.

87

resolution 128 and submitted by the Secretary-General
on the administrative and financial implications, 129 as
well as the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 130
Noting that in its resolution 3516 (XXX) the Secretary-General was requested to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session his final comprehensive report, which should fulfil the above-mentioned
requirements, taking into account the related statements on the administrative and financial implications
submitted by the Secretary-General131 and approved by
the Assembly at its thirtieth session,
Taking into account the note by the SecretaryGeneral of 1 November 1976, 132
Bearing in mind the pertinent provisions of its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States,
I. Reaffirms the right of the Arab States and peoples whose territories are under Israeli occupation to
regain full and effective control over their natural and
all other resources and economic activities, as well as
the rights of those States, territories and peoples to the
restitution and full compensation for the e~ploitation,
loss and depletion of, and damage to, their natural and
all other resources and economic activities;
2. Takes note of the regret e~pressed in the note
by the Secretary-General that the submission of the
report as requested by the General Assembly in resolutions 3336 (XXIX) and 3516 (XXX) and of the
related statements will be postponed until the thirtysecond session of the Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take immediately all the measures necessary to secure the submission to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session of his final substantive comprehensive report,
which should fulfil all of the above-mentioned requirements;
4. Requests the heads of the relevant specialized
agencies and United Nations organs, particularly the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and the Economic Commission for Western Asia, to
co-operate actively and adequately with the Secretary-General in the preparation of his final substantive
comprehensive report.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
3l!l37.

Assistance to Sao Tome and Principe

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the serious economic and social
situation in Sao Tome and Principe as a result of the
total lack of infrastructures for development inherited
from the colonial period,
12 8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyninth Session, Second Committee, 1635th meeting.
JW A/C.2/L.1385, A/C.5/1649.
1 :m Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session. A nnexcs, agenda item 73, document A/9978/ Add. I,
para. 4.
i:n A/C.2/L.1494, A/C.5/1759.
1::2 A/31/284.

38

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Further concerned by the adverse effects which the
international economic situation has caused to the frail
economy of Sao Tome and PJ"incipe,
Noting that Sao Tome and Principe has not been
included in the list of the most seriously affected countries,
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system to extend assistance to the newly independent
and emerging States,
Recalling further recommendation 99 (IV) of 31
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 133 particularly paragraph 4 thereof,
in which the Conference recommended that measures
of assistance should be undertaken by the appropriate
organs of the United Nations system in favour of the
newly independent States of Africa,
l. Urgently appeals to Member States and the
international institutions concerned, particularly the
United Nations Development Programme, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization and
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, to assist the Government of Sao Tome
and Principe in an effective and continuous manner so
as to enable it to establish the necessary social and economic infrastructures essential for the well-being of
the people;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to meeting the
short-term and long-term development needs of this
newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning to give favourable consideration at its thirteenth
session, as a matter of priority, to the question of the
inclusion of Sao Tome and Principe in the list of the
least developed countries and to submit its conclusions
to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third
session;
4. Invites in the meantime Member States, particularly the developed countries, and the organizations of the United Nations system to grant Sao Tome
and Principe the same benefits as those enjoyed by
the least developed among the developing countries in
the light of prevailing conditions in Sao Tome and
Principe;
5. Strongly recommends that Sao Tome and
Principe should be included in the list of the most
seriously affected countries;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep
this matter under review and to report to the General
133 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10),
part one, sect. A.

Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/188.

Assistance to Angola

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the widespread destruction and
damage caused to the social and economic infrastructure during the course of the struggle for independence
in Angola and in defence of its national sovereignty,
Taking note of the inadequate base of socio-economic
development in the rural areas inherited from the
colonial period,
Considering the urgent problem of absorbing and resettling the large numbers of returning refugees into
the permanent fabric of society,
Further concerned by the adverse effects which the
international economic situation continues to impose
on the weakened economy of Angola,
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system to extend assistance to the newly independent and
emerging States,
Recalling further recommendation 99 (IV) of 31
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 134 particularly paragraph 4 thereof,
in which the Conference recommended that measures
of assistance should be undertaken by the appropriate
organs of the United Nations system in favour of the
newly independent States of Africa,
Welcoming the efforts of the Government and the
people of Angola aimed at national reconstruction,
Taking note of the statement made by the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Angola before the General Assembly on 1 December 1976 135 proposing the establishment of an international fund for the national reconstruction of Angola,

l. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize an
international programme for financial, technical and
material assistance with a view to channelling the
proceeds into an international reconstruction fund for
Angola to meet its long-term and short-term development needs;
2. Urgently appeals to all Member States and to
the international economic and financial institutions
concerned to respond generously to the needs of Angola
and to provide assistance on a bilateral and/ or multilateral basis;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning at its thirteenth session, as a matter of priority,
to consider the question of the inclusion of Angola in
the list of the least developed countries and to submit
its conclusions to the Economic and Social Council at
its sixty-third session;
1 :14 Ibid.
13,i Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Plenary Meetings, 84th meeting, paras. 145-221.
