S/2003/216

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 February 2003
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to the request made at the 4705th meeting of the Security Council,
convened on 13 February 2003, on the item entitled “The situation concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the attached report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is hereby circulated for the attention of the members of the
Council.

03-25914 (E)

280203

*0325914*

S/2003/216

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to the Security Council on the situation of human rights in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(13 February 2003)

Introduction
1.
The situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
been of concern to the Security Council and the subject of several pronouncements
by it. In a presidential statement of 15 January 2003 the members of the Council
condemned in the strongest terms the massacres and systematic violations of human
rights perpetrated in the Ituri District in the eastern part of the country. They
expressed their intention to continue to monitor the situation in this regard, on the
basis of continuing investigations by the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR).
2.
This report is based on the joint efforts of OHCHR and MONUC and my visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 12 to 15 January 2003. It presents the
general situation of human rights in the country, highlights recent gross violations of
human rights committed by the different forces operating there, and provides an
update on the Kisangani massacres of 14 and 15 May 2002. The report covers the
period from 18 July 2002 to 30 January 2003.

I.

The situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as a whole
3.
The human rights situation remains grave throughout the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Despite having committed themselves to political and judicial reform
for the promotion of human rights, all parties to the conflict continue to carry out
gross violations of human rights with impunity. There has been a widespread failure
to provide minimum guarantees to the particular needs of the most marginalized and
vulnerable people: women, children, the internally displaced and those affected by
HIV/AIDS.
4.
MONUC, OHCHR, and the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have continued to document massive violations of human rights continuing in the
country, especially in areas controlled by the rebels of the Rassemblement congolais
pour la démocratie, Goma (RCD-G), the Mouvement de libération du Congo (MLC)
and the Union des patriotes congolais (UPC). In Government-controlled territory,
concerns continue over the administration of justice because of the weakness of the
judicial system. In the territories controlled by the rebels, reports continue to be
received of massive human rights violations, especially in the east of the country.
The Special Rapporteur is scheduled to undertake a mission from 28 February to 10
March 2003 and she will report on her findings to the Commission on Human Rights
at its fifty-ninth session in late March.
5.
It is in this context that I visited the country to make a first-hand assessment of
the human rights situation in the light of the signing of the Pretoria Agreement of 16

2

S/2003/216

December 2002. During my stay, I held consultations with a wide section of actors
in Kinshasa and Kisangani, including President Kabila and members of his
Government, leaders of RCD-Goma, former President Masire (the facilitator of the
inter-Congolese dialogue), the international diplomatic community, MONUC,
humanitarian groups and civil society representatives.
6.
My overall assessment is that the prevailing human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is alarming and a threat to the fragile peace
process. Despite the conclusion of the Pretoria and other peace agreements, the
ongoing war in eastern Congo is causing massive violations of human rights and
terrible suffering to thousands of civilians. The fighting in the Uvira area, clashes in
the Ituri District and atrocities committed in the Beni-Mambasa area have led to the
displacement of thousands of people.
7.
Both the Government and rebel leaders have acknowledged that there are
violations of human rights. However, the impunity of perpetrators of gross human
rights violations, especially high-ranking military officials, is a major obstacle to the
promotion of human rights and genuine peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Some of these violations constitute international crimes that could be
brought before various courts, including the International Criminal Court. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo ratified the Rome Statute on 30 March 2002.
8.
The Military Order Court (Cour d’ordre militaire), an arbitrary jurisdiction
that functions in Government-controlled areas, has sentenced to death and caused
the execution of a large number of persons (including civilians) without any
possibility of judicial review or appeal. During my discussions with President
Kabila, I strongly urged him to sign the law on the abolition of the court so that it
could immediately enter into force. The indiscriminate use of the death penalty by
this and other judicial processes in the country is a matter of serious concern that I
raised with Government officials in Kinshasa and the leadership of RCD-Goma in
Kisangani.
9.
The situation of human rights defenders throughout the country is yet one more
cause for serious concern. Many of them are subject to harassment, arbitrary arrest
and unjustified detention. While in the country I made strong representations in
respect of some of those detained and I have subsequently been informed that,
following my intervention, some of the human rights defenders arbitrarily detained
in Kinshasa have been released.
10. The rights of children and women are violated all over the country, but
especially in the rebel-controlled areas, where sexual violence against women and
girls is a tool of warfare. Much emphasis was also put on the discrimination against
women under Congolese law and the need to remedy this. I was informed that the
recruitment of child soldiers as well as the use of women and children as forced
labour continue in spite of efforts to put an end to these practices.
11. The already worrying humanitarian situation is deteriorating in view of the
difficulties humanitarian groups face in reaching populations in need, many of
whom have been forcibly displaced from their homes and are seeking refuge in the
inhospitable forests of the eastern region. These are rebel-controlled areas. The
belligerents prevent the humanitarian workers from crossing their respective zones
of control. Ensuring safe access for humanitarian workers is especially crucial given
the large number of internally displaced persons.

3

S/2003/216

12. The continued plundering of natural resources and State revenues remains a
destabilizing factor and underpins gross violations of human rights. The rapidly
deteriorating state of the economy, exacerbated by the continuing conflict, is also a
cause for concern. The dramatic reduction of household incomes has led to extortion
by magistrates, soldiers, policemen, teachers, school administrators, doctors and
nurses, thus rendering the entire public administration ineffective.

II.

Highlights of recent gross human rights violations
13. Against this background I now set out some of the specific atrocities which
have recently been perpetrated in the territories controlled by the Government and
rebels.

A.

Territories under the control of the Government
14. Notwithstanding the stated intention of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to improve the human rights situation in the territory under
its control, human rights violations persist. The detention centres, notorious for their
treatment of detainees, are still open despite a presidential order to close them.
Prisons are deplorable and extremely overcrowded. Prominent journalists have been
arbitrarily detained for speaking out on human rights, constitutional and rule of law
issues.
15. In spite of a presidential decree liberalizing the activities of political parties, as
well as the resolutions unanimously adopted at Sun City, members of some political
parties are still being subjected to arbitrary arrest and detention and are prohibited
from assembling. These issues have been raised by MONUC and my Office with the
Minister of Human Rights, who has promised to take prompt action in redressing the
situation. I also raised these matters in my meetings with the Congolese authorities.
16. Among the recent violations attributed to the Government forces is the incident
which occurred in Ankoro, in the Province of Katanga, from 10 to 18 November
2002 during fighting between the Mai-Mai (a militia group) and the Forces armées
congolaises (FAC). According to information gathered by the joint
MONUC/OHCHR team, more than 100 persons were killed by the Government
forces (see report of the joint team to Ankoro from 26 to 28 November 2002).
Moreover, over 1,000 houses were burned while several cases of destruction, pillage
and inhumane treatment were recorded. Commandant Emile Twabungu appears
responsible for this incident as soldiers from the 95th Brigade of FAC based in the
region, and who appear to have perpetrated these acts, are under his command.
17. On 7 January 2003, the Military Order Court handed down death sentences on
30 of the 150 persons initially accused of complicity and/or involvement in the
assassination of the late President Laurent Desiré Kabila. During my meeting with
the Congolese authorities at the highest level, including with President Kabila, I put
to them issues relating to due process at the trials and the use of the death penalty.
They have promised to take these into account in making a final decision on the
condemned persons.

4

S/2003/216

B.

Territories under rebel control
18. On 31 December 2002, a MONUC Special Investigation Team went to the
Beni area to investigate allegations that serious human rights violations — arbitrary
executions, rape, torture and forced disappearances — had occurred in Mambasa
town and in the villages on the axes Mambasa-Mangina and Mambasa-Erengeti. The
Investigation Team confirmed a pattern of looting, killing and rape as tactics of war
by MLC/Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie-National (RCD-N) combined
military forces carried out in October 2002 and during the fighting in December
2002 when they were assisted by UPC soldiers. The summary executions targeted
the Nande ethnic group and Pygmies, who were forced to flee to the forest for the
first time to escape persecution for their alleged collaboration with the
Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie/Mouvement de libération (RCD-ML).
19. The victims reported several cases of mutilation followed by acts of
cannibalism. The Special Investigation Team interviewed over 500 internally
displaced persons in Beni, Butembo, Mangina, Oicha and Erengeti. The most
common human rights violations, according to testimonies, consisted of arbitrary
executions (220), rapes (95), forced disappearances (122) and missing people,
including children (102), torture and ill-treatment (32 cases) and over 100 cases of
abduction of people used for forced labour (see report of the Special Investigation
Team to Beni, Butembo, Mangina, Oicha and Erengeti, from 31 December 2002 to
20 January 2003).
20. Witnesses also reported around 15 cases of cannibalism preceded by corporal
mutilations and sectioning of internal body parts. Three Catholic priests were forced
to follow the troops on their advance toward Mangina, witnessing on the way the
mutilation of the sexual organs of all dead bodies on the road. The systematic
looting of all buildings, including hospitals and churches as well as homes, was
confirmed during the visit of the team in Mambasa and Mandima.
21. The planned military operation was called “Effacer le tableau”. Its purpose
seemed to be for MLC/RCD-N forces to go from town to town destroying
everything they could lay their hands on. Some soldiers were allegedly seen with
T-shirts printed with “effacer le tableau”, which further suggests that the nature of
the operation was carefully premeditated. Soldiers from this force confirmed they
had been sent by Jean-Pierre Bemba (MLC) and Roger Lumbala (RCD-N). The
force was a mix of ex-FAR soldiers from Equateur, who spoke only Lingala, and
other recruits coming mainly from Isiro and in a smaller number from Ituri
(although some Ugandan and Portuguese speakers were identified). There were also
three sub-groups calling themselves Foudre, Dragon and Tigre. The so-called
“effaceurs” had received the order to attack on the double axis of the town of
Mambasa and Eringeti in order to regroup at Beni and take all the territory
controlled by RCD-ML.
22. Following the Security Council’s request in its presidential statement of 15
January 2003, efforts have been made by MONUC and OHCHR to follow up on
MLC action to make those responsible for the massacres accountable. It will be
recalled that, after first denying the allegation as a campaign of calumny
orchestrated by his enemies, Mr. Bemba admitted the veracity of the charges and
promised to prosecute those suspected of having committed the crimes. According
to reports, 27 officers thus far have been arrested and their trial is scheduled for 18

5

S/2003/216

February 2003. However, my position is that justice can and should only be
dispensed by legally recognized authorities.
23. The crisis around Beni/Mambasa has led to the displacement of well over
100,000 people. Early in January, in close partnership with non-governmental
organizations, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme and MONUC participated in humanitarian assessment missions to
the area. By mid-January, many of the displaced had begun to return towards
Mambasa and Eringeti, but large numbers had dispersed into the neighbouring forest
where access is difficult. Food insecurity was a predominant concern. The World
Food Programme delivered 213 tons of food on 4 January 2003. Humanitarian teams
assessed that, if the security situation did not improve, displaced persons would be
unable to tend their crops and longer-term food availability would be even more
problematic.
24. Two recent missions to Bunia (carried out by MONUC from 28 to 30 January
2003 and by OHCHR on 3 and 4 February 2003) confirmed gross violations of
human rights including group rapes of women, extrajudicial executions and looting
and burning of homes. These abuses occurred between August 2002 and January
2003. In Nyakunde, well over 2,000 killings were reported and the population has
fled to the forest. The missions also confirmed the existence of scores of mass
graves in Bunia and its environs. Similar atrocities have been reported in Kindu.
Reports of group rapes being carried out on a frequent basis have been confirmed in
North and South Kivu.
25. According to information received from non-partisan sources, a
humanitarian/human rights crisis is unfolding in Mahagi territory, owing to military
attacks and human rights abuses carried out by joint Union des patriotes congolaisreconciliation et paix (UPC-RP)/Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) troops.
For several years, the District of Ituri has been wracked by violence involving
primarily the Lendu and the Hema communities and the situation there remains
highly explosive.
26. In the areas controlled by UPC-RP since August 2002, the human rights
situation has deteriorated significantly. Information gathered reveals that persecution
on ethnic and tribal grounds, extortion, rape and other forms of sexual violence
against women, extrajudicial executions and forced recruitment of children are being
committed by UPC-RP military personnel. This situation has caused thousands of
civilians to flee south from Bunia to Irumu, Mambasa and Beni, thereby increasing
the number of internally displaced persons in this region. Following the December
2002 events in Mambasa, these persons had to flee southwards for a second time
with their host community, towards the towns of Erengeti and Oicha in the Beni
region. Mass graves are reported to have been identified in several places in Bunia,
namely at Camp Ndoromo, at the residence of the former governor, as well as near
“Hôpital général” and in Mudzipela.
27. The past months in the District of Ituri have been marked by massive human
rights violations. In the Bunia area, manhunts and reprisals on ethnic grounds
continue to be reported. Some testimonies suggest that Thomas Lubanga, the
President of UPC-RP, is fuelling the crisis. It should be noted that Mr. Lubanga did
not participate in the inter-Congolese dialogue held in Sun City, hence he is not a
party to the Pretoria Agreement. Many observers attribute his recent actions to one

6

S/2003/216

of frustration and recommend that a way be found to involve him in the Ituri
pacification process.
C.

Representations to Congolese leaders
28. My response to the different groups I met during my mission was very clear. I
expressed strong concern about the lack of respect for human rights, particularly
with regard to the serious violations that have occurred recently in various parts of
the country, the exacerbation of ethnic conflicts and the widely reported atrocities
committed against civilians. I reminded the belligerents of their responsibility to
protect the civilian population in areas under their control. Furthermore, I
emphasized that ending the culture of impunity is an indispensable condition for
reconciliation and lasting peace in the country; and I reiterated that the international
community would seek to bring all perpetrators of human rights violations to justice.
I repeatedly stressed the importance of the Pretoria Agreement as offering a timely
opportunity for the improvement of the rule of law and the human rights situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
29. Finally, I called upon all parties to respect human rights and international
humanitarian law and to cooperate in the immediate and unrestricted implementation
of the Pretoria Agreement.

III.

Follow-up to the massacres of 14 May 2002 in Kisangani
30. Last July, my predecessor reported on the massacres of 14 May 2002 in
Kisangani and the Council asked to be kept informed about follow-up action. My
office in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the assistance of MONUC, has
undertaken several missions to Goma and Kisangani, as a result of which I can
report the following:
• Although the leadership of the Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratieGoma claimed to have set up a general commission of inquiry in the very early
stages of the events and to have ordered a judicial inquiry by the Office of the
Military Prosecutor of Kisangani, information gathered indicates that the
Commission of Inquiry has never visited Mangobo Commune where most of
the killing of civilians occurred.
• The RCD leadership promised to prosecute all suspects in respect to whom
sufficient evidence was gathered, including public officials mentioned in
United Nations reports. According to its Chief of the Department of External
Relations, the trials would be open and suspects would have the right to defend
themselves. On 27 December 2002, the Conseil operationnel de guerre,
meeting in Kisangani, held a short trial of a small number of military and
police officers alleged to have masterminded the massacres of 14 May 2002.
Quite apart from the questionable legitimacy of such courts and proceedings,
the list of the accused did not include any of the well-known high-ranking
military officers that eye witnesses and human rights groups had identified as
having directed or led the massacres, nor did it include any high-level civilian
officials. Instead, those arraigned were mostly persons accused of genocide,
attempted genocide, or incitation to ethnic hatred in connection with the killing
of a small number of Rwandans in the early stages of the events.

7

S/2003/216

31. During my meeting with leaders of RCD-Goma in Kisangani on 14 January
2003, I raised my strong concerns about the lack of will to bring perpetrators of the
killings to justice. I handed over a list of the three senior RCD-Goma military
commanders accused, noting that two of them had been promoted. I requested that
they be immediately relieved of their command functions until conditions existed to
carry out a proper investigation and trial by a legally recognized authority. The
officers are :
(a) Commandant Amisi (“Tango-Four”), Deputy Chief of Staff of ANC,
implicated in the events in Kindu;
(b) Colonel Bernard Byamungu, commandant of the 8th Brigade, also cited
as being behind the atrocities committed in Kindu, including public summary
execution of three soldiers on the streets of Kindu;
(c) Commandant Laurent Nkunda Mihigo, ex-Commandant 7th Brigade,
Kisangani, now in Kasai.

Conclusion
32. From the information I have presented, it will be seen that widespread
violations of human rights continue to be perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with impunity. There will be a continuing need for the Security Council
to exert all possible pressure on the Government and the other belligerents and their
foreign supporters, notably Rwanda and Uganda, to put an immediate end to the
human rights violations and to the culture of impunity, and to actively protect
civilian populations in areas under their influence and control. I urge the Security
Council to activate the means to bring those responsible to justice. Some of the
persons whose names are mentioned in this report have been promoted to higher
ranks by RCD-Goma in anticipation of the reunification of the Congolese armed
forces. Other officers, notably from MLC and from government forces, have
likewise been named in this report. Efforts must be made to prevent their integration
into the post-Pretoria processes until they have been cleared through a credible
judicial process or inquiry. All commanders must be held responsible for gross
violations committed by fighters under their control. Serious consideration should
be given to the establishment of an international commission of inquiry to
investigate serious human rights violations committed by all sides.
33. Having ratified the Rome Statute, the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should be pressed to pass the necessary implementation legislation so
that those who commit war crimes or crimes against humanity may be prosecuted by
the international court, should a new national jurisdiction — which would clearly be
preferable — be unable to do so.
34. The Truth Commission, to be established pursuant to the resolution adopted by
all parties in Sun City, will be a useful instrument in promoting reconciliation. The
Commission, in addition to creating a historical record, may conduct investigations,
take testimony from witnesses, victims and perpetrators and recommend reforms
needed to prevent the recurrence of abuses. I would urge the Security Council to call
for the effective implementation of the sections of the Pretoria Agreement calling
for a National Observatory on Human Rights and a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.

8

S/2003/216

Abbreviations
RCD-Goma

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie, established in August
1998, led by Adolphe Onusumba and backed by Rwanda

MLC

Mouvement de libération du Congo, created in September 1998, led
by Jean-Pierre Bemba and backed by the Ugandan military

RCD-ML

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie-Mouvement de
libération, created in 1999 (by breaking off from RCD-Goma), led
by Mbusa Nyamwissi and backed by the Ugandan military

RCD-N

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie-National, created in
2000 (by breaking off from RCD-Goma), led by Roger Lumbala
and backed by the Ugandan military

UPC-RP

Union des patriotes congolais-reconciliation et paix, created in
August 2002 (dissident group of RCD-ML), led by Thomas
Lubanga, supported at the beginning by the Ugandan military;
currently maintaining relations with RCD-Goma and Rwanda

ANC

Armée nationale congolaise (army of the rassemblement congolais
pour la démocratie-Goma)

FAC

Forces armées congolaises (army of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo)

FAR

Forces armées rwandaises

FAZ

Forces armées zaïroises

APC

Armée du peuple congolais (army of the rassemblement congolais
pour la démocratie-ML)

UPDF

Uganda People’s Defence Forces

9
