S/PV.8755

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8755th meeting

Thursday, 20 August 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Syihab. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Kridelka
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Ms. Lõuk
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Sautter
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Kabtani
Mr. Roscoe
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2020/798)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-21605 (E)
*2021605*

S/PV.8755

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of Belgium
The President: I would like to extend, on behalf
of the Council, a warm welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of Belgium to the United Nations,
Mr. Philippe Kridelka, on the occasion of his first
in-person meeting of the Security Council.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2020/798)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia; and Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Mr. Madeira is joining this meeting via videoteleconference from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item of the agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/798, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan
Mr. Swan: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. Members have received a detailed
written update in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/798). So I will focus on just a few
key points regarding elections, relations between the
Federal Government and federal member states, the
security situation and humanitarian developments.
2/19

20/08/2020

This very week, top Somali leaders convened in
Dhuusamarreeb in an effort to reach a compromise
on how to proceed with the 2020/2021 elections. We
commend the leaders who participated in that meeting,
including President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo and the Presidents of the federal member states
of Galmudug, Hirshabelle and South-West. Although
much more work remains to be done, we are encouraged
that their discussions are taking place in a conciliatory
spirit and that they are examining a diverse range of
electoral options.
We therefore regret the absence of Puntland
President Said Deni and Jubaland President Ahmed
Islam Madobe from that important meeting. It is
disappointing that they declined to participate despite
repeated appeals from other Somali political leaders
and international partners. We understand that there
are strongly held divergent views among the leaders
and that political tensions are high in this pre-electoral
period. Yet it is precisely during such moments that it
is most necessary for the nation’s leaders to engage in
dialogue and present their best ideas to find solutions in
the interest of the Somali people.
On 27 June, the Chairperson of the National
Independent Electoral Commission briefed the House of
the People that, at this late stage, one-person-one-vote
elections could take place no earlier than March
2021, and then only if manual voter registration were
used, or in August 2021 if the Commission used
biometric registration.
The Chairperson’s briefing underscored the
dilemma facing Somalia’s political leaders. Under
the provisional Federal Constitution, Parliament must
be elected through universal direct suffrage. But
the Constitution also stipulates that parliamentary
elections must be held every four years according to
a prescribed deadline. That means that parliamentary
elections are due by the end of November 2020. It is
now clear that it is impossible to satisfy both those
constitutional requirements.
As the constitutional court has never been formed,
there is no credible judicial body to resolve this
constitutional dilemma. A solution therefore requires
broad-based political agreement. Unilateral action by
any Somali stakeholder is unlikely to garner the support
and legitimacy necessary for implementation.
Members of the Council have for more than a year
urged dialogue and cooperation between the leaders of
20-21605

20/08/2020

The situation in Somalia

the Federal Government of Somalia and those of the
federal member states. I am pleased to report that, since
my previous briefing to the Council (see S/2020/436),
those leaders met virtually on 22 June, and then in
person in Dhuusamarreeb from 18 to 22 July. Those
meetings became possible following a conciliatory
initiative by President Farmajo to reach out to Jubaland
President Ahmed Madobe. I commend both leaders
for accepting the dialogue despite their significant
remaining political differences.
In Dhuusamarreeb in July, leaders of the Federal
Government of Somalia and of the federal member
states agreed on the goal of timely and credible
elections acceptable to all, and they authorized a
technical committee to develop and present detailed
options for consideration at their follow-up summit,
which started on 15 August. The climate of cooperation
in July was regrettably somewhat undermined by
subsequent political events, as some federal member
states and political parties reacted negatively to the
abrupt removal of the Prime Minister from office,
among other developments.
President Farmajo and three federal member state
leaders returned on schedule to Dhuusamarreeb on
15 August, as agreed, to continue discussions. Again,
we regret the absence of the other leaders.
It is of course up to Somali stakeholders to determine
the model that will guide the electoral process.
Nevertheless, we also urge that such a model be arrived
at through inclusive dialogue and compromise. It
should also be informed by principles, including that
it must preserve the tradition of peaceful rotation in
office every four years, be implementable in practice,
ensure far broader representation than the 2016 model,
be inclusive of women and advance progress towards
the goal of one-person-one-vote elections.
Somalis and their international partners are
closely watching the discussion currently under way in
Dhuusamarreeb. It is incumbent on Somalia’s leaders
to rise to this moment in history and pursue agreement
in the national interest. At the request of many Somali
stakeholders, we have contributed ideas and options
for a compromise electoral model, and international
partners stand ready to offer support if requested by
the participants.
Turning to another important dialogue, we welcome
the summit of the leaders of Somalia and Somaliland
convened by Djibouti President Ismaël Omar Guelleh

S/PV. 8755

on 14 June, with facilitation by the European Union
and the United States. We urge that the planned
follow-up discussions by the technical committee and
subcommittees proceed.
We are now witnessing a worrisome upsurge in
attacks by Al-Shabaab, particularly in Mogadishu but
also in several regions. The vicious Al-Shabaab attack
on innocent civilians at the Elite Hotel on 16 August
was one of an increasing number of recent attacks
across Somalia and is a tragic reminder of the continued
imperative to improve security in Somalia. Long-term
security of course includes many aspects, such as
improved governance and justice systems and inclusive
economic development. Yet unquestionably there also
remains a requirement for hard security capabilities and
operations to counter Al-Shabaab. In my May briefing
to the Council, I commended the Somali National Army
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
for their capture of Janaale, Lower Shabelle region, in
March. Since then, efforts have focused on stabilizing
the recovered areas and consolidating a presence in the
area. I again salute the courage and commitment of the
Somali and African Union troops.
The year 2021 will see a critical transition, in
which Somalia takes the lead on its security matters.
Last week, the Federal Government of Somalia
completed a concept note for updating the Somalia
transition plan, and technical teams comprising Somali
security leaders and international partners began work
on the update this week. Force generation has faced
some setbacks in meeting the projections for 2020 as
a consequence of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
The comprehensive approach to security continues to
operate at the technical level but it would be enhanced
by additional strategic-level guidance, as called for by
the Council in resolution 2520 (2020).
Throughout this reporting period, despite the
impact of COVID-19, the United Nations Support Office
for Somalia has continued to contribute reliably to the
sustainment and the operations of AMISOM forces and
10,900 Somali National Army troops. In preparation
for key security-related decisions to be taken in 2021,
we look forward to the independent assessment called
for by the Council.
Somalia continues to suffer chronic humanitarian
crises, with recurring destructive cycles of floods
and drought, compounded this year by desert locusts
and COVID-19. More than five million people — one

20-216053/19

S/PV.8755

The situation in Somalia

third of Somalia’s population — still require life-saving
humanitarian assistance. The 2020 humanitarian
appeal, for just over $1 billion, is currently funded
at only slightly more than 50 per cent. We thank
international donors and request their continued
generosity in support of the Somali people.
COVID-19 has of course undermined health,
economic and development gains in Somalia. The
achievement in March of the decision point under the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative was crucial
to Somalia’s ability to secure funding to mitigate the
impact of COVID-19. We hope the new Government
and the Prime Minister, once appointed, will continue,
and indeed accelerate, Somalia’s reform agenda for
national development.
While today’s briefing has focused on immediate,
pressing issues, we remain mindful that progress
in Somalia requires a long-term commitment to
governance, justice, respect for human rights and the
inclusion of women, youth and minorities to build
the nation.
With regard to efforts to counter sexual and genderbased violence, I note with concern the recent initiative
by some parliamentarians to introduce a new bill entitled
“the law on sexual intercourse-related crimes”. We have
brought our concerns to the attention of the Speaker of
the House of the People and, at his request, we have
provided him details of many troubling elements in
the proposed draft. Among them, the draft bill would
violate protections against child marriage and forced
marriage, and it is not in conformity with international
human rights commitments to which Somalia is a party.
We urge that the previous 2018 sexual offences bill be
reintroduced for consideration.
Finally, on a positive note, I am pleased to report
that the Secretary-General has approved Somalia’s
request for renewed eligibility for the Peacebuilding
Fund. The next period of programming will focus on
the important topic of women and peace and security.
The President: I thank Mr. Swan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you very much, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on a
Somalia. I am particularly pleased to do so again with my
colleague Ambassador James Swan. Our partnership is
proof of the strong cooperation that exists between the
4/19

20/08/2020

African Union and the United Nations, which remains
vital to our collective support to Somalia.
Let me begin by recognizing that there have been
significant developments in Somalia since I last the
briefed the Council in May (see S/2020/436). Those
developments are, in large part, due to the determination
of Somalia’s leaders to get together and consult on the
bold steps required to strengthen the country’s capacity
to fight Al-Shabaab and other armed opposition groups,
build the State of Somalia and strengthen its institutions
and stabilize the country through the provision of
essential goods and the services to the people.
The emerging resumption of dialogue and
collaboration between the leaders of the Federal
Government and those of the federal member states is
the most salient political development that happened
in the period under consideration. If harnessed and
facilitated, this development can unlock the great
potential of the Somali people to put in the second plan
what divides them and build on the factors that bring
them together and strengthen the unity and solidarity
of their people.
I commend the personal efforts of President
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and those of the
Presidents of the federal member states, who, through
emissaries, direct and indirect contacts, consultations,
exchanges and mutual reassurances, have laid the
groundwork that made those crucial developments a
reality: the Dhuusamarreeb process.
In Dhuusamarreeb, we saw President Farmajo
meeting bilaterally with President Ahmed Mohamed
Islam Madobe of Jubtaland and discussing their issues.
We witnessed President Farmajo exchanging views one
on one with President Said Abdullahi Mohamed Deni
of Puntland, with President Mohamed Abdi Ware of
Hirshabelle and President Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed
Laftagareen of South-West State. We saw President
Ahmed Abdi Kariye Qoor Qoor preparing the ground
and welcoming President Farmajo and all the other
Presidents to the big meeting.
Those meetings are important and necessary. They
should cease to be historical developments. They must
be made to repeat themselves with such frequency that
they become normal events — regular encounters of
leaders united in a common purpose of making their
country a better place for all their people.
20-21605

20/08/2020

The situation in Somalia

We regret that, for the meeting that started on
15 August, two of those leaders have not been there. We
the international partners and friends of Somalia have
an important role to play to make peace a necessary
presence and transformation a necessary reality.
Then Dhuusamarreeb process deserves our
unwavering support, as it represents a clear signal of
the intent of Somali leaders to work towards a political
consensus. This was the missing link, and now it seems
to be close. We should not miss this opportunity.
The African Union, through the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), is there in Somalia
supporting the Somali security forces in ensuring
security for those encounters on the ground. While
the parties will require more commitment and trust
to assure that the Dhuusamarreeb talks are a success,
the African Union will continue not only to secure the
process but also to offer its political support, where and
when needed.
The African Union welcomes the developing
dialogue between President Farmajo and the
“Somaliland” leader, Mr. Muse Bihi Abdi. The latest
round of talks, held in June, brokered by President
Ismaël Omar Guelleh of Djibouti, stands as the second
this year. More important, this is evidence of Somalia’s
commitment to dialogue as a means of resolving its
national differences. We are equally aware that the
talks’ joint technical committee is yet to meet again, and
we underscore the importance that those talks continue.
The resumption of dialogue between the Federal
Government and the federal member states has real
potential to act as a catalyst for achieving critical
national priorities. I am encouraged so far that the
resumption of dialogue has already allowed for
Somali stakeholders at all levels to engage in frank
and inclusive discussions in search of a consensual
approach to the issue of elections and its modalities.
We partners of Somalia must strive to ensure that the
discussions will remain all-inclusive, because it is that
inclusivity that lends legitimacy and will determine the
consistence and implementability of the consensus that
may be reached in the Dhuusamarreeb process.
Following the National Independent Electoral
Commission (NIEC) report to Parliament on
27 June, AMISOM, at the request of the Commission’s
Chairperson, has enhanced its discussions on election
security, the securing of the new NIEC premises and

S/PV. 8755

the African Union Commission’s technical support to
NIEC prior to and during the elections.
I am also pleased to report that AMISOM’s police
component, which will play a critical role in election
security, is regularly engaging its Somali counterparts
on areas of support. In that context, AMISOM police
are currently training Somali police on the use of
mapping tools for election security threat assessments.
Despite that support, it remains essential, as part of
election preparation, that the important work of the
National Electoral Security Task Force resume as soon
as practically possible.
I remain concerned at the threat of Al-Shabaab
across Somalia, which is demonstrated by the extremist
group’s sustained attacks against Government officials,
businesses, civilians, security forces and international
personnel. The fight against Al-Shabaab will continue
to require concerted efforts. At the centre of peace
efforts must be enhanced collaboration, coordination,
coherence,
improved
information-sharing
and
complementarity between the Federal Government
and the federal member states, particularly as Somalia
prepares to hold elections.
More must be done to degrade Al-Shabaab’s
operational capacities. It is our assessment that as
Somalia’s national dialogue continues to edge towards
political consensus, Al-Shabaab will seek to derail those
efforts. Already Al-Shabaab, in its public statements,
has unsuccessfully attempted to undermine the
Dhuusamarreeb process and foment national discord.
In line with AMISOM’s tasks, as stipulated
in the African Union Peace and Security Council
communiqué 923 and Security Council resolution 2520
(2020), I can report that despite the ongoing impact of
the coronavirus disease, AMISOM has continued to
implement the transition plan. Since May, AMISOM,
jointly with our partners in the Somali security forces,
has been continuing to conduct several targeted
operations to disrupt, degrade and disrupt Al-Shabaab’s
freedom of movement and action. In addition to these
operations, we have jointly secured and maintained key
supply routes.
As part of our transition tasks, we have also
mentored various Somali security forces battalions
through our ongoing colocation, particularly in Lower
Shabelle. In Lower Shabelle, as the Council is aware,
recovered areas remain secure thanks to the continued

20-216055/19

S/PV.8755

The situation in Somalia

joint operations and the bravery of our Somali security
forces and AMISOM soldiers.
The African Union, through AMISOM, has been
the foundation of progress on security in Somalia since
2007, but with this we have thankfully witnessed the
capabilities of the Somali security institutions gradually
increase. These increases must continue in earnest so
that Somalia is eventually able to take the lead on its
security responsibilities by 2021. To that effect, it is
with satisfaction that we note that the work towards
the revision of the transitional plan is ongoing and the
Government has set a clear vision Of what the revision
should entail, the strategic priorities it should pursue,
the actions that need to be implemented to make each
strategic priority a reality and the specific tasks that
need to be fulfilled and by whom.
Clearly, improved and enhanced coordination and
coherence, information-sharing and accountability,
transparency and complementarity will be necessary
for the adopted revised transition plan to be fully
implemented in a timely manner. We are happy that
this revision is taking place in tandem with efforts
to revitalize the comprehensive approach to security
mechanisms, which will be more aligned with the
revised transition plan activities.
A very positive feature in the current revision
is that the elements of all-inclusiveness have been
enhanced and the federal member states have been
fully included and involved from the outset in the
preparation of this new revised transition plan. They
are participating directly and actively, and their views
are being noted and reflected in the baseline documents
that are being produced. Their seats are assured and
reserved in the three technical committees tasked with
producing the draft revised transition plan. This is of
extreme importance, as no realistically sustainable
peace operation in Somalia can succeed without the
involvement of the regions concerned.
As we begin to review the transition plan, under the
leadership of the Federal Government, it remains critical
that a reviewed plan must focus on practical elements.
These must include consensus on priority locations for
transition and agreement on the realignment of tasks,
particularly for international partners, as called for in
African Union Peace and Security Council communiqué
923. Agreements on those elements will in part inform
our collective assessment on what comprehensive
support Somalia would require from key international
6/19

20/08/2020

partners in the lead-up to 2021 and post-2021, as called
for in both African Union Peace and Security Council
communiqué 923 and Security Council 2520 (2020).
In terms of operations, one of the pressing issues
that needs to be tackled head-on and addressed as a
matter of urgency is the lack of commensurate Somali
security forces to take over and hold areas under
AMISOM control and those projected for liberation
from Al-Shabaab. This is making it difficult for
AMISOM forces in various sectors to reconfigure and
create mobile forces for targeted offensive operations
against Al-Shabaab, as they are forced by circumstance
to keep holding and protecting the populations in the
towns and habitational centres they have liberated from
Al-Shabaab.
Therefore, realistic and feasible approaches need to
be identified to effectively address the issue of the slow
pace of generation of the Somali National Army forces.
As I conclude, I should like to draw the Council’s
attention to the fact that African Union Peace and
Security Council communiqué 923 is broadly in line
with paragraph 38 of Security Council resolution 2520
(2020) on the need for a comprehensive, independent
assessment. In the spirit of the African Union-United
Nations shared vision for Somalia, the African Union
continues to call for a joint African Union-United Nations
effort in delivering on this important assessment.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Swan for his briefing and welcoming
Ambassador Madeira and also thanking him for his
comprehensive briefing, as well as Ambassador Osman.
On behalf of the United Kingdom, I want to first
express my condolences to the families and friends
of those killed in the recent Al-Shabaab attack on the
Elite hotel in Mogadishu. I want also to reaffirm our
solidarity with all Somalis in the face of such attacks.
Deplorably, those attacks, despite coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) and the Secretary-General’s call for a
ceasefire, continue to undermine peace and security in
Somalia. We condemn those attacks, and we pay tribute
to the ongoing commitment and sacrifices of troopcontributing countries to the African Union Mission
20-21605

20/08/2020

The situation in Somalia

in Somalia (AMISOM) and the efforts of the Somali
security forces to counter Al-Shabaab.
As we have heard today, Somalia is at a critical
juncture on its journey towards a long-term political
settlement and the peace, security and stability
that will enable. Somali leaders and international
partners have committed to supporting and advancing
democracy in Somalia. With the deadline for elections
fast approaching, an agreement on a way forward is
urgently needed. A timely and inclusive way forward
is also critical — a way forward that respects the
principles and commitments agreed to in the Mutual
Accountability Framework, including at least a 30 per
cent quota for woman parliamentarians. That agreement
should represent clear progress from the 2016 election
model, moving Somalia away from clan-based selection
processes to direct elections, and enable as many
citizens to vote as possible, as set out in the provisional
Federal Constitution.
We therefore welcome the ongoing consultations
between leaders of the Federal Government and the
federal member states at Dhuusamarreeb. We have
always been clear that the electoral model will require
broad-based support among all Somali stakeholders. To
that end, we regret — as Special Representative Swan
and Ambassador Madeira both said — that President
Deni of Puntland and President Madobe of Jubaland have
not yet joined the talks. We call for them to attend as a
matter of urgency. It is vital that all stakeholders — the
Federal Government, federal member states, Parliament,
the National Independent Electoral Commission and
the joint parliamentary committee — work together in
a spirit of compromise to reach agreement and avoid
unilateral or provocative acts that would undermine the
hard-won stability in Somalia and the partnership with
the international community. We stand ready to support
agreed outcomes that strengthen inclusive politics and
include a significant element of direct voting.
Turning to the human rights situation, we too share
the concerns expressed today by the United Nations and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
about the bill regarding sexual-intercourse crimes. It
was encouraging to see so many Somalis speak out
against it. We urge the Parliament to give first reading
to the original sexual offences bill submitted by the
Cabinet. Any bill passed by the Somali Parliament must
reflect its international obligations and commitments
on the protection of children, women and girls.

S/PV. 8755

I want also to express our deep concern about
attacks on the freedom of expression and against
journalists and media workers in Somalia. Media
freedom is a vital component of our democratic society,
and the media has a vital role to play in Somalia. We
call for journalists and media workers to be able to
perform their work freely and safely.
Somalia faces a protracted climate- and conflictinduced humanitarian crisis. That crisis has been
exacerbated by the global COVID-19 pandemic, floods
and locust infestation. We call on the international
community to provide more funding for the
humanitarian response and to step up efforts to build
resilience and mitigate the long-term effects of climate
change. The United Kingdom gave $420 million to
Somalia in the past financial year and is now working
to support the COVID-19 response. It is vital that the
Federal Government and the federal member states
facilitate the delivery of relief aid to all those in need,
and ensure the safety of aid workers in line with
international humanitarian law.
I return to the security situation in Somalia. The
country has made important progress in recent years,
but the security situation, as we have heard, remains
difficult. Next year’s deadline for transition of greater
responsibility to the Somali security authorities
presents both a challenge and an opportunity.
It is vital that all those that are invested in supporting
AMISOM and building Somalia’s security forces now
work together to agree to a future of international
support for the security of Somalia. Without that,
we risk wasting the progress and sacrifices made to
date. A United Nations-led independent assessment
on post-2021 security should offer the forum for
such discussions, and I urge all partners to engage
proactively with it.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize three points.
First, I want to reiterate our call, which the Security
Council has made many times, for the Federal
Government and all federal member states to reach a
decisive and inclusive agreement on elections, soon.
Secondly, I want to underline the importance of the
Council, the United Nations, the African Union and the
wider international community continuing to support
Somalia to achieve progress and political and security
reform. Finally, I want to stress the importance of
a united response in supporting Somalia in its fight
against COVID-19 and protracted humanitarian crises.

20-216057/19

S/PV.8755

The situation in Somalia

Through the determination of the its people and
the support of the international community, Somalia
has come a long way. We should not lose sight of that.
We stand ready to lend our support to navigate this
next stage and to help Somalia realize its goal of peace
and security.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia for their briefings and actions. I would like to
reiterate Belgium’s full support.
Before saying a few words on the political situation
and on human rights and security issues, I would like
to offer, through Ambassador Osman, my condolences
to the families of the victims of the attack on a hotel
in the capital on Sunday. Such terrorist acts are
unacceptable and demonstrate once again that the
Somali Government and the Somali armed forces must
prioritize the country’s security.
With regard to the political situation, I wish
to welcome the resumption, in July, of a high-level
political dialogue between the Federal Government and
the federal member states. That is an encouraging and
entirely necessary development to address the urgent
issues facing Somalia. We must ensure that the dialogue
continues and that a consensus is reached between the
Federal Government and all the federal member states.
We hope that the removal of Prime Minister Khayre,
in problematic circumstances, does not signal a change
of direction. Time is running out to take important
decisions on the organization of the elections, but such
decisions must absolutely be the result of a compromise,
not a unilateral decision taken by a Somali political
institution or actor. We also encourage the authorities to
broaden the democratic space in order to allow for the
participation of a large part of the population, including
women, young people and internally displaced persons,
in those processes, which are crucial for the future of
the country. In that context, Belgium also echoes the
representative of the United Kingdom in expressing our
concern about the attacks on journalists who are doing
their work and exercising their freedom of expression.
With regard to human rights, we remain concerned
about the grave violations against children. As Chair
of the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict,
I am pleased to confirm that the Group very recently
adopted conclusions on Somalia, with the ongoing
8/19

20/08/2020

support of Assistant Secretary-General Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter. The group welcomes those conclusions, in
particular the efforts made by the Federal Government.
Belgium encourages the Government to continue its
efforts aimed at implementing the necessary legislation
to combat several types of violations, including the
draft law on sexual violence. On this point, we are
concerned about the introduction in Parliament of a
new text that appears to be incompatible with Somalia’s
international obligations.
Finally, Sunday’s attack reminds us that Al-Shabaab
remains the primary threat to the security and stability
of the country. The development and deployment of
the Somali army is essential to containing this threat
and protecting the population. We await the review of
the transition plan, which will be the key document to
guiding Somalia, with the help of its partners, towards
regaining control of its security and reconfiguring the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I wish to
recall the support that the European Union is providing
to Somalia through the financing of AMISOM, the
European Union Training Mission and the European
Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia and the
anti-maritime-piracy Operation Atalanta.
The support of the international community is
not limited to the security sector. There is of course
also humanitarian aid, which is badly needed by the
population, as the number of food-insecure people is
in the millions. There is also support for institutional
capacity-building, as the restoration of State authority
is not simply a military operation; it is a matter of the
Somali authorities providing the population with the
basic services and freedoms to which they aspire.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Mr. James
Swan and Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira for the
valuable and detailed information they provided.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the resumption
of dialogue and collaboration between the Federal
Government and the leaders of the federal member
states in July and the agreement to establish a technical
committee to make recommendations on the modalities
of the upcoming elections. In this regard, we commend
the efforts of the United Nations and international
partners aimed at fostering political consensus among
Federal and state leaders in order to advance the
implementation of national priorities in Somalia.
20-21605

20/08/2020

The situation in Somalia

A key element in achieving that objective is the
adoption of the reformed constitution. We therefore
urge the parties to continue to make the necessary
efforts for the resumption of a constructive, inclusive
and transparent dialogue in order to reach the political
agreement that will make it possible to conclude the
review process. Similarly, we commend the meeting
between the Presidents of Puntland and Galmudug and
their commitment to cooperating in the maintenance of
peace, security and economic development, in particular
in Mudug Region. We also commend the initiative of
the President of Djibouti, Mr. Ismaël Omar Guelleh, to
facilitate the resumption of dialogue between Somalia
and “Somaliland”. We are convinced that achieving
consensus through dialogue among political actors
in Somalia will be the driving force for unifying the
country and making the upcoming elections viable and
based on electoral modalities acceptable to all Somalis.
We express our concern about the security situation
in Somalia and condemn the attacks perpetrated by the
Al-Shabaab terrorist group, some of which were carried
out using improvised explosive devices. We particularly
condemn the attack on 16 August on the Elite Hotel in
Mogadishu. We extend our condolences to the families
of the victims and hope that those responsible will be
brought to justice.
In addition, we recognize the efforts made by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) and the United Nations Development
Programme to train and raise awareness among the
population on gender issues and on the women and
peace and security agenda. Similarly, we welcome the
establishment by the South-West state assembly of a
parliamentary committee on women, human rights and
humanitarian issues that could spearhead the promotion
of legislation that empowers women and promotes
gender equality.
We understand that greater participation by women
in the various areas of public and political practice is
vital. Women have the power to change communities.
Their representation in the political system is key to
achieving sustainable peace. Similarly, the participation
of young people is necessary to help overcome the
challenges in Somalia. That is why care must be taken to
ensure an enabling environment for their development.
We also express our concern about the fragile
humanitarian situation in Somalia resulting from the
triple threat posed by coronavirus disease, the desert

S/PV. 8755

locust infestation and the floods that have affected
thousands of displaced persons in recent months. In
this regard, we would like to acknowledge the tireless
efforts of humanitarian partners in Somalia despite the
difficult situation in the country. Accordingly, we also
encourage the international community to contribute to
the humanitarian assistance fund for Somalia in order to
save lives and alleviate the needs of the most vulnerable.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight the role
that the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, the
African Union Mission in Somalia and UNSOM have
been playing. At the same time, we recognize all the
actors whose actions promote peace and stability in
the country.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I thank Special Representative Swan and Special
Representative Madeira for joining us today and for
their comprehensive updates and briefings.
I also join you, Mr. President, in welcoming our
new Belgian colleague, Ambassador Kridelka. It is
really good to see him in person. Although I saw him on
the screen yesterday, I want to welcome him officially
to the Security Council today.
Somalia stands before a moment of profound
opportunity. The country faces difficult circumstances
and security challenges to get there, however, including
in the attack on the hotel in Mogadishu last weekend,
which the United States condemns. We express our
condolences to the victims and their families. This and
other attacks highlight the need for Somalia to keep
the upcoming elections on track. Those elections are
fundamental to advancing stability and security in the
country. Uncertainties and delays in holding elections
will have the opposite effect.
The challenges Somalia faces require concerted
and unified efforts by its leaders. Unfortunately, the
withdrawal of confidence in the former Prime Minister
and his Government in July by the President and the
Lower House of Parliament has only heightened
the political tensions. We are concerned that such
action has undermined the process of dialogue and
negotiation among the Federal Government of Somalia,
federal member states and other key stakeholders. We
strongly encourage Somalia’s Federal Government and
member states to hammer out a way forward for the
upcoming elections.

20-216059/19

S/PV.8755

The situation in Somalia

Elections need to be credible, timely, secure,
practical, implementable and built on broad-based
consensus in a Somali-owned and Somali-led
process. We welcome the discussions under way in
Dhuusamarreeb and encourage the parties to reach
agreement on a model that meets the criteria and can be
implemented by early 2021.
The United States further encourages Somali
authorities to maintain momentum on the reform efforts
that brought about the re-establishment of ties with
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
in March of this year. Reaching the heavily indebted
poor country decision point is an important milestone
for Somalia, as it lays the foundation for inclusive
economic growth. But such reforms must continue as
Somalia seeks to build long-term inclusive economic
growth and resiliency.
The United States is and will continue to be a close
partner of Somalia. I meant to say earlier that it is very
good to have Ambassador Osman here in the Council
with us. With more than $5.3 billion in bilateral foreign
assistance over the past 20 years, we are working
alongside the Somali people in support of improved
food security, health-care services, water, sanitation
and hygiene. United States humanitarian assistance is
helping Somalis overcome flooding, drought, locust
infestation and food insecurity, affecting nearly half the
population, with a quarter of the people also displaced
by natural calamities and conflict.
The United States is also working alongside
its Somali partners to mitigate the impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Since the crisis
began, we have provided more than $23 million to
support Somalia’s COVID-19 response, including for
masks, hospital beds, testing-centre equipment and
communication efforts.
Finally, as other colleagues have already
highlighted this morning, Al-Shabaab remains a
destabilizing force in Somalia that has also repeatedly
demonstrated the will and capability to launch attacks
against neighbouring States. We are encouraged that
the Somali and African Union Mission in Somalia
forces have made progress on the battlefield, and that
those military gains have been followed up with vital
stabilization efforts to hold liberated territory. We
remain concerned, however, that the implementation of
key elements of the Somalia transition plan are behind
schedule. We urge all parties to take the necessary steps
10/19

20/08/2020

to accelerate the transfer of security responsibilities to
the Somali military and civilian authorities.
The United States remains steadfast in its
commitments to promoting peace and stability in
Somalia and to working with our international partners
in assisting the country to reach its goals for a peaceful
and prosperous future.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important and
timely meeting on the situation in Somalia. I have the
distinct honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
At the outset, the A3+1 would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation
in Somalia (S/2020/798). We would also like to
thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), and
Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), for their briefings. We commend
them for their efforts in Somalia. We would also like
to welcome our colleague, Ambassador Osman of
Somalia, to our meeting today. We pay tribute to all
Somalis who have perished since our previous meeting
on the situation in Somalia (see S/2020/573).
The A3+1 statement will focus on four important
issues and developments in Somalia, namely,
first, political developments; secondly, election
preparations; thirdly, security; and, fourthly, the
humanitarian situation.
First, on political developments, the A3+1 welcomes
and commends the Federal Government of Somalia and
federal member states for their recent meetings and
consultations, which constitute an important first step
towards building the political consensus necessary for
the transition in Somalia.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s observation
that the long-awaited resumption of dialogue between
the leaders of the Federal Government and the federal
member states and the steps taken towards normalizing
the Federal Government’s relations with Jubaland are
critical to the restoration of collaboration between the
Federal and state levels of Government.
20-21605

20/08/2020

The situation in Somalia

In that regard, the A3+1 further welcomes the
meeting between President Farmajo and Somaliland
President Muse Bihi Abdi in Djibouti, following their
initial meeting in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. We appreciate
the continued regional and subregional efforts, as well
as those of the international community, in bringing
political stability to Somalia and the Horn of Africa.
That is a positive development towards consolidating
peace, security and development in the region.
The Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and South Africa urge all major
stakeholders in Somalia to maintain that spirit of
inclusive consultations and cooperation in all follow-up
meetings in order to reach a broad-based agreement on
critical matters. We regard that and other developments
in the relations between the Federal Government and
the federal member states as a critical step towards
building the essential political consensus on various
important issues, including agreement on the electoral
modalities, security arrangements, constitutional
review and power-sharing.
As the Security Council and the international
community, we should all support the recent discussions
held by the Federal and state leaders in Dhuusamarreeb.
The international community and partners of Somali
leaders and stakeholders should also allow them to
lead and determine their future, without interference
or imposition.
Furthermore, we appeal to the Somali stakeholders
to undertake urgent and concerted efforts to reach a
broad-based, inclusive political agreement, including
on the way forward on elections and the finalization
of the revised Constitution, among other key priorities.
Secondly, on the preparations for the elections, the
Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, recall their previous statement to
the Council, in which they noted that the preparations
and holding of one-person-one-vote elections in
Somalia was a critical priority (see S/2020/436, annex
XII). We further underlined the importance of dialogue,
inclusive political participation and the resolution of
political differences between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the federal member states, which are
critical to the success of the elections and national
cohesion. We reiterate that those observations remain
valid today.
Therefore, the A3+1 commends the recent
developments related to the preparations for the elections

S/PV. 8755

in Somalia, in particular the adoption by the House of
the People of the amendments to the political parties
law and four resolutions that address the representation
in Parliament of all federal member states, including
the allocation of seats to constituencies for both Houses
and a minimum of 24 per cent representation of women
in Parliament,
We are also pleased that the National Independent
Electoral Commission continues its preparations for the
national elections. That is evidenced by the two possible
options for conducting the elections either in March or
in August 2021, depending on whether the elections are
held through paper-based voter registration and polling
or standard biometric voter registration.
The A3+1 urges all the stakeholders in Somalia to
engage constructively in an inclusive dialogue to reach
a political consensus on the modalities and timing of
the elections. We further appeal to the international
partners to coordinate their support to ensure inclusive,
credible and secure elections in Somalia.
Thirdly, on the security situation, the A3+1
remains concerned about the volatile security situation
in Somalia. We strongly condemn the attacks by
Al-Shabaab on Somali civilians, the security forces,
AMISOM, the United Nations and the international
community. We pay tribute to the ultimate sacrifices
of AMISOM and the Somali National Army in their
quest to bring about peace, stability and development
in Somalia.
We reiterate our previous calls urging the Federal
Government of Somalia, with the support of the
United Nations, AMISOM and international partners,
to continue the generation, training and resourcing of
capable and effective Somali national forces, which
will ultimately take over the security responsibilities
in line with the revised Somali transitional plan and the
national security architecture.
To that end, we again appeal for the international
community and partners to mobilize the necessary
resources, including the replenishment of the United
Nations trust fund in support of AMISOM and the
trust fund to support the Somali security forces,
as they continue to make commendable progress
towards restoring State authority, peacebuilding and
State-building.
We commend in particular the efforts of the Somali
National Army in securing all recovered areas thus far.

20-2160511/19

S/PV.8755

The situation in Somalia

However, we recognize the challenges created by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as well as
the rains, from April to June, that have impacted the
expansion of some security activities, including the
liberation of more zones.
We are heartened by the number of reconciliation
efforts made by the State Administration and
communities aimed at ending the cycle of violence
among clans. We support the peaceful resolution
of tensions among the communities and peaceful
coexistence between the clans.
We strongly condemn the reported incidents of
civilian casualties and conflict-related sexual violence,
particularly those affecting women and girls. We also
strongly condemn the grave violations against children
in armed conflict, including the use, abduction,
recruitment, killing and maiming of children, that have
been registered during the period under review. We
support the calls urging that all perpetrators of such
crimes be identified and held accountable.
Furthermore, we have taken note of the developments
in Parliament relating to the draft sexual-offences bill
and the introduction of an alternative bill. Although we
recognize the prerogative of the Somali Parliament to
draft legislation, we call on the authorities to ensure
that any new piece of legislation remains consistent
with Somalia’s international law obligations.
Fourthly, concerning the humanitarian situation,
Somalia has been impacted by the triple threat and shock
of the COVID-19 pandemic, an infestation by desert
locusts and floods. Those challenges have deepened
Somalia’s humanitarian crisis. COVID-19 in particular
has exacerbated pre-existing vulnerabilities, disrupted
socioeconomic gains and affected the livelihoods of
ordinary Somalis. We commend the actions taken by
the humanitarian partners for the expansion of their
support to Somali authorities to address the impact
of COVID-19.
The A3+1 notes that the adverse impact of flooding
due to climate change remained widespread in Somalia
during the period under review. We are concerned
that that situation will continue to exacerbate the
displacement of people, food insecurity and the outbreak
of water-borne diseases, as well as to adversely affect
the livelihoods of those made most vulnerable across
the country.
12/19

20/08/2020

In that respect, Somalia requires continued support
by the international community and humanitarian
partners to mitigate the impact of that triple threat.
We support the call by the Secretary-General for the
additional funding that is urgently needed to continue
to deliver humanitarian assistance.
We deplore the fact that the security situation
remains a major constraint to humanitarian operations.
We are concerned at and condemn the recorded
incidents against humanitarian operations and
providers, including recorded incidents that led to the
killing, abduction and, in some instances, detaining of
humanitarian workers.
Finally, the Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and South Africa commend the efforts and
commitment of the United Nations through UNSOM
and the United Nations Support Office in Somalia,
AMISOM, the United Nations Mine Action Service, the
Federal Government and the federal member states of
Somalia and the international partners for their continual
efforts and progress in bringing about stabilization and
deepening federalism and State-building in Somalia.
We urge a continued and strengthened working
relationship between AMISOM and UNSOM in order
to assist Somalia to take ownership of addressing its
own security challenges, as envisaged by the transition
plan. We reiterate that the withdrawal of AMISOM
from Somalia should be condition-based, as the
security situation remains volatile and is characterized
by frequent terrorist attacks.
To conclude, the Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines and South Africa support the continued
presence of AMISOM and UNSOM in Somalia. In
that regard, we support the renewal of the mandate
of UNSOM for another 12 months when it ends on
31 August 2020.
Ms. Lõuk (Estonia): We join others in offering our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims of
the recent attack on the Elite Hotel. We also join others
in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews.
It is important that despite the multiple challenges,
including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, Somalia keep moving ahead with the longterm goals of State-building. We commend Somalia on
the progress made thus far and encourage them to stay
on course.
20-21605

20/08/2020

The situation in Somalia

Estonia warmly welcomes the resumption of
dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia
and the federal member states, and strongly encourages
all stakeholders to continue their talks to pursue
national priorities, including the modalities of timely
and peaceful elections. Given the high stakes of the
upcoming elections, it is crucial that no unilateral
actions be taken and that broad-based political
agreements be reached. We hope that the stakeholders
can agree on timely and inclusive elections, which
represent progress beyond the 2016 model.
We are concerned about the sexual-intercourse-related
crimes bill proposed by the parliamentary committee
and urge the Parliament not to pass any legislation that
is in violation of international standards. We also call
on the authorities to address the attacks on freedom of
expression and to investigate attacks on journalists and
media workers accordingly.
Lastly, we call on the Federal Government to take
steps towards establishing the national human rights
commission, which has a key role in promoting and
protecting human rights. Estonia welcomes the fact that
the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict has
agreed its most recent conclusions on Somalia, and we
are looking forward to their implementation.
The security situation remains a major challenge.
We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks by
Al-Shabaab and offer condolences to the victims of
the attacks. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, all
stakeholders must ensure that progress is also made
on the security front. We further call on the Federal
Government of Somalia to accelerate the updating of
the transition plan. Clear timelines, clear tasks and a
clear vision are crucial in order to achieve the end goal
of Somalia taking full responsibility for its security.
Finally, Estonia is deeply concerned about the
current humanitarian situation, which has suffered
the triple shock of the COVID-19 pandemic, a locust
infestation and floods. We are concerned that the
humanitarian response plan remains underfunded, with
3.5 million people facing severe food insecurity for
the remainder of the year. We call on the international
community to address the funding gap.
I would like to conclude by expressing Estonia’s
gratitude and support to United Nations personnel in
Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and the
Somali security forces for their efforts, commitment
and sacrifices to bring peace and stability to Somalia.

S/PV. 8755

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish to begin, if I may, by extending my
heartfelt condolences to our Somali colleagues in the
wake of the terrorist attack perpetrated by Al-Shabaab
last weekend at the Elite Hotel in Mogadishu. I ask my
dear friends to please accept our heartfelt condolences.
We are thankful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, James Swan, as well as to the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and Head of the African Union Mission
in Somalia, Mr. Madeira, for their comprehensive
briefings on the situation in Somalia. We also welcome
to his first meeting in person the new Permanent
Representative of Belgium, Philippe Kridelka.
The Russian Federation welcomes the efforts
made by Mogadishu to achieve political stability, the
normalization of the socioeconomic situation and the
phased establishment of democratic institutions in
the country. We steadfastly champion the maintenance
of the territorial integrity and unity of Somalia.
In recent months, the Federal Government has
achieved concrete results in its dialogue with the
federal member states in the run-up to next year’s
scheduled elections. We trust that this week’s summit
in Galmudug will help to identify the modalities of the
future vote.
The Security Council should fully support
Mogadishu’s commitment to holding one-person,
one-vote elections. We remain convinced that the
broadest possible implementation of the electoral
model could potentially help extricate Somalia from
the current political impasse and a state of permanent,
all-out war. It could also deal a heavy blow to the
positions of Al-Shabaab, which is keen on maintaining
the traditional clan-based system of voting.
We value the now regular virtual consultations
between the Federal Government and the leadership of
the states of Jubaland, Galmudug, Puntland, Hirshabelle
and South-West. We are concerned about the breakdown
in August of the second round of talks between
the delegations of Somalia and the self-proclaimed
Somaliland. We urge both sides to explore possible
compromises as a way of resolving their differences.
We concur with the conclusions of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2020/798) that the security
situation in Somalia remains volatile. Al-Shabaab has
not stopped its terrorist activities. The fight against

20-2160513/19

S/PV.8755

The situation in Somalia

20/08/2020

extremists has been adversely affected by the poor
supply of weaponry to the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and its inability to procure
military equipment, in particular helicopters, and is
further compounded by the lack of engagement with
the Somali National Army and the general passivity
of the Somali authorities on the issues of restoring
the local administration and security structures in the
liberated areas.

On the matters under discussion today, I would like
to share the following points.

We believe that it is our common task to identify
the proper response to the threat posed to the country
by improvised explosive devices, which Al-Shabaab
increasingly relies on in its operations.

Nevertheless, the threat of attacks and the impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic have delayed preparations
for the election and have made them more difficult. We
support the election process and the implementation
plan set out by the Government of Somalia and other
stakeholders to ensure the participation of all people
and political parties in elections. In that connection, we
urge the Federal Government, federal member states
and political parties to make further efforts to engage
in inclusive dialogue to reach political consensus on the
modalities and timing of the elections, including the
political representation of women and minorities.

In these circumstances, AMISOM remains the
linchpin in the fight against terrorism. We supported the
extension of the mandate of the African peacekeepers
until the end of February 2021. Given the prospects
of the phased closure of the Mission, strengthening
the capacity of the Somali National Army is critical.
At the same time, we object to attempts by a number
of countries to forcibly expedite the drawdown
of AMISOM.
Given the current situation, we deem it judicious
for the Security Council to jointly and systematically
pursue its efforts to reach agreement on multifaceted
assistance to the country’s authorities with a view
to achieving a definitive end to the internal crisis
in Somalia.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Madeira for their
informative briefings and for their work on the ground
at this very challenging time. I warmly welcome
Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of
Somalia, to our meeting today.
I join others in extending our deepest condolences
to those who lost family members in Sunday’s attack
in Mogadishu or in other incidents in the country since
our last meeting on Somalia (see S/2020/573).
Somalia is now at a historical turning point thanks to
positive developments in the dialogue and collaboration
between the Federal Government and federal member
states, improved security and economic conditions,
and the preparations for upcoming elections. However,
the country is still facing substantial insecurity and
challenges resulting from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and weather-related crises.
14/19

First, on the election process, we welcome the
communiqué issued at the July meeting between the
leaders of the Federal Government of Somalia and the
federal member states. It calls for timely and credible
elections acceptable to all Somali stakeholders. We
also welcome the adoption of the amendments to the
political parties law by the House of the People.

We call on the United Nations and the international
community to provide further technical assistance and
necessary measures to protect Somali citizens and
political parties on the road ahead.
Secondly, we would like to stress the importance of
national unity and reconciliation in Somalia as it moves
forward. Given the recent positive developments, this is
a precious time for the Federal Government of Somalia
and the federal member states, especially Somaliland
state, to work together in mutual trust and for the
benefit of the Somali people. In that connection, we
support the efforts of the Government and political
leaders of Somalia to maintain a stable environment for
dialogue. We therefore commend the recent consultative
meeting in Djibouti between President Farmajo and the
Somaliland President, Mr. Muse Bihi Abdi, and look
forward to seeing their continued confidence-building
efforts and specific follow-up actions, under the
mediation of Djibouti and facilitation of the United
States of America and the European Union.
Thirdly, on the fight against the triple shock,
Somalia continues facing a number of long-standing
threats and challenges. The triple shock of desert
locusts, floods and the COVID-19 pandemic has
severely impacted socioeconomic gains, livelihoods,
food security and the humanitarian footprint in the
country. The consequences of the desert locusts and
20-21605

20/08/2020

The situation in Somalia

floods remain widespread and have affected at least
1.3 million people, of whom nearly a million are
displaced and in need of humanitarian assistance. The
risk of exponential COVID-19 infection also remains
high across the country. Somalis need continued
support to overcome these difficulties. We call on
international partners to assist the Federal Government
of Somalia in alleviating the socioeconomic impact of
this triple threat.
Fourthly, on resilience for security, we condemn
the attacks by Al-Shabaab against Somali civilians,
local security forces, as well as the United Nations and
personnel and facilities of the African Union Mission
in Somalia. The suicide car-bombing attack on the
Elite Hotel in Mogadishu on Sunday killed 15 people
and injured more than 20. In that connection, we call
upon international partners to continue to support
Somali security forces through training, equipment
provision and capacity-building. It is also incumbent
upon international partners and relevant parties to
uphold their responsibilities to strengthen cooperation
measures and to take all necessary security measures
against Al-Shabaab in order to protect civilians,
especially women and children.
To that end, we commend the unceasing work
and untiring efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia. We reiterate our support for its
mandate and are committed to working constructively
with the United Nations, regional and international
organizations and relevant parties to promote peace,
stability and development in Somalia.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): I would like to thank
Mr. James Swan and Mr. Francisco Madeira for their
briefings, and I welcome Ambassador Osman to
today’s meeting.
I would like to make five points.
First, with regard to the electoral process, we
would like to underscore that credible, free, fair and
direct elections in late 2020 will be key to the building
of a democratic State in Somalia. The elections
will be the yardstick by which the current Somali
Administration will be measured. We acknowledge that
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) makes this much
more difficult, yet the existing proposals on the table
are, in our view, not sufficient. That has been made
clear by other delegations, and we agree with them. A
return to previous forms of governance, where a few
groups decide for the whole country, must be avoided.

S/PV. 8755

What we need to see now is concrete progress towards
implementing the principle of one-person, one-vote,
wherever possible.
Secondly, with regard to the political cooperation
between the federal Government and the federal
member states, such cooperation is key. We take note of
some positive developments, including the July leaders’
summit. At the same time, we feel that more progress
will be necessary. The speedy nomination of the new
prime minister would be an important step towards
ensuring an inclusive process. At the same time, it is a
basis for achieving sustainable progress, including on
the question of elections and the transition plan.
Thirdly, with respect to human rights, we are,
like others, deeply concerned about the bill entitled
“law on sexual intercourse-related crimes”, proposed
by a parliamentary committee. This is particularly
concerning given that Somalia does not, unfortunately,
have a good track record on sexual violence. Let me
remind my colleagues that the Secretary-General, in
his most recent report on children and armed conflict
in Somalia (S/2020/174), reports that Somali security
forces and regional forces were responsible for one in
three crimes involving sexual violence between 2016
and 2019. We therefore strongly urge Somalia to respect
its international human rights obligations and return
to an inclusive and non-discriminatory text. In this
context, we would like to welcome the agreement in
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict on
the Somalia conclusions. These conclusions must now
be implemented.
Fourthly, with regard to security, the complex
attack on the Elite Hotel this past weekend shows that
the security situation remains a major challenge. We
condemn attacks by Al-Shabaab on Somali civilians,
security forces, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the United Nations and the international
community. We extend our condolences to the victims
and their families. We encourage all stakeholders to
increase their efforts and speed up the work on the
update and implementation of the security-transition
plan. In this respect, we are looking forward to
the AMISOM independent assessment, which will
contribute to the assessment of the abilities and gaps in
the Somali security forces. While this is no replacement
for a stakeholder agreement it is still important.
Fifthly, and briefly, on climate and security, we
appreciate and support the work the United Nations

20-2160515/19

S/PV.8755

The situation in Somalia

Assistance Mission in Somalia has been doing in this
field in particular.
Mr. Bing Dai (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. James Swan, and the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Mr. Francisco Caetano José
Madeira, for their briefings.
Somalia is entering a critical stage in its
achievement of peace and reconstruction. Over the past
three months, the Somali federal Government has made
earnest efforts to advance the national reconstruction
process and tackle the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. It has gradually resumed dialogue with
leaders of the federal member states. At the same time,
the country’s security and humanitarian situation has
remained fragile, as evidenced by frequent terrorist and
other violent incidents. In this regard, I would like to
make the following four points.
First, efforts to advance Somali’s critical process
must ensure that it is Somali-owned and Somali-led.
China encourages the relevant Somali parties to further
build mutual trust and gather momentum for dialogue,
enhance federal institutions and move ahead with the
constitutional review and other critical reform processes.
China supports regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, in playing a mediation role
for the political settlement of the Somali issue. The
United Nations Mission in Somalia has been actively
coordinating the various efforts of the international
community and has played a constructive role. China
supports the renewal of its mandate for 12 months.
Secondly, a critical task of the Somali political
process is to hold successful elections. China welcomes
the dialogue between the Somali Federal Government
and the federal member states on specific electoral
arrangements and encourages them to design electoral
processes in the light of the situation on the ground
and the people’s wishes. The international community
should respect the leading role of the Somali
Government and support full consultation among the
Somali parties in order to create conditions favourable
to well-run elections.
Thirdly, eliminating the threat of terrorism is
prerequisite for the long-term peace and stability of
Somalia. China strongly condemns terrorist and violent
incidents, which often claim innocent civilians as their
16/19

20/08/2020

victims. We commend the African Union Mission in
Somalia for its important role in maintaining stability.
The ability of the Somali security forces to assume
primary responsibility for maintaining national
security is key to the timely completion of the Somali
transition plan. The international community should
assist Somalia in capacity-building in the security
sector and continue to provide the necessary security
support on the basis of a full assessment of local
security situations.
Fourthly, the triple shock of COVID-19, flooding and
locust infestations has had a grave impact on Somalia’s
economic and social development and aggravated its
humanitarian crisis. China welcomes the supplemental
financing from the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund and calls on the international
community to step up efforts to help plug the gaps in
Somalia’s humanitarian aid, enhance its capacity to
respond to the pandemics and disasters, and support the
advancement of its national development plan.
China has always been an active contributor to
the Somali peace process and a long-time provider
of humanitarian assistance and economic and social
development support. This year alone, we have donated
two batches of medical supplies to Somalia and will
continue to help to the best of our abilities. China
stands ready to work with the international community
in playing a constructive role in realizing the goal of
peace, stability and development in Somalia.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I join
in others in congratulating and welcoming Ambassador
Philippe Kridelka, to whom I wish every success.
I also wish to join in expressing condolences,
through the Somali authorities, to the families of the
victims of the attack on the Elite Hotel in Mogadishu last
weekend, which we very strongly condemn, of course.
I would also like to thank our briefers and make
three points.
First, on the political level, France believes that
Somalia remains at a critical juncture. We are closely
following the ongoing discussions between the Federal
Government and the federated member States. We note
that those discussions led last month to an agreement
to hold elections on time, but without specifying the
modalities of the elections. For France, it is imperative
that all Somali actors continue to work constructively
in preparing for presidential and legislative elections
20-21605

20/08/2020

The situation in Somalia

that are peaceful, inclusive, free and transparent and
that enjoy the support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia. It is also essential for the stability
of Somalia that these elections be held as soon as
possible, in early 2021. We regret the removal of Prime
Minister Hassan Ali Khayre by the Somali Parliament,
whose vote did not respect the institutional rules that we
support. Unfortunately, this decision is not conducive
to reconciliation in the country.
Secondly, on the security front, France also believes
that Somalia remains at a critical juncture, since the
Somalis themselves will have to assume responsibility
for the security of their country by the end of 2021. In
that context, it is necessary that the transfer of security
responsibilities from the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) to the Somali federal and regional
security forces continue. The Somali authorities must
also update their transition plan for September, with
a view to fully engaging in that process by 2021. We
expect the authorities to accelerate the implementation
of a plan for the generation of additional forces
and to integrate the regional forces into the Somali
National Army.
Thirdly, France calls on the Somali authorities and
their main partners, including the European Union,
the United Nations, the African Union and AMISOM
troop-contributing countries, as well as bilateral donors
involved in the security sector in Somalia, to seriously
engage in discussions on international support to
the Somali security sector after 2021. The European
Union has shown its readiness to actively participate
in such discussions. For our part, we would like to see
a more proactive approach to the issue. It is critical
that the Somali authorities implement the benchmarks
established by the Security Council in resolution 2520
(2020), adopted in May. Decisions on international
support for the security sector in Somalia after 2021
must indeed be directly linked to the progress made on
those benchmarks.
Finally, France would like to recall that the current
model of support for Somalia cannot be taken for
granted. All options must be considered, including
alternatives to AMISOM. In particular, we recall that
the European Union’s current financing model for
AMISOM is not sustainable. If the European Union is
to continue to support the security sector in Somalia,
that support will be dependent on the establishment
of accountability mechanisms, the participation of the

S/PV. 8755

European Union in AMISOM’s strategic decisions and
the financial contribution of other partners.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate our
concern about the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
which is exacerbated by the spread of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. I also fully share the concerns
expressed by the representatives of Germany and
Belgium over sexual violence and violations committed
against children. The protection of civilian populations
and respect for their rights are key requirements that
must be fully taken into account in the reform process
in Somalia. We commend the efforts of United Nations,
in coordination with other partners, to adapt their action
and support the response of the Somali authorities.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
I would like to thank Mr. Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, for
their insightful briefings. I would also like to welcome
Ambassador Abukar Osman, Permanent Representative
of Somalia, to this meeting.
As the Secretary-General has summed up, Somalia
is at a critical juncture. It is therefore crucial for all
Somali stakeholders, supported by the international
partners, to work together constructively. In that regard,
I would like to highlight three points.
First, we welcome the discussions between
federal and state leaders in Dhuusamarreeb in July.
The Security Council has repeatedly highlighted the
need for Somalia’s federal and state leaders to come
together in a spirit of unity and compromise. We would
like to stress that only through dialogue can Somali
stakeholders move forward with the reform agenda
that it has committed to undertaking. We are hopeful
that a consensus on the electoral modalities that enjoys
the support of all stakeholders, particularly the Somali
population, can be reached. It is also important to
advance the implementation of national priorities and
State-building efforts.
Secondly, we remain concerned over the security
situation. We once again condemn all recent attacks
by Al-Shabaab, including the attack on the Elite Hotel
in Mogadishu last Sunday, as well as the mortar attack
targeting the United Nations compound. In that regard,
let me join others in extending our condolences to the

20-2160517/19

S/PV.8755

The situation in Somalia

people and the Government of Somalia, in particular
the families of the victims. We would ask that the
perpetrators be brought to justice. We would like to
reiterate that any attack on United Nations personnel is
unacceptable and that all perpetrators must be brought
to justice.
We are concerned that, despite the continued
operations against Al-Shabaab and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Al-Shabaab remains
capable of conducting larger, more complex highprofile attacks. It is therefore important to continue to
build the capacity of the Somali National Army (SNA)
and to equip it with the necessary training, including in
countering improvised explosive devices.
We commend the continued operations by the SNA
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
to recover areas under Al-Shabaab’s control, as well
as to disrupt its capacity to conduct terror attacks. In
our view, it is important to accelerate force generation
efforts so as to hold the recovered areas and pave the
way for further stabilization activities.
Thirdly, Somalia is facing the triple challenge of
COVID-19, flooding and desert locusts. Increased
support from international partners is needed now more
than ever, particularly in support of the humanitarian
response plan. Sustained support is also necessary
to alleviate the economic impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic in order to ensure the long-term recovery
and resilience of the people of Somalia. We would also
like to reiterate the importance of ensuring unimpeded
humanitarian assistance and relief.
I reaffirm Indonesia’s respect for Somalia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and I convey
our utmost tribute to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia, AMISOM and all actors working to ensure
lasting peace and stability in Somalia. What happens
in the next few months will determine the future
of Somalia. We hope that all Somali stakeholders
will remain committed in their pursuit of dialogue
and reconciliation to ensure peace and prosperity in
the country.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Somalia.
18/19

20/08/2020

Mr. Osman (Somalia): Allow me to begin by
commending the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Indonesia and the Permanent Mission
of Indonesia for their leadership as President of the
Council for this month of August. I would also like
to welcome Ambassador Kridelka of Belgium to New
York and to the Security Council and to being a member
of the United Nations family.
It is an honour to address the Security Council at
this gathering of Somalia’s partners at the Security
Council. I want to reiterate that the Somali Government
is strongly committed to its ambitious peace and
State-building agenda. We are making very clear strides
towards achieving inclusive politics, strengthening
democracy and constructing the very rights-based
institutions that are the pillars of strong societies.
I am happy to report that we have held successful
regional elections in some federal member states in the
build-up to the planned one-person-one-vote national
parliamentary election. We are determined to facilitate
the success of that process through the electoral law
recently adopted by the legislature.
The challenge for Somalia has been the
monopolization of legitimate power by a few at the
expense of the Somali people. Our Government, led
by His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Farmajo,
is determined to bring the people of Somalia to the
centre of their democracy by giving them a historic
opportunity to vote on their future path. That is a noble
endeavour, which will strengthen the civic engagement
and public trust in policy, while firmly instilling
accountability within the Somali policy.
Today President Mohamed Abdullahi Farmajo is
sitting in Dhuusamarreeb, a city in central Somalia,
with key leaders of federal member states to discuss
the modalities and strategies for making the ambition of
universal suffrage a genuine possibility. The President
also addressed the House of the People immediately
before the Dhuusamarreeb meeting and promised
to respect its constitutional mandate to legislate for
the Somali people by bringing all electoral decisions
back to it to deliberate and vote on to move forward
from the Dhuusamarreeb meeting. For democracy
and stability to thrive in Somalia, it is a must that we
respect the key roles of Parliament, the Upper House
and other mandatory electoral bodies, most specifically
the National Independent Electoral Commission
and the intergovernmental committee established to
address the outcomes of the Dhuusamarreeb process.
20-21605

20/08/2020

The situation in Somalia

Accordingly, we are determined to move Somalia away
from the exclusive and exclusionary processes that
determined our politics and shackled our people to
voicelessness, especially our young people, our women
and our minorities.
Of course, we in Somalia understand the need
for negotiations and consensus-building to achieve
our democratic goals, and through the Federal
Government’s commitment to the Dhuusamarreeb
process, we have proved this. A stable, democratic
and prosperous Somalia is in the interest of each and
every Somali, and the achievement of this will be the
best way to celebrate our joint effort with our valuable
international partners in delivering a better tomorrow
for Somalia and the world.
However, I am very sad that there are those who
seek to derail the democratic processes that our
Government envisages for Somalia with a narrow focus
on old, broken, exclusive politics. Our Government will
continue the engagement with all stakeholders openly
and fairly but will not and cannot tolerate spoilers at
this critical time in Somalia’s history.
The international community should continue to
support and encourage the Government’s programmes
of inclusive politics and democratization, and it must
not give in to the unjust pressures of spoilers.
Security has been our Government’s focus and
its greatest public expenditure since it took office,
because achieving other endeavours, including poverty
eradication, quality education, climate action and
inclusion depend on security.
Today we are building a well-trained armed
force, rights-based security and accountable security
institutions to take over the responsibility of securing
Somalia. Our Government, in partnership with
AMISOM and other key international supporters, is
working hard to achieve this through the transition
plan in line with the national security architecture.

S/PV. 8755

These comprehensive reforms are not easy, but thanks
to the commitment and absolute determination of the
Federal Government of Somalia and its partners, I am
convinced that Somalia’s successful security-sector
reforms will provide us with the best possible security
apparatuses to safeguard the well-being and progress of
the Somali people.
The Government of Somalia is working hard with
its people to build a more sustainable future free from
poverty, with strong social protections. Our approach to
eradicating poverty is to create economic opportunities
for our people, especially young people, and, to do
so, we are engaged in an ambitious and successful
fiscal and economic reform programme guided by the
International Monetary Fund Staff-Monitored Program.
We are proud of the fact that throughout the reformfocused benchmarks, we managed to achieve debt relief
in the first quarter of this year, and we are working
to further strengthen our economy to make it work for
all our people. A key benefit of debt relief has been
renewed confidence in Somalia’s ability to change and
the access to grant resources that have proved valuable
through the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In conclusion, the Somali Federal Government is
absolutely committed to socioeconomic and political
reforms to improve the lives of the Somali people.
It is our mandate and duty to do the heavy lifting to
deliver stability, inclusive politics and opportunities for
our people by working closely with our international
partners. That is a commitment that we will continue to
deliver on, God permitting. I thank all present for their
partnership and friendship.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations. I would kindly ask all
observers to promptly exit the Chamber directly upon
the adjournment of the meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

20-2160519/19
