UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/52
12 October 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3587th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 October 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the entry into force of the cease-fire
agreement between the Bosnian parties of 5 October 1995.
"The Security Council takes this opportunity to express its gratitude
to all those who negotiated the cease-fire agreement, and to the United
Nations Protection Force and others who, often at risk to their own lives,
have made possible, with the cooperation of all the parties, the
restoration of gas and electricity supplies to the inhabitants of Sarajevo
enabling them to live in more decent conditions.
"The Security Council demands that all parties fully comply with the
provisions of the cease-fire agreement and refrain from any military
activity that could jeopardize the peace process. It expresses its deepest
concern at any operation that provokes large-scale movements of population
detrimental to the peace process and a final and fair settlement. The
Council is particularly concerned about new reports related to the
movements of the displaced population in the areas of Sanski Most and
Mrkonjic Grad.
"The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of all
practices of ethnic cleansing wherever they occur and by whomsoever
committed. It demands their immediate cessation and underlines the need to
alleviate the sufferings caused by these acts. The Council urges all
Bosnian parties to respect fully the rights of all communities including
their right to remain where they are or to return to their homes in safety.
"The Security Council is in particular deeply concerned about new
reports concerning acts of ethnic cleansing committed in the Banja Luka and
Prijedor areas, especially about reports, including those by international
humanitarian organizations, that non-Serb men and boys of draft age are
being taken away by Bosnian Serb and other paramilitary forces. The
Council demands that these persons be immediately released.
95-30782 (E)

121095

/...

S/PRST/1995/52
English
Page 2

"The Security Council demands that the Bosnian Serb party grants
immediate and unimpeded access for United Nations personnel and the
representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to
all the areas of concern. It also demands that ICRC representatives be
allowed to visit and register any persons detained against their will. The
Council reiterates in this context the demands set out in resolution
1010 (1995) and in the statement of its President of 7 September 1995 on
Srebrenica and Zepa.
"The Security Council reaffirms that those who have committed or have
ordered the commission of violations of international humanitarian law will
be held individually responsible for them. The Council recalls in this
context the establishment of the International Tribunal pursuant to its
resolution 827 (1993) and reiterates that all States shall cooperate fully
with the Tribunal and its organs.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter.”

-----
