Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Comrn.ittee

world, conducive to general and complete disarmament,
particularly nuclear disarmament;
2. Reaffirms its call upon all States to respect and
abide by the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa;
3. Reaffirms further its call upon all States to con;ider and respect the continent of Africa, including the
::ontinental African States, Madagascar and other
islands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free
wne;
4. Reiterates its call upon ali States to refrain from
testing, manufacturing, deploying, transporting, storlng, using or threatening to use nuclear weapons on the
A.frican continent;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Organization of African
Unity towards the realization of the solemn Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, in which the African Heads of Staite and Government announced their
readiness to undertake, in an intemational treaty to be
concluded under the auspices of the United Nations,
not to manufacture or acquire control of nuclear
weapons;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "lmplementation
of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3472 (XXX). Comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in ali its
aspects
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3261 F (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, by which it decided to undertake a comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weaponfree zones in ali its aspects,
H aving considered the special report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament3~ containing
the comprehensive study of the 1uestion of nuclearweapon-free zones in all its aspects, 8
Noting the comments made by States members of
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament regarding the study,37
Convinced that the study will enhance further efforts conceming nuclear-weapon-free zones,
Recognizing that the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones can contribute to the security of
members of such zones, to the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to the goals of general and complete disarmament,
Expressing the wish that the study will be of assistance to States interested in the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones,
l. Takes note of the special report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament containing the
comprehensive study of the question of nuclearweapon-free zones in ali its aspects;
81101/icial Record, of the General Auembly, Thirtieth Se•
sion, Supplement No. 27A (A/10027/Add.1).
as lbid., annex l.
87 lbid., annex II.

23

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Ad Hoc Group
of Qualified Govemmental Experts for the Study of
the Question of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones for the
preparation of the study;
3. Conveys its thanks to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency and other relevant
intemational organizations for the assistance they have
given for the preparation of the study;
4. Commends the special report to the attention of
all Govemments, the lnternational Atomic Energy
Agency an~ other relevant international organizations;
5. Invites all Governments, the International Atomic
Energy Agency and other international organizations
concerned to transmit to the Secretary-General before
30 June 1976 such views, observations and suggestions
on the special report as they may deem appropriate;
6. Requests the Secretary-Oeneral to prepare a report based on information received under paragraph 5
above and to submit it to the General Assembly at its
thirty-first session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the reproduction of the special report as a United
Nations publication and to give it the widest possible
publicity in as many languages as is considered desirable and practicable;
8. Recommends that all Governments give a wide
distribution to the special report so as to acquaint publíe opinion with its contents, and invites relevant international organizations to use their facilities to make
the special report widely known;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "Comprehensive
study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in
all its aspects".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, as set forth in the Charter of the
(!nited Nations, the Organization is based on the principie of the sovereign equality of ali its Members and
that, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter
intemational rel!lti<:ms should be govemed, among othe;
f~n~~mental pnnc1ples, by those relating to the prohib1t10n of the threat or use of force and to non-intervention,
. Bearing in mind that nucle3;I-weapon-free zones cQ[lstitute o~e of _the most eflecf:ive means for preventir,ig
the proliferation, both honzontal and vertical of
nuclear weapons and for contributing to the elit~inátion of the danger of a nuclear holocaust,
Reaffirming the principie defined in its resolution
2028 (XX) of 19 November 1965, which established
the necessity that there should be an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the
nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States,
Reaffirming also the request made in its resolution
2153 A (XXI) of 17 November 1966 to all nuclearweapon States to refrain from the use, or the threat of
use, of nuclear weapons against States which conclude ·
regional treaties in order to ensure the total absence of
nuclear weaoons in their respective territories,

General Auembly-Thirtieth Se11ion

24

Having examined the comprehensive study of the
question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects 36
carried out under the auspices of the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament by the Ad Hoc Group of
Quali.fied Governmental Experts for the Study of the
Question of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones in pursuance
of--General Assembly resolution 3261.F (XXIX) of
9 December 1974,
Having also examined the comments made by States
members of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament regarding that study, 37 the text of which is
annexed to the special report in which the Conference
transmitted the study to the General Assembly, 35
Bearing in mind that, without prejudice to the results
that may be obtained through any further examination
of this matter, from the analysis of the contents of the
special report it is already possible at this time to draw
certain incontrovertible conclusions,
N oting that from among those conclusions it would
seem advisable to stress the necessity that the General
Assembly define the concept of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone and the scope of the principal obligations of the
nuclear-weapon States towards such zones and towards
the States included therein,
Convinced that in so doing it will strengthen the
new efforts recently undertaken and the realizations
already achieved for the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones,
Solemnly adopts the following declaration:

I.

Definition of the concept of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone

1. A "nuclear-weapon-free zone" shall, as a
general rule, be deemed to be any zone, recognized
as such by the General Assembly of the United
Nations, which any group of States, in the free exercise of their sovereignty, has established by virtue
of a treaty or convention whereby:
(a) The statute of total absence of nuclear weapons to which the zone shall be subject, including the
procedure for the delimitation of the zone, is defined;
( b) An intemational system of verification and
control is established to guarantee compliance with
the obligations deriving from that statute.

II.

Definition of the principal obligations of the
nuclear-weapon States towards nuclear-weaponfree zones and towards the States included
therein
2. In every case of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
that has been recognized as such by the General
Assembly, all nuclear-weapon States shall undertake
or reaffirm, in a solemn intemational instrument having full legally binding force, such as a treaty, a
convention or a protocol, the following obligations:
(a) To respect in ali its parts the statute of total
absence of nuclear weapons defined in the treaty or
convention which serves as the constitutive instrument of the zone;
( b) To refrain from contributing in any way to
the performance in the territories forming part of
the zone of acts which involve a violation of the aforesaid treaty or convention;
(e) To refrain from using or threatening to use
nuclear weapons against the States included in the
zone.

111.

Scope of the definitions

3. The above definitions in no way impair the
resolutions which the General Assembly has adopted
or may adopt with regard to specific cases of nuclearweapon-free zones nor the rights emanating for the
Member States from such resolutions.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3473 (XXX). Implementation of General Assem~ly resolution 3262 (XXIX) concerning the
8lgnature and ratification of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear W eapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 and 3262 (~XIX) of 9 December 1974 concerning the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) 38 and its
Additional Protocol I,
. T~king into account that certain territories lying
w1thm the zone of application of that Treaty which are
not sovereign political entities are nevertheless in a
position ~o recei~«:: the benefits deriving from the Treaty
through its Add1t10nal Protocol I to which the States
that de jure ?r 1e facto are intemationally responsible
for those tetntones may become parties,
Recalling with satisfaction that the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northem Ireland and the Kingdom of the Netherlands became parties to Additional
Protocol I in 1969 and 1971, respectively,
l. Again urges France and the United States of
America to sigo and ratify Additional Protocol I of
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
~atin ~merica (Treaty of Tlatelolco) as soon as poss1ble, m order that the peoples of the territories in
question may receive the benefits which derive from the
Treaty and which consist mainly in removing the danger of nuclear attack and sparing the squandering of
resources on the production of nuclear weapons;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the two States to which the above
appeal is addressed and to inform the General Assembly at its thirty-second session of any measure adopted
by those States;
. 3.. Decides to inc_lude in. the provisional agenda of
1ts th1rty-second sess1on an 1tem entitled "lmplementation of General Assembly resolution 3473 (XXX) conceming the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3474 (XXX). Establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it overwhelmingly commended the
idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East,
38 United Natfons, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.
