166

General As1embly-Thirty-1econd Session

requests the Chairman of the Special Committee to
conitnue his consultations with a view to gaining access
far such a mission to the Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Government of Guam, to safeguard
the inalienable right of the people of the Territory
to the enjoyment of its natural rcsources by taking
effective measures which guarantee thc right of the
people to own and dispose of those natural resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
9. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the speciaJ.ized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in al! sectors of the national
life of Guam;
1O. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to seek the best ways and means far the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Guam, including the
possible dispatch of a visiting mission in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/29.

Question of Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos
Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda British
Virgin Islands, Montserrat and Turks and C~icos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 23
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Deolaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
~ations relat,ing to the Territories listed above, in particular General Assembly resolutions 31 /52 and 31/54
of 1 December 1976,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to the Territories listed above, 24
Noting the continued readiness of the administering
Power to grant independence to the peoples of the Territories under its administration on the basis of their
express wishes and aspirations in that regard, and its
declared policy of fostering the growth of free and
democratic political institutions in those Territories,
Cons~ious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full 1mplementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories concemed,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved
a_s a consequence of the United Nations Visiting Miss10n to the Cayman Islands in April 1977 25 and reiterat23 !bid., vol. I, chaps. III-V, and vol. III, chaps. XXIV
and XXV.
• 24 !bid., Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meetmg, paras. 12-21.
25 /bid., Thirty-Second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. IV, chap. XXVI, annex.

ing its conviction that the dispatch of such missions to
colonial Territories is essential for securing adequatc
and first-hand infarmation ,in rc:gard to the política!.
economic and social conditions in those Territories and
to the views, wishes and aspirations of the peoplcs
therein,
Mindful that those Territories require thc continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in thc
achievement by their peoples of thc objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territorics
concemed, and stressing the necessity of diversifying
and strengthening further their economies as a matter
of priority in arder to promote economic stability and
to reduce their dependence on fluctuating economic
activities,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Spccial Committce on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
~ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs rclatmg to Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Montserrat and
Turks and Caicos Islands; 26
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those :rcrritories to self-determination and independence m accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Jndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs;
~- f!..eafjirms its conviction that questions of tcrritonal s1ze, geographical isolation and limited resources
should in no way delay the implemcntation of the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upan thc Government of the United Kinodom of Great Britain and Northem Ircland as the
administering Power, in consultation with tJ{e freely
elected representatives of the peoples, to continuc to
tak~ all the nccessary steps to ensure the ful! and specdy
attamment of the goals set forth in thc Declaration
with respect to the Territories;
. 5. Calls upan the administering Powcr to expand
1ts pro~rammc of ?udgetary aid and to take ali possiblc
steps,. m consu_ltat1C?n with the local authorities, as appropnate, to d1vers1fy and strengthen further thc economies of the Territorics listed above and to work out
concrete prograrnmes of assistance and economiL: developmcnt for those Territories;
6. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Governments of the Territories concerned, to saf~gu~rd the inalie~able right of the pcoples
of those Terntones to the enJoyment of their natural
resourcc~ by t:1king effective measures which guarantee the nghts of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
. 7. Rcquests thc administering Power, in consultat10n with the Governmcnts of the Territories concerned
to pay particular attcntion to the training of qualified
local personncl;
8. W e/comes the positive attitude of the administerir.tg Po~~r. with . re~pect. to the receiving of United
Nat10ns v1s1tmg m1ss10ns m the Territories under its
admini~tration and ~equest~ the Chairman of the Special
Comm1ttee to contmue h1s consultations with a view
to the dispatch of such missions, as appropriate;
26 lbid.,

vol. 111, chaps. XXIV and XXV.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourlh Committee

-----------------~~---

9. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations sy_stcm
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the nat1onal
life of those Territories;
1O. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementa_ti_on
of the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, Bnt1sh
Virgin Islands, l'vwntse:rat a_nd Turks ~~d. Cai~os_ 1slands, including the poss1ble d1spatch of v1s1tmg m1ss1ons
in consultation with the administering Power, and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/30.

Question of the Cayman Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Cayman Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 27 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory
in April 1977 at the invitation of the administering
Power, the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 28
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 29
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cayman Islands;30
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Cayman Islands to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Invites the attention of the administering Power
to the obs:ervations, conclusions and recommendations
of the United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to
the Territory in April 1977 31 :md expresses it appreciation to the members of thc Visiting Mission for
the constructive work accomplished and to the administering Power and the Government of the Cayman Is27 /bid., vol. I, chaps. III and IV, and vol. IV, chap. XXVI.
28 /bid., vol. IV, chap. XXVI, annex.
29 /bid., Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meet-

ing, paras. 12-21.
30 /bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.l), vol. IV, chap. XXVI.
31 [bid., annex, paras. 486-511.

167

---------------

lands for the close co-operation and assistance extended to the Mission;
5. Re.¡uests the Government of the United Kingdom of Grcat Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to continue to take al! necessary
mcasures, in consultation with the Government of the
Cayman !stands, to expedite the process of dccolonization in the Territory in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Dcclaration;
6. Endorses the view of the Visiting Mission that
urgent attention should be given to the diversification
of the economy of the Cayman Islands, as an important
elemcnt in the process of self-determination;
7. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting
Mission, to continue to enlist the assistance of the
spccialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system in the development and
strengthening of the economy of the Territory, and
requests those agencies and organizations to respond
appropriately to the development needs of the Cayman
Islands;
8. Further requests the administering Power, in
consultation with the Government of the Cayman IsIands, to pay particular attention to the training of
qualified local personnel with a view to their increascd
participation in the over-all development of the Tcrritory;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
full cxamination of this question at its next session
in the light of the findings of the Visiting Mission,
including the possible dispatch of a further mission to
the Cayman Islands at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to rcport
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/31.

Question of the United States Virgin
Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples,
and ali other resolutions and decisions of the Unitcd
Nations relating to thc Territory,
Hai:ing examined the rclevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committce on the Situation with rcoard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the a;'anting of Indepcndence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples,:i2 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
April 1977 at the invitation of the administering Power,
the Govcrnm.:nt of the United States of America,s:i
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 31

=~

/bid., vol. I, chaps. III and V, and vol. IV, chap. XXVII.
· Jbul., vol. IV. chap. XXVII, annex.
4
3 /bid.,
Thirty-second Session. Fourtlz Committee 17th
meeting, paras. 47-50.
'
