A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/79
25 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 108
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/617)]
51/79.

Measures to combat contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 50/135 of 21 December 1995 and Commission on
Human Rights resolution 1996/21 of 19 April 1996,1
Bearing in mind the outcome of the World Conference on Human Rights,
held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993, and, in particular, the attention
given in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action2 to the elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance,
Aware that racism, being one of the exclusionist phenomena plaguing many
societies, requires resolute action and cooperation for its eradication,
Having examined the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission
on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance,3 including his conclusions and
recommendations,
Deeply concerned that, despite continuing efforts, racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, as well as acts of
violence, continue to persist and even grow in magnitude, incessantly adopting
new forms, including tendencies to establish policies based on racial,
religious, ethnic, cultural and national superiority or exclusivity,

1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1996, Supplement
No. 3 (E/1996/23), chap. II, sect. A.
2

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

3

A/51/301, annex.

97-76885

/...

A/RES/51/79
Page 2

Conscious of the fundamental difference between, on the one hand, racism
and racial discrimination as governmental policy or resulting from official
doctrines of racial superiority or exclusivity and, on the other hand, other
manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance which are increasingly visible in segments of many societies and
perpetrated by individuals or groups, some of which are directed against
migrant workers and members of their families,
Taking note of the final report on freedom of opinion and expression
submitted to the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities at its forty-fourth session by the Special Rapporteurs
Mr. Louis Joinet and Mr. Danilo Turk, in which the Special Rapporteurs
concluded that, under international law, racism is not an opinion but an
offence,4
Noting that the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
in its general recommendation XV (42) of 17 March 19935 on article 4 of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, held that the prohibition of the dissemination of all ideas
based upon racial superiority or racial hatred was compatible with the right
to freedom of opinion and expression as outlined in article 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights6 and in article 5 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,7
Conscious that impunity for crimes motivated by racist and xenophobic
attitudes plays a role in weakening the rule of law and tends to encourage the
recurrence of such crimes,
Underlining the importance of creating conditions that foster greater
harmony and tolerance within societies,
Regretting that the Special Rapporteur has continued to encounter
difficulties in his efforts to fulfil his mandate, owing to the lack of
necessary resources,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;3
2.
Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue his exchange of views
with Member States, relevant mechanisms, related United Nations organs and
specialized agencies in order to further their effectiveness and mutual
cooperation;

4

E/CN.4/Sub.2/1992/9 and Add.1.

5

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 18 (A/48/18), chap. VIII, sect. B.
6

Resolution 217 A (III).

7

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
/...

A/RES/51/79
Page 3

3.
Takes note of the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to
convene, without further delay, a world conference on racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and to include the question
of immigration and xenophobia on its agenda;8
4.
Expresses its profound concern at and unequivocal condemnation of
all forms of racism and all racist violence, including related acts of random
and indiscriminate violence;
5.
Expresses its deep concern at and condemnation of manifestations
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against
migrant workers and members of their families and other vulnerable groups in
many societies;
6.
Encourages all States, in accordance with the conclusions and
recommendations of the Special Rapporteur in his report, to include in their
educational curricula and social programmes, at all levels as appropriate,
knowledge, tolerance and respect for foreign cultures, peoples and countries;
7.
Encourages the efforts of Governments to take measures aimed at
the eradication of all forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
8.
Categorically condemns any role played by print, audio-visual or
electronic media in inciting acts of violence motivated by racial hatred;
9.
Recognizes that Governments should implement and enforce
legislation to prevent acts of racism and racial discrimination;
10.
Calls upon all Governments and intergovernmental organizations,
with the assistance of non-governmental organizations, as appropriate, to
continue to cooperate with and to supply relevant information to the Special
Rapporteur;
11.
Commends non-governmental organizations for their action against
racism and racial discrimination and for their continuous support and
assistance to the victims of racism and racial discrimination;
12.
Urges all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special
Rapporteur, with a view to enabling him to fulfil his mandate;
13.
Once again requests the Secretary-General to provide, without any
further delay, the Special Rapporteur, as in the case of other Special
Rapporteurs, with all the necessary human and financial assistance to enable
him to carry out his mandate efficiently, effectively and expeditiously and to
submit, in a timely manner, an interim report on this question to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session.
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996

8

See A/51/301, para. 57.
