UNITED NATl'ONS

I NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
orrlCIAI. RECORDS
TWELFTH

799

YEAR

th MEETING: 5 NOVEMBER 1957

---;------erne SEANCE: 5 NOVEMBRE 1957

DOUZIEME ANNEE

CONSEII. DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS orrlCIEI.S
NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SjAgendaj799)

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1

Adoption of the agenda

...................... .............

1

The India-Pakistan question (continued) ...............•................••

1

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (SjAgendaj799)

1

Remerciements au President sortant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption de l'ordre duo jour

1

Question Inde-Pakistan (suite)

1

( 44 p. )

SjPV.799

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

* **
Les document!! pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dan5les comptes
rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements tri.
mestriels aux Documents officiels.

Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de lettres majuscules et de chifjres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte signifie
qu'il s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

SEVEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-NINTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 5 November 1957, at 3 p.m.

SEPT CENT QUATRE-VINGT-DIX-NEUVIEME SEANCE
Tenue it New-York, le mardi 5 novembre 1957, it 15 heures.

President: Mr. Hashim JAWAD (Iraq).

President : M. Hashim JAWAD ·(Irak).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Australia, China, Colombia, Cuba, France, Iraq,
Philippines, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Irela;nd, United States of America.

Presents : Les representants des pays suivants
Australie, Chine, Colombie, Cuba, France, Irak, Philippines, Suede, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/799)

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/799)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The India-Pakistan question.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Question Inde-Pakistan.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

Remerciements an President sortant

1. The PRESIDENT: Before we proceed to the
adoption of the agenda, I should like to pay tribute
to the retiring President of the Council, Mr. GeorgesPicot, the representative of France. I feel that he
presided over the Council with ability and distinctio~.
I believe that you all wish me on behalf of the CouncIl
to congratulate him and to express to him our sincere
thanks.

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant de
passer it l'adoption de l'ordre du jour, je voudrais
rendre hommage au President du Conseil de securite,
M. Georges-Picot, representant de la France, qui a
dirige les debats avec autant de competence que de
distinction. Je me fais, j'en suis sur, l'interprete du
Conseil tout entier en le felicitant et en le priant de
recevoir nos sinceres remerciements.

2. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translated from
French): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the
kind words which you have addressed to me on your
own behalf and on that of the Council. May I take
this opportunity to express the personal hope that
the good-neighbourly relations which we maintain
here in the Council will soon be resumed at the level
of the diplomatic relations between our two countries.

2. M. GEORGES-PICOT (France) : Monsieur le President, je voudrais vous remercier des aimables paroles
que vous venez de m'adresser en votre nom et au nom
du Conseil. Qu'il me soit permis a cette occasion
d'exprimer a titre personnel le souhait que les relations
de' bon voisinage que nous entretenons ici au Conseil
se traduisent un jour prochain a nouveau sur le plan
des relations diplomatiques entre nos deux pays.

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

The India-Pakistan question (continued)

Question Inde-Pakistan (suite)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. V. K. Krishna
Menon, representative of India, and Mr. Firoz Khan Noon,
representative of Pakistan, took places at the Council
table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. V. K. Krishna
Menon, representant de l'Inde, et M. Firoz Khan Noon,
representant du Pakistan, prennent place a la table
du Conseil.

3. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): At the request of the
representative of Pakistan, the Security Council is
again considering the Kashmir question. This time

3. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russel : A la demande du representant du Pakistan, le Conseil de securite examine
de nouveau la question du Cachemire. Le Conseil s'est

the occasion for the discussion is the report [8/3821]
which Mr. Jarring, the Swedish representative, submitted on 29 April 1957 in accordance with the Security
Council's resolution of 21 February 1957 [8/3793].
The Council requested Mr. Jarring, who was President
of the Security Council at that time, to conduct negotiations with the representatives of India and Pakistan
for the purpose of examining any proposals likely to
contribute to the peaceful settlement of the Kashmh'
problem.

reuni cette fois pour discuter le rapport que M. Jarring,
representant de la Suede, a soumis le 29 avril 1957
[8/3821], conformement a la resolution adoptee par
le Conseille 21 fevrier 1957 [8/3793]. Le Conseil avait
demande a M. Ja,rring, qui presidait a l'epoque, d'engager cies pourpaaers avec le Gouvernement de l'Inde
et le Gouvernement du Pakistan afin d'examiner toutes
propQsitions de nature a contribuer a un reglement
pacifique du probleme du Cachemire.

4. At the time that draft resolution [8/3792] was
under discussion the delegation of the Soviet Union
drew attention to its fundamental defects and objected
in particular to the mention of the Council's previous
resolutions [774th meeting, paras. 43 and 44], in other
words, to the idea that, in carrying out the Security
Council's instructions, Mr. Jarring should to any
extent be bound by its earlier decisions, adopted in
entirely different circumstances. We pointed out at
that time that he should base himself on the present
international situation and on circumstances in the
Kashmir area as they are today, rather than on resolutions adopted many years ago and embodying recommendations which no longer have any real force and
meaning in view of fundamentally altered circumstances. The Soviet delegatior did not object to the
adoption of the resolution, however, for it believed
that the mission entrusted to the President of the
Security Council, if carried out in the light of the
situation which had developed in that area of the
world, could contribute to the peaceful settlement of
the problem.

4. Lors de l'examen du projet de resolution [8/3792],
la delegation de I'Union sovietique avait signale les
graves defauts de ce texte et s'etait elevee notamment
contre le fait qu'on y rappelait les resolutions anterieures du Conseil [774e seance, par. 43 et 44]; en
d'autres termes, elle ne voulait pas que, dans l'accomplissement des instructions du Conseil de securite,
M. Jarring flit lie en aucune faf(on par les resolutions
anterieures du Conseil, qui avaient ete adoptees dans
des circonstances tout a fait difIerentes. Nous avions
indique alors que M. Jarring aurait interet it se fonder
sur la situation internationale presente et sur les conditions actuelles dans la region du Cachemire, plutot
que sur des resoh~tions adoptees plusieurs annees auparavant, qui avaient en fait perdu leur force et leur
sens par suite des changements notables survenus
depuis. Cependant, la delegation sovietique ne s'etait
pas opposee a l'adoption de ce projet de resolution,
estimant que si le President du Conseil de securite
s'acquittait de sa mission en tenant compte de la
situation dans cette region du monde, le reglement
pacifique du probleme pourrait s'en trouver facilite.

5. The Soviet delegation has studied the report
submitted by Mr. Jarring and feels that some of the
observations it contains can assist the members of
the Security Council in forming a correct and objective
idea of the situation which has arisen in connexion
with the Kashmir problem.

5. La delegation sovietique a pris connaissance du
rapport de M. Jarring et considere qu'il contient des
elements qui peuvent aider les membres du Conseil it
se faire une idee juste et objective de la situation qui
s'est creee a propos de la question du Cachemire.

6. In particular, the report reflects the fact that
during the ten years which have elapsed since the
Kashmir problem was first referred to the Security
Council, fundamental changes have taken place not
only in Kashmir itself, in the life of the people of
Kashmir, but also in the political situation in that
part of Asia. Considering those circumstances, it would,
of course, be unrealistic to be guided by recommendations and proposals put forward in connexion with
the Kashmir question many years ago.

6. Le rapport indique notamment que, pendant les
10 annees qui se sont ecoulees depuis que le Conseil
a ete saisi de la question, des changements importants
se sont produits aussi bien au Cachemire, dans la vie
du peuple cachemirien, que dans le climat politique de
cette region d'Asie. Il est evident que, dans ces conditions, il ne serait guere realiste de s'inspirer de recommandations et de propositions adoptees il y a plusieurs
annees.

7.

In the report it is expressly stated that:
"The Council will, furthermore, be aware of the
fact that the implementation of international agreements of an ad hoc character, which has not been
achieved fairly speedily, may become progressively
more difficult because the situation with which they
were to cope has tended to change." [8/3821, para. 21.]

7. Voici ce qu'ecrit M. Jarring:
« Le Conseil doit se rendre compte du fait que,
si elle ne s'est pas faite avec une rapidite suffisante,
la mise en reuvre d'accords internationaux d'une
portee precise peut se reveler de plus en plus malaisee
parce que la situation it laquelle ces accords devaient
remedier a tendance it evoluer.» [8/3821, par. 21.]

8. At the same time the report draws attention to
". . . the concern expressed in connexion with
the changing political, economic and strategic
factors surrounding the whole of the Kashmir
question, together with the changing pattern of
power relations in West and South' Asia." [Ibid.,
para. 20.]

8. En meme temps, le rapport signale :
« L'inquietude exprimee au sujet de l'evolution des
facteurs politiques, economiques et strategiques qui
interviennent dans la question du Cachemire prise
dans son ensemble, ainsi qu'au sujet de la transfor-

.2

J

m.tiondesnbie
paretI..
entrepar.
puissane..
clans ..
l'Asie
l'Ouest
du rel.tions
Sud.» [Ibid.,
20.]
•

F•• ,

9. These conclusions in the report accord with the
views expressed by the Soviet delegation when the
Kashmir problem was discussed at the beginning of
1957. The Security Council has not yet shown any
sign of taking those conclusions into account.

9. Ces conclusions s'accordent avec les vues que la
delegation sovietique a exposees, lors de l'examen de
la question du Cachemire, au debut de 1957, mais il
ne semble pas que, jusqu'a present, le Conseil de
securite en ait tenu compte.

10. The Soviet delegation for its part shares the
concern caused in peace-loving circles in Asia and
throughout the world by the policy of organizing
politico-military blocs and establishing military bases
on foreign soil, by the armaments race with its disastrous
consequences for the economies of the under-developed
countries, by the Western Powers' intervention in
the domestic affairs of States and other actions which
are leading to increased tension and undermining
security in various parts of Asia. The fact that Pakistan
has allowed itself to be drawn into the orbit of that
policy of the Western Powers has left its mark on the
Pakistan Government's policy with regard to the
Kashmir problem as well. As a result of Pakistan's
policy, which has found support and encouragement
among that country's partners in the South-East Asia
Treaty Organization (SEATO), the situation in the
Kashmir area continues to be strained.

10. La delegation sovietique partage les inquietude!
qu'inspirent aux peuples pacifiques d'Asie et du illonde
entier la creation de blocs militaires et politiques,
l'installation de bases militaires en territoire etranger,
la course aux armements lourde de graves consequences
pour l'economie des pays sous-developpes, l'intervention des puissances occidentales dans les affaires
interieures de certains Etats, et les autres agissements
de ces puissances qui ont pour effet d'accroitre la tension
et de compromettre la securite dans diverses regions
d'Asie. Le fait que le Pakistan a ete entraine dans
l'orbite de cette politique des puissances occidentales
n'a pas manque d'influencer l'attitude du Gouvernement pakistanais a l'egard de la question du Cachemire. En raison de la politique du Pakistan, appuyee
et encouragee par les autres membres de I'Organisation
du Traite de l' Asie du Sud-Est (OTASE), la situation
dans la region du Cachemire demeure tendue.

11. For many years the Indian Government has
sought a peaceful settlement of the conflict on the
basis of the agreements reached in the past and incorporated in the resolution adopted by the United Nations
Commission for India and Pakistan on 13 August 1948
[8/1100, para. 7.5] and in its further resolution of
5 January 1949 [8/1196, para. 1.5].

11. Depuis plusieurs annees, le Gouvernement indien
recherche un reglement pacifique du differend sur la
base des accords consignes dans la resolution de la
Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan
en date du 13 aout 1948 [8/1100, par. 7.5] et completes
par la resolution du 5 janvier 1949 [8/1196, par. 16].

12. Nevertheless, all India's efforts to bring about
the successive implementation of those agreements
and, in particular, the withdrawal from Kashmir of
Pakistan. troops, tribesmen, and Pakistan nationals,
in accordance with the Commission's resolution of
13 August 1948, have been balked by Pakistan's
obstructionist policy. The Indian Government, in
accordance with the obligations which it has assumed,
has sought to promote the national development of
Kashmir by granting its people the right of self-determination and by taking the necessary steps to ensure
the free expression of their will in the manner most
appropriate to the circumstances which have arisen.
As is well known, in September 1951 the first general
election was held in Kashmir for the purpose of establishing a Constituent Assembly. In February 1954 that
Assembly unanimously ratified the accession of Kashmir
to India and in November 1956 it adopted a State
Constitution formalizing the status of Kashmir as a
self-governing State within the Republic of India. In
March 1957, the population of Kashmir, together
with all the peoples of India, participated in elections
to the Indian Parliament and also elected a legislative
assembly of their own State. The whole development
of the State and its successes in the work of national
construction show that the close political, economic
and cultural ties between Kashmir and the Republic
of India are an important condition of its further
progress. By now it should be clear to everyone that
the people of Kashmir have decided their own destiny
ence and for all, that they regard Kashmir as an
inalienable part of the Republic of India and that
they do not want any interference in their affairs by
any self-appointed guardians.

12. Cependant, tous les efforts deployes par l'Inde
pour assurer la mise en ceuvre successive de ces accords,
et notamment pour faire retirer du Cachemire les
troupes, membres de tribus et ressortissants du Pakistan,
conformement a la resolution du 13 aout 1948, se sont
heurtes a l'opposition systematique du Pakistan. En
vue de favoriser le developpement national du Cachemire, le Gouvernement indien, conformement a ses
engagements, a accorde au peuple cachemirien le droit
de disposer de lui-meme et a pris les mesures necessaires pour lui permettre d'exprimer librement ses
vceux selon la procedure la plus appropriee a la situation. On sait qu'en septembre 1951 se sont tenues
pour la premiere fois au Cachemire des elections generales a une Assemblee constituante de I'Etat. En
fevrier 1954, cette assembIee a ratifie a l'unanimite
l'accession du Cachemire a l'Inde et, en novembre 1956,
eile a adopte une constitution conferant au Cachemire
le statut d'Etat autonome au sein de la Republique de
l'Inde. En mars 1957, la population du Cachemire a
participe, avec tous les peuples de I'Inde, aux elections
au Parlement indien, et elle a egalement elu une Assemblee legislative de I'Etat. Toute l'evolution de I'Etat
et les resultats qu'il a obtenus dans son edification
nationale montrent que les liens solides qui I'unissent a
la Republique indienne, dans les domaines politique,
economique et culturel, constituent une condition importante de son progres futuro Tout le monde doit comprendre maintenant que le peuple cachemirien a definitivement decide de son sort, qu'il considere le Cachemire comme partie integrante de la Republique de
I'Inde, et qu'il ne desire aucune intervention dans ses
affaires de la part de tuteurs malvenus.
3

13. Why is the question of the fate of the people of
Kashmir again being re opened? Obviously it is not
the interest of the people of Kashmir which is determining the policy of the Western Powers, engaged as they
are in yet another attempt to use the Kashmir problem
once again to exacerbate relations between India and
Pakistan, to undermine the security of that part of
South-East Asia and to increase tension in the area.

13. Mais alors, ponrquoi veut-on remettre en cause
l'avenir du peuple cachemirien ? De toute evidence, ce
n'est par I'interet de ce peuple qui inspire la politique
des puissances occidentales ; celles-ci cherchent de nouveau it exploiter la question du Cachemire pour aggraver
les relations entre I'lnde et le Pakistan, pour compromettre la securite et accroitre la tension dans cette
region de I'Asie du Sud-Est.

i4~' It would be hard to disagree with the statement
made by Mr. Nehru, the Prime Minister of India, on
4 March 1957 in which he said that certain Powers
which do not like his country's independent foreign
policy are seeking to exert pressure from within and
without to induce India to change it.

14. On ne peut manquer de souscrire it la declaration
que M. Nehru, premier ministre de l'Inde, a faite le
4 mars 1957, et selon laquelle certaines puissances auxquelles la politique etrangere independante de I'Inde
n'a pas I'heur de plaire s'efforcent d'exercer une pression
de I'exterieur et de l'interieur en vue de modifier cette
politique.

15. It would seem to have been no mere coincidence
that the resumption of the discussion of the Kashmir
problem at the beginning of 1957 occurred at the very
time when certain Western Powers were expressing
open dissatisfaction with the foreign policy of India,
which had taken a stand in favour of the peaceful
co-existence of States and the settlement of outstanding
international problems by negotiation. Having artificially created the unhealthy atmosphere which
::urrounds the Kashmir problem, the Western Powers
are seeking to use it as a means of applying political
pressure to India. The Security Council, however,
cannot and must not be a party to, much less an
instrument of, such pressure. It is quite obvious that
any sort of proposal to send international troops into
Kashmir or to refer the question for consideration to
various arbiters and mediators, primarily represents
a blatant attempt to exert pressure on India. Furthermore, the purpose of such proposals is to cover up
and justify foreign intervention in the Kashmir problem
and the domestic affairs of India to the detriment
of its national sovereignty. For that reason, the objections voiced here by the Indian representative to
the proposal to institute a special arbitration procedure
for investigating the facts of the Kashmir problem
are fully justified. The Council cannot disregard those
objections.

15. On a I'impression que ce n'est pas par hasard que
la question du Cachemire a ete discutee de nouveau
au debut de cette annee, it une epoque oil certaines
puissances fJccidentales etaient manifestement mecontentes de Ita politique exterieure de l'Inde, qui se prononl;ait en faveur de la coexistence pacifique des Etats
et du reglement des problemes internationaux en suspens par voie de negociation. Les puissances occidentales cherchent it exploiter l'atmosphere malsaine
qu'elles ont creee artificiellement autour de la question
du Cache!"1ire pour exercer une pression politique sur
I'lnde. CeiJendant, le Conseil de securite ne peut pas
et ne doit pas se faire le complice ou l'instrument d'une
te1l2 pression. Il est absolument evident que toutes les
propositions tendant it envoyer des forces internationales
au Cachemire ou it confier le reglement de la question
it des arbitres et mediateurs refletent avant tout un
desir non deguise de faire pression sur l'Inde. D'autre
part, ces propositions visent it masquer et it legitimer
I'intervention etrangere dans la question du Cachemire
et dans les affaires interieures de I'lnde au mepris de
la souverainete nationale de ce pays. C'est pourquoi
les objections que le representant de l'Inde a opposees
it la proposition concernant le recours it un arbitrage
special pour etablir les faits sont entierement justifiees.
Le Conseil doit tenir compte de ces objections.

16. The Soviet delegation holds that the Security
Council should use its authority not to impose the
will of others on the people of Kashmir, but to bring
about the cessation of activities which are increasing
tension in the relations between two Asian countries
and to create favourable conditions for the settlement
by peaceful means, without any foreign interference
or pressure, those aspects of the Kashmir problem
which are still unresolved. If the Security Council
follows this course, it will win the support and understanding of the forces of peace everywhere, and will
help to restore the situation in the Kashmir area to
normal and to strengthen peace and security in SouthEast Asia, and, consequently, throughout the world.

16. La delegation sovietique estime que le Conseil de
securite doit user de son autorite, non pas pour imposer
au peuple cachemirien la volonte d'autrui, mais pour
faire cesser les agissements qui aggravent les relations
entre deux pays d'Asie et pour creer une atmosphere
favorable au reglement, par des moyens pacifiques, et
sans aucune intervention ou pression de l'exterieur, des
aspects du probleme du Cachemire qui ne sont pas
encore resolus. En agissant dans ce sens, le Conseil de
securite s'assurera la comprehension et I'appui de tous
les peuples pacifiques, contribuera it retablir une situation normale dans la region du Cachemire et aidera it
renforcer la paix et la securite dans l'Asie du Sud-Est,
et, partant, dans le monde entier.

17. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): Although India is 17. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de l'anglais] :
not a member of the Security Council, the President Bien que I'lnde ne soit pas membre du Conseil de .
has, under the terms of the Charter and on behalf securite, le President a, conformement it la Charte;
of the Council, invited my delegation to appear here invite, au nom du Conseil, la delegation indienne it
and to participate in these proceedings. I therefore venir sieger et it participer au debat. Je considere done J
consid." it an honour and a privilege to offer him my 4 conone on honneur et nn privilege de feJiciter an nom

I

J

country's felicitations on his assumption of the office
of President of the Security Council for this month.

de mon pays le President au moment OU il prend pour
un mois la presidence du Conseil.
.

18. This group of meetings of the Council was
originally called at the request of Pakistan for the
purpose, as we understand it, of considering the report
made to the Security Council by the representative
of Sweden [8/3821]. On 24 September, the Foreign
Minister of Pakistan made a statement before the
Council [791sl meeting]. At the end of that statement,
we asked for time to consider it. In accordance with
its usual practice, the Council decided that both the
members of the Council and the parties concerned
should have the necessary time to consider the propositions or ideas put forward.

18. Le Conseil a 6te convoque pour cette serie de
seances it la demande du Pakistan afin, pensons-nous,
d'etudier le rapport que lui a presente le representant
de la Suede [8/3821]. Le 24 septembre [7911' seance],
le Ministre des affaires etrangeres du Pakistan a fait
une declaration devant le Conseil. A la suite de cette
declaration, nous avons demande que l'on nous accorde
le temps de l'etudier. Conformement it sa pratique
habituelle, le Conseil a decide de donner it ses membres
et aux parties en cause le temps necessaire pour examiner les propositions et les idees qui ont ete avancees
au cours du debat.

19. When the Council again convened on this subject,
on 9 October [795lh meeting], I submitted on behalf
of the Government of India what we regarded as
relevant information, replies to questions which had
been posed, denials of affirmations which we regarded
as incorrect or misstatements of fact, and points of
view which we considered to be legitimate and necessary in view of the duty resting upon us as a sovereign
nation and on this Council to defend the Charter.

19. Lorsque le Conseil s'est reuni it nouveau pOUf
examiner la question le 9 octobre [795e seance], j'ai
presente au nom du Gouvernement de I'Inde ce que
nous considerions comme des renseignements pertinents ;
j'ai repondu aux questions posees, dementi les assertions
que nous estimions incorrectes ou ne correspondant pas
aux faits, expose les vues que nous jugions Iegitimes
et necessaires, compte tenu de l'obligation de defendre
la Charte qui nous incombe it nous, en tant que nation
souveraine et qui incombe egalement au Conseil de
securite.

20. On 9 October, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan
made a brief reply [796lh meeting]. So far as I could
comprehend it, the purpose of that reply was to state
that the remarks made on behalf of India consisted
largely of misstatements of facts and to inform the
Council that it could expect a fuller reply from Pakistan
later, We had hoped that we should have the benefit
of that fuller reply so that we could give the Council
our own complete responses to it. Unfortunately for
us, however, that is not the position today. We make
no complaints about this. It is open both to members
of the. Security Council and to those who are caned
before it to choose the time for their statements.

20. Le 9 octobre [796e seance], le Ministre des affaires
etrangeres du Pakistan a repondu brievement. Jl veulait, me semble-t-il, montrer que les observations faites
par I'Inde etaient en grande partie des assertions ne
correspondant pas aux faits et avertir le Conseil qu'une
reponse plus complete serait faite ulterieurement au
nom du Pakistan. Nous avons espere entendre cette
reponse pour pouvoir y repondre point par point devant
le Conseil. Malheureusement, la situation est toute differente aujourd'hui. Milis nous ne nous en plaignons pas,
car il appartient aux membres du Conseil de securite
et it ceux qu'il invite it se presenter devant lui de decider
du moment de leurs interventions.

21. I wish only to submit to the Council that the
remarks which we shall make today en behalf of India
are governed by the basic conditions which brought
this issue before the Council; by, more immediately,
the Jarring report; by the statement of the Foreign
Minister of Pakistan, so far as it has gone; and by the
statements of the members of the Council who have
participated in the debate. If there should be any
further statements which call for elucidation, we shall
not only be willing but shall feel it our duty to place
such information as we have at the Council's disposal.

21. Je me bornerai it signaler au Conseil que les observations que nous ferons aujourd'hui au nom de I'Inde
tiendront compte des facteurs fondamentaux qui font
que le Conseil est, a l'heure actuelle, saisi de cette
situation; elles tiendront compte, plus precisement, du
rapport Jarring, de la declaration du Ministre des
affaires etrangeres du Pakistan et des declarations des
membres du Conseil ayant participe aux debats. Si
toute autre declaration appelait des eclaircissements,
non seulement nous serions disposes it mettre les renseignements que nous possederions it la disposition du
Conseil, mais encore nous nous y sentirions obliges.

22. At the Council's meeting of 29 October, when
the representative of France was presiding, I stated
the following on behalf of the Government of India:
" We have now heard the statement by the representative of Pakistan and the statements of members
of the Security Council, as far as they are willing
to ma]<e them now." [798lh meeting, para. 53.]
I also said that we had listened to the suggestions
- or what purported to be suggestions - which had
b~en made. I assured the Council that, in accordance
WIth the usual practice of the Government of India and, I would hope, of all Governments - we would

22. A la seance du 29 octobre, que presidait le representant de la France, j'ai dit ceci, au nom du Gouvernement de l'Inde :
« Nous avons entendu la declaration du representant du Pakistan et celles des membres du Conseil
de securite qui ont bien voulu exprimer leur opinion
jusqu'it present.» [798e seance, par. 53.]
J'ai dit aussi que nous avions ecoute toutes les suggestions, ou ce que l'on considerait comme des suggestions.
J'ai assure le Conseil que, conformement it la pratique
du Gouvernement de l'Inde - pratique suivie aussi,
je l'espere, par tous les gouvernements - nous tien-

I
I
5

of course give consideration to any suggestions made
in the Security Council. I stated that my delegation
wished to reserve its right, in view of the remarks
that had been made in the Council, to make detailed
replies.

drions compte de toutes les suggestions faites devan
le Conseil. J'ai precise que ma delegation se reservait
le droit de repondre en detail aux observations formulees
devant le Conseil.

23. Here, I wish to say that we are well aware of
the different points of view and different interpretations of Governments as to factors of time or space
or political conditions. We are even well aware of the
views that one Government or another might hold
concerning the capacity or the willingness of other
Governments to perform. So far as we are concerned,
however, we wish to assure the Council that any
expression of opinion by any representative of any
Government which is a member of this Council is
listened to by the Government of India not only with
courtesy but with a desire to understand its purposes.
Nevertheless, we do not seek to attribute any motives.

23. Je dois declarer ici que nous connaissons bien les
divergences de vues et les differences d'interpretation
entre les gouvernements quantau temps, au lieu et a la
situation politique. Nous connaissons hien les vues que
pourrait avoir tel ou tel gouvernement sur la capacite
ou la volonte d'agir des autres gouvernements. En ce
qui nous concerne, cependant, nous desirons assurer le
Conseil que l'Inde ecoute les opinions des representants
de tous les pays membres du Conseil de securite, non
seulement avec courtoisie, mais encore avec le desir
de comprendre les objectifs vers lesquels elles tendent.
Mais nous ne voulons pas, toutefois, rechercher les
intentions.

24. In some of the speeches addressed partly to us
the hope has been expressed that the parties concerned
would take this, that, or the other in good faith. May I
say with great respect that this particular remark is
not really necessary in our case. We do not question
the motives of the Governments which have expressed
themselves strongly in one way or another or which
fundamentally disagree with the basic views we hold.
At the same time, we would be failing in our duty not
only to our people and not only to the future of our
country, in which we are deeply interested, but even
to the Security Council, if we did not even make what
might be spoken of in other places as repetitions or
speeches that take up too much time of the members
of the Council. Mter all, the complaint is ours. We are
the party most affected. We came here because we were
affected. We came here because we placed our reliance
upon the United Nations Charter and, therefore, we
have to give this matter the fullest consideration that
it deserves, at the same time trying to conserve both
the time of the United Nations as a whole and the
patience and energies of the Security Council.

24. Certains orateurs ont dit qu'ils souhaitaient que
les parties en cause - ils visaient donc en partie I'lnde
- acceptent de bonne foi telle ou telledeclaration.
Qu'il me soit permis de dire que, en ce qui nous concerne,
cette observation ne s'imposait pas. Nous ne mettons
pas en doute les motifs qui ont amene les gouvernements
a se declarer fermement partisans de telle ou telle
solution, ou a s'opposer radicalement a notre point de
vue. Cependant, nous avons des responsabilites non
seulement envers nos concitoyens et envers l'avenir de
notre pays, qui nous touche profondement, mais aussi
envers le Conseil de securite, et nous nous y deroberions
si nous ne prenions meme pas la parole, au risque
de paraitre a certains nous repeter ou abuser du temps
des membres du Conseil. Apres tout, nous sommes les
plaignants. Nous representons la partie qui a le plus
d'interets en jeu. Nous sommes venus ici parce que
nos interets sont en jeu. Nous sommes venus ici parce
que nous avons place notre confiance dans la Charte
des Nations Unies, et c'est la raison pour laquelle nous
devons donner a cette affaire toute l'attention qu'elle
merite, tout en nous efforc;ant de menager le temps des
Nations Unies, comme la patience et l'energie du Conseil
de securite.

25. I referred at that time to certain speeches by
certain countries in particular. That may have created
the impression that some of the representatives were
being singled out or that it was a bilateral difference
of opinion, or something of that kind. I should like to
elaborate on that a little later.
26. In the meanwhile, even though it has been said
before, after all this matter has been here for ten years,
and each time it has reappeared in a different context.
Each time, though the parties who take the initiative
may be the same, though our basic position has not
altered, nor our willingness to accede to counsels of
conciliation or our insistence upon what we consider
to be basic, namely, the integrity and independence of
our Union, the circumstances in which we meet, the
factors that are pin-pointed, their bearing upon the
situations as they occur in our country and in the
world at the time, are different. All the same, that
basic position has a fUD.damental bearing upon the
whole of this so-called problem. Let me therefore
briefly state what it is.

25. A l'epoque, j'ai mentionne certains discours
prononces par certains pays. Peut-etre a-t-on eu
l'impression que je voulais m'en prendre a quelques
representants, que nous n'etions pas d'accord, ou
quelque chose de ce genre. Je voudrais revenir un peu
plus tard sur ce point.
26. Pour l'instant, je ferai observer, au risque de
redites, qu'apres tout cette affaire est en instance
depuis 10 ans, et qu'elle apparait chaque fois sous un
jour different. Ce sont peut-etre les memes parties qui
prennent l'initiative, notre position fondamentale n'a
peut-etre pas change, peut-etre sommes-nous toujours
disposes a suivre les conseils de conciliation, peut-etre
continuons-nous a insister sur ce qui nous parait essentiel, a savoir l'integrite et l'independance de I'Union
indienne, mais les circonstances dans lesquelles nous
nous reunissons, les elements qui sont mis en relief, leur
repercussion sur la situation telle qu'elle se presente
dans notre pays et dans le monde, different. Cependant,
cette position fondamentale a une influence preponderante sur l'ensemble de ce pretendu probleme. Permettez-moi done de la definir brievement.

I
6

27. First of all, we came here with a complaint under
Chapter VI of the Charter. We are the complainants
in this matter, if you want to put it that way. We do
not ourselves want to put it that way. The party on
the other side is not in a position of equality. From our
point of view, the party on the other side is the defendant whose action stands to be corrected, and that
correction is required has been stated so many times
by the Security Council and not least in the resolution
of 13 August 1948 to which both Pakistan and India
gave their assent at that time and, within the limitations and in the circumstances I have enumerated
several times before this Council, by which we stand
engaged. The preamble of that resolution stated:
"Being of the opinion that the prompt cessation
of hostilities and the correction of conditions the
continuance of which is likely to endanger international peace and security are essential ... " [8/1100,
para. 75.]
28. Those conditions still remain, but we came here,
as I have said, to seek a correction of those conditions.
Who are the "we" who came here? Kashmir did not
prefer a complaint before the Security Council. Kashmir has no international existence. India is a Member
State of the United Nations. India is a nation-State,
and Kashmir is a constituent part of India. We came
here to complain about agression, acts of aggression,
or the aiding and abetting of aggression on the Union
of India. Therefore, the position is, and my Government wants this to be made quite plain, as it was
made plain to Mr. Jarring in India, that it is a great
mistake to regard this as a dispute over a little b.1t of
earth somewhere.

29. What we are concerned about is the integrity and
independence of the Union and, therefore, the complainant in this matter is the Government of India. All
the requests, admonitions, injunctions, have been
addressed to the Government of India. Even when,
in certain parts, an appeal had to be made to the local
population, it was the Government of India that was
called upon to make this appeal; it was no other Government. Therefore, the complainant in this matter is
the Government of India, and how does the Government of India appear?
30. The Government of India does not appear as a
protector State. It has not declared that all territories
in such and such a latitude are under its protection.
The Government of India does not appear here as
amicus curiae, as though Kashmir had an independent,
national entity but was not represented here, and that
India was speaking for it in the way that some of us
have done in the case of countries which were not at
that time Members of the United Nations. We did
~ot come here with a brief on behalf of a country that
IS outside the United Nations. We came here with a
complaint by India on behalf of India in respect of
that territory of Indill ' 'lich is called Jammu and
Kashmir. That vital diL ..ince has to be brought home
because several misconceptions arise from this.

27. Tout d'abord, c'est nous qui sommes venus lCl
porter plainte en invoquant le Chapitre VI de la Charte.
En somme, on peut dire si l'on veut que, dans cette
afiaire, nous sommes les plaignants. Nous ne tenons
pas personnelIement a cette expression. La partie
adverse n'est pas sur le meme plan que nous. A notre
point de vue, la partie adverse est defenderesse et risque
de voir sa position contestee; d'ailleurs, le Conseilde
securite a bien souvent declare qu'il falIait redresser
la situation, notamment dans la resolution du 13 aout
1948, que l'Inde et le Pakistan ont tous deux acceptee
a l'epoque et par laquelIe nous restons lies, dans les
limites et compte tenu des circonstances que j'ai plusieurs fois mentionnees au Conseil. Le preambule de
cette resolution s'enonc;ait comme suit:
« Estimant que... il importe de mettre rapidement fln aux hostilites et a une situation dont le
maintien risque de menacer la paix et la securite
internationales... ll [8/1100, par. 75.]
28. Cette situation demeure, mais, comme je rai dit,
nous sommes venus ici pOUf demander qu'elle soit
redressee. Quand je dis l( nous sommes venus ll, je ne
parle pas du Cachemire, qui n'a pas porte plainte
devant le Conseil de securite. Le Cachemire n'a pas
d'existence internationale. L'lnde est un Etat Membre
de l'Organisation des Nations-Unies, L'lnde est une
nation, un Etat dont le Cachemire est l'un des
elements constitutifs. Nous sommes venus ici pour
porter plainte pour agression, actes d'agression diriges
contre l'Union indiennp., pour aide et assistance
pretees a l'ar-resseur. C'est pourquoi, a notre point de
vue, et mon gouvernement tient a le dire sans ambages,
tout comme il l'a dit a M. Jarring en Inde, c'est une
grave erreur de penser qu'il s'agit la d'un difierend
portant sur quelques arpents de terre.
29. Ce qui nous preoccupe ici, c'est l'integrite et l'independance de l'Union indienne; c'est donc le gouvernement indien qui est le plaignant dans cette afiaire.
Les requetes, les avertissements, les injonctions, ont
toutes ete adressees au Gouvernement indien. Meme
lorsqu'il a falIu faire appel a la population de certaines
regions, c'est le Gouvernement indien, et nul autre, qui
a ete charge de lancer cet appeI. Le plaignant dans cette
affaire est done bien le Gouvernement indien; or, en
queUe qualite l'Etat indien presente-t-il sa requete ?
30. Le Gouvernement indien ne se presente pas devant
le Conseil comme un Etat protecteur. 11 n'a pas declare
que tous les territoires situes entre tel et tel degres
de latitude sont sous sa protection. Le Gouvernement
indien ne vient pas non plus ici en tant qu'amicus
curiae, comme si le Cachemire etait un pays independant
une nation non representee a I'Organisation, comme si
l'Inde parlait en son nom, comme certains d'entre
nous l'ont fait pour des pays qui n'etaient pas a l'epoque
membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Nous ne
sommes pas venus ici avec un dossier que nous presenterions au nom d'un pays qui ne fait pas partie des
Nations Unies. Nous sommes venus ici deposer au nom
de l'Inde une plainte emanant de l'Inde, au sujet
d'une partie du territoire indien qui s'appeUe Jammu
et Cachemire. C'est la une difference fondamentale,
qu'il importe de bien comprendre si on ne veut pas
avoir de cette afiaire une conception erronee.

31. We came here because we did not want the conflict
that had taken place in regard to Kashmir to expand,
to become more intensive, or to spread into what might
be larger and larger and more continued acts of war.
Therefore, in 1947, when the first statement was made
before this Council, the representative who occupied the
place I now occupy said that India wanted to avoid
any action that might lead to it having to set foot on
Pakistan territory or that might lead to invasion. It
was there to protect its own territory, and he called
upon the Security Council to lend its strength and its
purposes, not in defence of India only, although we
have the right to do that as one of eighty-two Members,
but in defence of the Charter and in defence of all
those things that all of us regard as very important
and very vital to the continuance of freedom in this
world.

31. Nous sommes venus ici parce que nous ne voulions
pas que le conflit qui s'etait ouvert a propos.du Cachemire s'etende, qu'il devienne plus vif, qu'il puisse
donner lieu a des actes de guerres plus graves et plus
frequents. C'est pourquoi, en 1947, alors que cette
affaire venait pour la premiere fois devant le Conseil
de securite, le representant qui parlait a la place que
j'occupe aujourd'hui a dit que l'Inde voulait eviter
tout acte qui pourrait l'entrainer a penetrer en territoire pakistanais ou provoquer une invasion. L'lnde
avait pour seul souci de proteger son propre territoire,
et son representant a demande au Conseil de securite
d'intervenir avec toute sa force et son autorite, non
::;eulement pour defendre 1'Inde - et nous avons droit
it cette defense puisque nous comptons parmi les
82 Etats Membres -, mais aussi pour defendre la Charte
ainsi que tous ces principes sans lesquels il n'y aurait
plus a nos yeux de monde libre.

32. We came here, therefore, because of our faith in the
Charter. We did not come here looking around to see
what was the composition of the Security Council. And I
say this, because today it is not even possible to ask
about a barrel of flour without saying: "Was this
grown in this or that part of the world? Does it belong
to this bloc or to that bloc? If it is from that bloc it
smells bad; if it is from this bloc it smells good." We
did not come here as part of one of the rival power
blocs. We did not bring this as a cold war issue of any
kind. We did not enlist sympathy and support in that
way; and while, for a long time, we have been in the
company of nations which, in other contexts, are differently aligned, we are in the position of not having an
ally in the world. While we have many friends - I
hope that all the nations are our friends - we have
no allies, military or other. We came here, therefore,
on the merit of this complaint, having faith in the
Charter and in the responses that independent countries
would make, and also believing that whatever decisions
were taken, whatever approaches made, would be in
terms of Chapter VI of the Charter, under which we
came and, what is more, that they would be both
extended and bounded - both these points are important to us - by the decisions that are taken. What
is more, we have not at any time regarded any assurances given on behalf of the Security Council to us
as lightly given.

32. Nous sommes done venus ici guides par notre seule
foi dans la Charte. Nous ne nous sommes pas preoccupes,
en arrivant ici, de connaitre la composition du Conseil
de securite. Je dis cela parce qu'aujourd'hui on ne
peut meme plus parler d'un sac de farine sans s'entendre
dire : « Cette farine vient-elle de tels pays ou de tel
autre? Si elle vient de ce bloc-d, elle a une odeur
desagreable, mais si eUe vient de ce bloc-la, eUe a une
bonne odeur.» Pour notre part, nous ne sommes pas
venus id pour ajouter aux forces des grands blocs qui
s'affrontent. Quand nous avons saisi le Conseil de cette
affaire, il n'etait pas question pour nous de « guerre
froide ». Ce n'est pas ainsi que nous avons suscite les
sympathies et rallie les partisans; si nous avons vecu
l(lngtemps parmi des nations qui ont adopte, dans
d'autres domaines, une position differente, nous n'avons
pas, quant a nous, un seul allie au monde. Nous avons
de nombreux amis - j'espere que toutes les nations
sont nos amies -, mais nous n'avons pas d'allies,
militaires ni d'aucune sorte. Done, nous sommes venus
ici forts du bien-fonde de notre plainte, guides par
notre foi dans la Charte, confiants dans les reactions
qu'auraient des pays independants, et persuades que
les decisions qui seraient prises, les solutions qui seraient
envisagees, seraient conformes aux dispositions du
Chapitre VI de la Charte, que nous avons invoque,
persuades en outre que ces solutions auraient, d'une
part, toute l'etendue qU'autorisent les decisions prises,
et seraient, d'autre part, limitees par ces decisions les deux choses sont importantes a nos yeux. Qui plus
est, nous n'avons jamais considere que les assurances
que nous avions re~mes au nom du Conseil de securite
aient pu etre formulees a la legere.

33. When we came here our first and foremost consideration was to stop bloodshed in Kashmir. Here were
people who, only a few months ago, a few weeks ago
almost, belonged - although as subject people - to
the same country which political vicissitudes had cut
into two separate States, people whose families lived
on both sides of the frontier where, in the name of
religion, or something else, there were fratricidal
strife, killings of various kinds, violence in all kinds
of ways. Therefore, our first concern when we came
here was the cessation of hostilities. Those who, as
permanent members of the Council, have been here for
a long time will recollect that in the early days of this
debate much time was taken in discussing what shnuld

33. Quand nous sommes venus ici, notre premier souci
fut de mettre fin a l'effusion de sang au Cachemire.
Voila des gens, sujets il est vrai, qui appartenaient
quelques mois plus tot, je pourrais presque dire quelques semaines plus tot, a un meme pays que les vicissitudes de la politique avaient decoupe en deux Etats
distincts, des gens dont les familles vivaient de part et
d'autre d'une frontiere qui devint, pour des raisons de
religion ou pour d'autres raisons, le theatre d'une lutte
fratricide, de toutes sortes de meurtres et d'actes de
violence. C'est pourquoi, quand nous sommes venus
ici, nous voulions avant tout la cessation des hostilites.
Ceux d'entre nous qui, representant des membres
permanents du Conseil, occupent leur siege depuis
8

ili

come first: the terms of a political settlement, the
terms of a further settlement, or the stoppage of
bloodshed. I am sure that the representative of the
United Kingdom will not mind my saying so, but the
representative of the United Kingdom at that time
placed less insistence on the stoppage of the fighting,
and it was only the earnest pleadings of India, assisted
by others - including at that time the delegation of
China - who regarded it as vitally import ant that
fighting must stop so that further efforts could be made.
When we came, our dominant desire was a peaceful
settlement. India was a large country, its peoples of
Kashmir were solidly behind the fighting force sindeed it was their resistance that was able to turn
back the treacherous invasion of that countr y which
I have described to the Council several times before.
But we did not think that a decision in that way was
preferable to some arrangement that could be made
in accordance with the Charter, an arrangement which
did not militate against our sovereignty, which did not
violate the integrity of our Union and, what is more;
which did not place a premium upon aggression.

34. On this last point, in any decision that is made
about Kashmir, or rather, since decisions cannot be
made, because this must be done by agreement; in
any view that is taken about Kashmir, none of us,
whether members of the Council or not, can afford to
forget the fact that such a view cannot in any way
proclaim that the gains of aggression can be capitalized.
Although we are still trying to define aggression - as
we have been for the last ten years - and have almost
given up the attemp t, I think there is general consent
that aggression is an international crime. We have had
instances in recent times where close friends have
fallen apart on this issue. On 25 October 1957, the
representative of the United States, speaking in the
General Assembly, came out absolutely withou t qualifications and without reserve in saying that aggression,
wherever it might happen, would not find his country
on the side of the aggressor. The President of the United
States, spaking on a previous occasion, said that it
did not matter who the aggressor was, it did not matter
how close the aggressor was to his own country, it did
not matter in what part of the world aggression took
place. President Eisenhower said that in 1956.
35. That is our position with regard to aggression
and, therefore, if we take the time of the Council in
dealing not with principles, not with slogans, but
with facts that are contained in recorded decisions of
the Council - and we do not ask anybody to draw
inferences; we ask you to look at the decisions of the
Council as made, or the basis on which the Council
has made certain decisions in going into this question
of aggression and the nature of this problem before
the Council - I hope that the Council will bear with
me in accepting the fact that we do regard it as basic
to the whole position.
36. We have all along - and my own recollections
ever since I have been before this Council to present
the views of India bear this out - registered our
6

longtemps se rappeIleront qu'a 1'origine du present debat
on ~l.Vait passe beaucoup de temps a se demander ce
qu'il fallait discuter d'abord : les conditions d'un regIe;'
ment politique, celles d'un autre reglement, ou les
moyens d'arret er l'effusion de sang. Je suis sur que le
represe ntant du Royaume-Uni ne m'en voudra pas si
je lui rappelle qu'a cette epoque le representant du
Royaume-Uni s'etait montre moins insista nt pour qu'on
arrete le comba t et que seule 1'Inde - a laquelle
d'autre s delegations, et notamm ent celle de Ja Chine,
firent echo a 1'epoque - avait plaide vigoureusement
pour 1'arret des hostilites, car il etait essentiel a son
avis de faire cesser le comba t pour pouvoir s'appliquer
de nouveau a la recherche d'un reglement pacifique.
L'Inde etait un pays vaste; la population indienne du
Cachemire souten ait entierement les forces combattantes. En fait, ce fut sa resistance qui a permis de
repousser 1'invasion perfide de ce pays que j'ai decrite
plusieurs fois au Conseil. Mais plutot que de regler la
question de cette fac;on, nous pensions qu'il valait
mieux abouti r a un arrang ement conforme a la Charte
qui ne portera it pas atteint e a notre souverainete,
qui ne violerait pas 1'integrite de 1'Union indienne, et
qui ne constituerait pas une prime a 1'agression.
34. En ce qui concerne ce dernier point, quand elles
prenne nt une decision au sujet du Cachemire - en
realite, il ne peut etre question de decision dans cette
affaire, car elle doit etre regIee avec l'accord des parties
-, quand elles formulent une opinion au sujet du Cachemire, les delegations, qu'elles siegent ou non au Conseil,
ne peuven t se permet tre de perdre de vue qu'elles n'ont
pas le droit de ratifier les empietements de 1'agresseur.
Bien que nous essayions toujours, apres 10 ans d'efforts,
de definir l'agression, et que nous ayons presque abandonne tout espoir, je crois qu'on sera generalement
d'accord pour reconnaitre que 1'agression est un crime
international. Recemment, des nations traditionnellement amies se sont trouvees divisees sur ce point. Le
25 octobre 1957, a I'AssembIee generale, le represe ntant
des Etats-U nis d'Amerique affirmait encore de la
maniere la plus peremptoire que son pays ne soutiendrait jamais l'agresseur, oil qu'il se trouve. Aupara vant,
le Presid ent des Etats-U nis avait deja eu l'occasion
de dire qu'il n'impo rtait pas, a cet egard, de savoir
quel etait l'agresseur, s'il entrete nait des relations
etroites avec son propre pays, ni dans quel continent
se trouva it le theatre de l'agression. Le president
Eisenhower a dit cela en 1956.

35. Telle est aussi notre attitud e en ce qui concerne
l'agression et, si nous prenons le temps du Conseil en
nous attach ant non pas aux principes, non pas aux
formules, mais bien aux faits qui sont mentionnes
dans ses decisions formelles - nous ne demandons a
personne de proceder par induct ion; nous vous demandons seulement d'examiner les decisions du Conseil
telles qu'ille s a prises, de considerer la position qu'il a
adoptee quand il a aborde cette question d'agression
ainsi que la nature du probleme dont il a ete saisi -,
j'espere que le Conseil aura l'obligeance de reconnaitre
que, dans cette affaire, nous considerons son point de
vue comme fondamental.
36. Nous n'avons cesse - et les souvenirs que j'ai
du Conseil depuis que j'y presente les vues de l'Inde
l'indiq uent - de nous opposer a ce qu'on qualifie

caveat against the description of this issue as a " dis- cette afiaire de « difierend ». Il ne s'agit pas ici d'une
pute"; and this was not a legal quibble of any kind. simple querelle de terminologie juridique. Le Cachemire
Kashmir is not no-man's-land. It was not a territory n'est pas un no-man's-land. Ce n'est pas un territoire
that was discovered; nor has the Security Council at recemment decouvert, et le Conseil de securite n'a
any time had the power to adjudic.ate on those issues. ja,mais ete habilite a se prononcer sur {le genre de
As I said, we came here in regard to a situation that questions. Comme je l'ai deja dit, nous sommes venus
has arisen concerning a part of the Union. And the ici pour examiner une affaire qui concerne une partie
only resolutions by which we are in any way engaged de l'Union indienne. Les seules resolutions qui nous
are the Security Council resolution of 17 January lient sont les resolutions adoptees par le Conseil de
1948,1 and the resolutions adopted by the United securite le 17 janvier 1948 1 et par la Commission
Nations Commission for India and Pakistan on 13 August pour l'Inde et le Pakistan les 13 aout 1948 [8/1100,
1948 [8/1100, para. 75] and 5 January 1949 [8/1196, par. 75] et 5 janvier 1949 [8/1196, par. 15]. Or, dans
para. 15]. In none of those resolutions does the word aucune de ces resolutions, on ne trouve le mot « dif" dispute" ever occur. It is quite true that the word ferend». Il est vrai que ce mot figure dans certaines
" dispute" does occur in certain resolutions of the resolutions que le Conseil de securite a adoptees ulteSecurity Council to which we are not a party and rieurement et aUXqUelleS nous n'avons eu aucune part.
which have been taken subsequently. The resolution Mais la resolution du 13 aout 1948 contient ce qui
suit:
of 13 August 1948 states the following:
"The United Nations Commission for India and
« La Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde
et le Pakistan,
Pakistan,
" Having given careful consideration to the points
« Ayant examine attentivement les points de vues
of view expressed by the representatives of India and
exprimes par les representants de l'Inde et du Pakistan au sujet de la situation dans l'Etat de Jammu
Pakistan regarding the situation in the State of
Jammu and Kashmir ..." [8/1100, para. 75.]
et Cachemire... » [8/1100, par. 75.]
It speaks about assisting the Governments of India Dans cette resolution, il est question d'aider les Gouverand Pakistan in effecting a final settlement of the nements de l'Inde et du Pakistan a effectuer un regIe··
situation.
ment definitif de la situation.
37. Therefore, any idea that a dispute - if it is a
dispute exists is not right. It is possible to speak in
certain terms, which particularly the representative
of the United Kingdom has used. One cannot compound
a felony; it is not right to ask us to do so. It is possible
for a country'to give up its own sovereign territory by
its own sovereign will. That is another matter, but no
independent nation, no Member State here expects
to be called upon or asked to say: " Well, you have
been invaded; that is the fact of today." That may
well be; we have all been invaded at times - we no
more than any other people. But I do not think that
this invasion is sufficiently ancient to be historic.
What is more, there has been no relinquishment of
sovereignty, nor has there been any questioning of
sovereignty ::md the right of the Union of India to the
maintenance of law and order and the defence of the
frontiers of the whole of the Union, by this Council.
And this is a basic fact. That is to say that, in the
whole of these resolutions, there has been no such
questioning, not even reading back from these words
as to what they may mean and how they can be construed.

37. Par consequent, il n'y a pas lieu de parIer de
differend. On peut s'exprimer comme l'a fait, par
exemple, le representant du Royaume-Uni. On n'a
pas le droit de transiger, et il n'est pas juste de nous
demander de le faire. Un pays peut renoncer a sa souverainete sur son propre territoire s'il le fait en toute
liberte. C'est la un point tout different. Mais on n'ira
pas demander a une nation independante, a un Etat
Membre de I'Organisation des Nations Unies, d'accepter qu'on lui dise : « C'est un fait, vous avez ete
envahis.» Certes, nous avons tous ete envahis a telle
ou telle periode de notre histoire, l'Inde comme les
autres pays. Mais je ne crois pas que l'invasion dont
il est question ici remonte suffisamment loin pour etre
consacree par l'histoire. Qui plus est, nous n'avons
pas renonce a notre souverainete, et le Conseil n'a
pas davantage mis en cause la souverainete de I'Union
indienne ainsi que son droit a faire respecter l'ordre
public et a assurer la dCfense des frontieres de toute
I'Union. C'est la un fait essentiel. En d'autres termes,
dans toutes les resolutions, on n'a jamais souleve de
point de ce genre, meme si on les examine de pres
pour decouvrir leur sens ou en faire une interpretation.

38. I tried, in my feeble way perhaps, to point out
to the Council before that these long resolutions, on
which are based our present considerations, are the
result of long deliberations in which the members of
the Commission, particularly Mr. Lozano of Colombia,
and others went through various phases of conversation,
of give and take, and it is on the basis of the assurances
given - not assurances given privately; they are part
of the documents, but assurances given at the time and
made public - and in that context that the resolutions

38. J'ai essaye, avec mes modestes moyens, de montrer
au Conseil que ces longues resolutions qui forment
la base de nos debats sont le fruit de deliberations
laborieuses au cours desquelles les membres de la
Commission pour l'Inde et le Pakistan, et notamment
M. Lozano, representant de la Colombie, ainsi que
d'autres sont passes par plusieurs phases de pourparlers,
de concessions mutuelles, et c'est sur la base des asSUrances donnees a l'epoque - non pas en prive, mais
en public: elles se trouvent dans les documents -

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Third Se&sion,
Supplement No. 2, chapter 5, section C.

1 Documents officiels de I'Assemblee generale, troisieme session,
Supplement nO 2, chap. 5, sec. C.

10

>'" '." . :., .. .'c.'.... ':..: .
."".~

.~:;'

..

~ *'".~

~._

......

_-.,,-.~_.

._._.

.....

-~-""."_.

,,_._.... "--_..

_~.- C" ._ _ , _ .

~ .. ,

........~~. ~~--,~._-----

-~~~,,,,,,,,,_ _ - - , , - - , , , , , _ _ ,,,,,,,,,,.~~,,,,,,,~~_
..
..,.....~_..........--""""tt,,....,,

' ' "'we;e adopted. It is not a question of this or that being que les resolutions ont ete a.doptees. Il n'est pas question
.•• -

0"

."

de dire que ceci ou cela. est implicite, a moins d'entendre
le mot « implicite» au sens de ce qui est inherent au
texte et qui n'est pas contredit par lui. La souverainete
de l'Inde, le droit et le devoir qu'ont l'Union et tous
les Etats qui la constituent d'assurer la defense du
territoire et de faire respecter l'ordre public dans certaines circonstances, celui de representer le pays
aupres de la communaute internationale, tout cela
n'est pas mis en cause. Je reviendrai d'ailIeurs sur
ce point.

implied - unless" implied" means that it is inherent
in the meaning of the thing and is not contradicted.
The sovereignty of India, the right of the Union, as in
the case of all its constituent States, and the duty of
the Union with regard to defence and the maintenance
of law and order in certain circumstances, and of
representation in international contexts - these are
secure and safeguarded. I shall come to this at a later
stage.

39. Therefore, any further approach to this matter 39. Ce serait donc une erreur fonciere de continuer
as though it were a territorial dispute, a boundary a aborder cette affaire comme s'il s'agissait d'une
dispute or a frontier problem would be a fundamental question de territoire, d'une question de demarcation
fallacy. There is no one more anxious and more desirous ou de frontiere. Nul n'est plus dispose que le Gouverand more willing to co-operate in finding the end of nement indien. it preter son concours pour trouver
this trouble than the Government of India itself. But une solution aces difficultes, nul ne souhaite cette
it is not possible to find the ending of the trouble by solution plus ardemment que lui. Mais ce n'est pas
basing that solution on trouble itself. We have made en fondant la solution sur les dissensions qu'on pourra
protests to the Department of Public Information of mettre fin aces memes dissensions. Nous avons prothe United Nations with regard to the approach to teste aupres du Departement de l'information de
this problem as though it were a problem of a disputed 'l'Organisation des Nations Unies, qui aborde cette
territory, because Kashmir is not a disputed territory. question comme s'il s'agissait d'un territoire en litige.
Even supposing for argument's sake that we take into En fait, le Cachemire n'est pas un territoire en litige.
this question the interpretation put now - not always Supposons meme un instant que nous examinions
- on certain paragraphs of the resolution of 5 January cette question en nous guidant sur l'interpretation
1949 and in other places that the question of the acces- que l'on donne maintenant - mais que l'on n'a pas
sion of the State of Jammu and Kashmir will be decided toujours donnee - a certains paragraphes de la resothrough the method of a free and impartial plebiscite lution du 5 janvier 1949, ainsi qu'a d'autres passages
and so on - first of all, these are principles about d'oiI il ressort que la question de l'avenir de l'Etat
which we are talking and which are supplemented in de Jammu et Cachemire sera reglee par un plebiscite
the Commission's report. I am not going to analyse libre et impartial, etc. Je ferai observer tout d'abord
that; I have done it before. What is important is that que nous discutons ici de principes, et que ces principes
any changes that might come about are about the sont commentes dans le rapport de la Commission.
future status, even in argument. So far as the situation Je ne vais pas en faire l'analyse ; j'ai deja eu l'occasion
at present is concerned, the sovereignty, the total de le faire. Ce qu'il importe de noter, c'est que, meme
authority, the right of defence and the right to speak au stade de la simple discussion, les changements de
for the territory of Kashmir lies in the Union of India. statut qui sont envisages le sont pour l'avenir. En ce
qui concerne la situation actuelle, c'est l'Union indienne
qui est souveraine, qui a autorite pleine et entiere sur
le territoire du Cachemire, c'est elle qui a le droit
d'assurer sa defense et de parler en son nom.

I

40. The basis of our present discussion was well set
out by the representative of the United States on
25 October, when he said:
" It may be useful at the outset to recapitulate
the main lines of Ambassador Jarring's report, because
it is from that report that our current sessions start."
[797th meeting, para. 28.]

40. Le representant des Etats-Unis a fort justement
delimite la discussion actueIIe lorsqu'il a dit le 25 octobre:
« Il peut etre utile, pour commencer, de recapituler les principaux points du rapport de M. Jarring,
car c'est la presentation de ce rapport qui marque
le point de depart de la presente serie de seances
du Conseil.» [797e seance, par. 28.]

41. We have had the advantage this time of listening
to a. very brief intervention by the representative of
Sweden [798th meeting, para. 38 to 42]. May I say with
great respect that when we asked whether we could
hear his interpretation on certain other interpretations
he naturally took the view that if he chose to do so he
would do it later. In any case, the report stood by
itself.

41. Nous avons ete heureux, cette fois, d'entendre
la declaration, tres breve, du representant de la Suede
[798 e seance, par. 38 a 42]. Puis-je me permettre de
faire observer que, lorsque nous lui avons demande
s'il pourrait nous donner son point de vue au sujet
de certaines autres interpretations, il a natureIIement
repondu que, s'il le faisait, il le ferait plus tard. En
tout cas, le rapport est suffisamment eloquent.

42. In this connexion, since we are meeting in the
context of the Jarring report and especially in view
of the fact that the discussions and the debates have
tried to take other turns, for reasons which are not
easily fathomable, I wish to say that we did not ask
for the appointment of Mr. Jarring to go to India.

42. A ce propos, puisque nous discutons sur la base
du rapport Jarring, et surtout puisqu'on a essaye de
drmner a la discussion une autre direction, pour des
raisons qui ne sont pas facHes a penetrer, je tiens a
dire ici que nous n'avons pas demande que M. Jarring
soit designe pour aller en Inde. Nous avons dit que

11

We said that we would welcome him in India,. as
indeed we would welcome any nominee of the "United
Nations at any time in accordance with the traditional
hospitality of our country. We offered him all the cooperation and all the friendliness we could. We gave
him whatever information he asked for. I think I am
correct in saying that few reports received by the
Security Council have had more and greater unanimity
of praise than the report of Mr. Jarring. We are not
called upon, and it would not be proper for us, either
to offer praise or blame except to deal with the substance of the matter as it stands and where we stand in
relation to it.

nous serions heureux de le recevoir en Inde, tout
comme nous serions heureux de recevoir n'importe
quel envoye de l'Organisation des Nations Unies a
n'importe quel moment, conformement a la tradition
d'hospitalite de mon pays. Nous lui avons prete tout
le concours possible. Nous l'avons sans reserve accueilli
amicalement. Nous lui avons fourni tous les renseignements qu'il demandait. Je crois pouvoir dire sans
risque d'erreur que le Conseil de securite a rel;u peu
de rapports qui aient obtenu plus d'eloges et des eloges
plus unanimes que le rapport de M. Jarring. Nous ne
sommes pas charges d'adresser des louanges ou des
blames - ce ne serait d'ailleurs pas a nous de le faire ;
notre tache est d'examiner le fond de la question et
de determiner notre position.

43. I would like to bring out three facts in this
connexion. First of all, there has not been, in our
submission, in the analysis of the Jarring report by
members of the Council the same degree of attention
given to certain parts of the report as to other parts.
But that is as it may be, because it is not for us to say
how a delegation should treat any document that is
before it.

43. Je voudrais signaler a ce sujet trois faits. Tout
d'abord, quand ils ont analyse le rapport Jarring, les
membres du Conseil ont, a notre avis, accorde plus
d'importance a certaines parties du rapport. C'est la
cependant une simple constatation, car il ne nous
appartient pas de determiner les reactions qu'une
delegation doit avoir en face d'un document dont elIe
est saisie.

44. I have analysed the Jarring report and I gave
our approach to it on the last occasion. [795th meeting,
paras. 2 to 69.] Therefore, it is not my intention to repeat
that process. However, from the observations made
by delegations, apart from the general tribute made
to the sacrifice by Mr. Jarring of his time and energy,
they all expressed views in regard to what it might
mean and what its place was in the whole context of
this business.

44. J'ai deja examine le rapport Jarring, et j'ai
indique la derniere fois notre point de vue sur ce sujet
[795e seance, par. 2 a 69]. Je n'ai donc pas l'intention
de revenir la-dessus. Je note cependant qu'a part
l'hommage general rendu a M. Jarring pour la fal;on
dont il a donne sans compter son temps et sa peine,
chaque delegation a dit quelque chose du sens que
son rapport pourrait avoir et de la place qu'il pourrait
prendre dans cette affaire.

45. My friend and colleague, Sir Pierson Dixon, said:

45. Mon collegue et ami, sir Pierson Dixon a dit :
« ... J'espere... que son rapport aura une signification particuliere en marquant le debut d'une
nouvelle phase de progres constructif ... » [797e

". . . I hope that his report will prove to have a
special significance in marking the beginning of a
new phase of constructive progress ..." [797th meeting, para. 2.]
Therefore we must assume that the constructive
progress which we all seek is going to be rooted for the
present time in this report. So it is the same thing.
The representative of the United States cannot help
the Council to decide how bess it can aid in finding a
settlement acceptable to both sides.
46. The same kind of observation has come from. the
representative of France who, with characteristic
caution, said:
"The report of Mr. Jarring has the merit of stressing
the complexity of the question." [798th meeting,

seance, par. 2.]

Nous devons donc en conclure que le rapport va maintenant etre le point de depart de ces progres reels
que nous souhaitons tous. En fait, nous en sommes
au meme point. Le representant des Etats-Unis ne
peut aider le Conseil a decider de queUe maniere il
pourrait le mieux contribuer a trouver une solution
acceptable pour les deux parties.
46. Avec une prudence caracteristique, le representant de la France a fait le IDeme genre de reflexion:
« Le rapport de M. Jarring aura eu le merite de
bien souligner la complexite de la question.») [7986

seance, par. 48.]

para. 48.]

47. When we come to the study of the report by the
Council, we find that the main attention is paid to
that part of the report which deals with a solution
which, with great respect to Mr. Jarring, was the
solution we did not think should have been submitted
to us - the issue of arbitration - because this has
all the appearance of a country declining to accept
good advi"~ or the counsels of conciliation. There are
certain things that are arbitrable; there are certain
things that are not arbitrable. But in this particular
case it goes further than that. This question of arbitrating on certain aspects of this problem has been before

47. Lorsque nous abordons l'etude du rapport a
laqueUe s'est livre le Conseil, nous constatons qu'il
s'est surtout interesse a la partie du rapport oil, avec
tout le respect que je dois a M. Jarring, il est question
d'une solution qui n'aurait pas du, a notre avis, nous
etre presentee : je veux parler de la question de l'arbitrage. En effet, cette solution donne a entendre que
le pays en cause reste sourd aux bons conseils et aux
exhortations a la conciliation. Certaines choses peuvent
etre soumises a l'arbitrage, et d'autres ne le peuvent
pas. Mais, dans l'affaire qui nous occupe, il y a plus.
Depuis 1948, depuis que nous sommes ici, le Conseil
12

the Security Council from 1948 onwards, ever since
we came here. At each stage, the representative of
the Government of India who was before this Council
declined to accept arbitration, because the independence
of countries cannot be put into the hands of political
delegations to decide one way or another. Last time,
I made a brief reference to this and I pointed out that
no country in the world - and leaEt of all Mr. Jarring's
country - had accepted arbitration in a similar issue.
The representative of the United Kingdom referred
to this matter. The name of the United Kingdom
appears small, perhaps less than that of the United
States, in the case law on this point where the United
Kingdom refused to accept arbitration. At the 795th
meeting, I quoted to you the reasons put forward by
Henry John Temple at one time. We do not take that
position. But even as late as the Jay Treaty, concluded
in 1794 between the United States of America and
Gre~~ , ;ritain, the British refused to arbitrate on
t.~
<, .... tters.

de securite discute de la question de soumettre a I'arbitrage certains aspects de I'affaire. Chaque fois, le
representant du Gouvernement indien aupres du
Conseil a refuse de se soumettre a l'arbitrage, parce
que I'independance d'un pays ne peut etre confiee a
des delegations politiques pour qu'elles en decident
dans un sens ou dans I'autre. La derniere fois, j'ai
dit quelques mots sur ce point, et j'ai souligne qu'aucun
pays au monde - et certainement pas celui de M. Jarring - n'avait accepte en pareil cas de se soumettre
a l'arbitrage. Le representant du Royaume-Uni a
aborde cette question. On constate dans la jurisprudence relative a cette matiere que le Royaume-Uni a
rarement refuse de se soumettre a I'arbitrage - peutetre moins souvent encore que les Etats-Unis. Je vous
ai cite a la 795 e seance les motifs avances a une certaine epoque par Henry John Temple. Nous ne partageons pas ce point de vue, mais, meme a une epoque
aussi tardive que celle du traite Jay, signe en 1794
entre les Etats-Unis d'Amerique et la Grande-Bretagne,
les Britanniques ont refuse de soumettre a I'arbitrage
ce genre de question.

48. Anyway, I am instructed by the Government of
India to make our position very clear on this matter.
We do not want world public opinion - and not only
the members of the Council - to be under the impression that the Indian people or the Government of
India reject arbitration in toto on every issue. In fact,
we are in favour of either arbitration or mediation or
conciliation or good offices on so many problems. But
this problem concerns the vital interests of a country
and, what is more, issues on which this Council has
already pronounced itself. To make an arbitral tribunal
of what in our opinion would be a court of appeal or
a court of review would not be correct. Therefore, we
made it very clear that it was not possible at that time.

48. Quoi qu'il en soit, le Gouvernement indien m'a
demande de definir tres nettement notre position dans
cette matiere. Nous ne voulons pas que les membres
du Conseil, ni l'opinion publique mondiale, aient
I'impression que le peuple et le gouvernement indien
rejettent systematiquement I'arbitrage pour toutes
les questions. En realite, nous croyons que I'arbitrage,
la mediation, la conciliation ou les bons offices sont
parfaitement indiques pour un certain nombre de
problemes. Mais la question dont nous discutons met
en jeu la vie meme du pays et, qui plus est, elle concerne
des problemes sur lesquels le Conseil s'est deja prononce. Il ne serait pas normal de transformer en tribunal arbitral ce qui est a nos yeux une cour d'appel
ou une cour de cassation. C'est pourquoi nous avons
dit alors sans ambage que cela n'etait pas possible.

49. The other day [795th meeting, paras. 57 to 59],
I cited the most recent instance where, in what is called
the Interhandel case, the United States refused to go
to arbitration with a Swiss concern for the same reasons.
The same thing applies to the United States - Panama
disputes. It is necessary for me to say this because a
country like mine does not want to place itself in the
position of not listening to counsels of conciliation and
of good offices.

49. J'ai cite I'autre jour [795e seance, par. 57 a 59]
un precedent recent, I'affaire Interhandel, dans laquelle
les Etats-Unis ont refuse, pour les memes raisons, de
soumettre a I'arbitrage leur differend avec une societe
suisse. La meme consideration s'est applique aux differends entre les Etats-Unis et le Panama. Je suis oblige
de dire ces choses, car un pays comme l' Inde ne veut pas
que I'on dise qu'il rejette la conciliation etl'arbitrage.

50. But all problems have to be judged in the context
of their vital implications. Where our security and, what
is more, where the terms of reference of Mr. Jarring's
visit are affected, then we think that arbitration was
the inappropriate method to pose to us.

50. Pourtant, pour juger des problemes, il faut tenir
compte de ce qu'ils impliquent. Etant donne qu'il s'agit
de notre securite, etant donne surtout les termes du
mandat donne a M. Jarring, nous pensons qu'il ne
convenait pas de nOllS proposer un arbitrage.

51. Mr. Jarring very frankly and helpfully told us
that he was going to proceed on the basis of the resolutions of 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949. Those
were the tracks that he had set and he was not going
to move from it. As far as we are concerned, all the
discussions have taken place on that basis, and we
take the view that we are entitled, if that is the position,
whatever may happen in the far future, that the
decisions made by the Council cannot be thrown into
the melting pot of an arbitrator. And the facts - in
this particular case one fact, whether part I of the

510 M. Jarring nous a declare avec beaucoup de franch. qu'il avait I'intention de proceder en se fondant
sur les resolutions du 13 aout 1948 et du 5 janvier 1949,
et qu'il ne sortirait pas des limites qu'il s'est imposees.
De notre cote, toutes les discussions se sont derouIees
sur cette base, et nous estimons que, quoi qu'il puisse
advenir, on ne saurait admettre qu'un arbitre remette
en question toutes les decisions du Conseil. Or, les faits,
et en particulier la question de savoir si la premiere
partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948 a ete ou n'a pas
ete appliquee, ont ete explicitement et implicitement

resolution of 13 August 1948 had been completed or
not - in our submission, have been established by the
Commission, both explicitly and implicitly. They appear
in many ways, in many parts of the resolution; they
appear in the various records submitted by the Commission; and what is more, they appear in the broad fact
- which not even the darkness of nights can conceal of the annexation of our sovereign territory by an
external Power. Therefore, it is not necessary to arbitrate on that.

etablis par la Commission. Ces faits sont etablis, de
diverses fal;ons, dans plusieurs passages de la resolution ; ils sont etablis egalement par les divers documents
soumis par la Commission. Bien plus, ils decoulent,
d'une fal;on generale, du fait - que toutes les tenebres
de la nuit ne sauraient dissimuler - de l'annexion
d'une partie de notre territoire souverain par un Etat
etranger. Par consequent, il n'est pas necessaire de proceder a un arbitrage sur ce point.

52. A fact which we would like to stress is the reference
to the grave problems, made not at our instance, because
we made no appeal to Mr. Jarring, we expressed our
point of view. I hope I am not disclosing any private
conversations. Our position was that he had come as
a well-known neutral at the behest of the Security
Council and we understood that his loyalties were to
the Security Council; that is, to the Charter and to
the merits of the problem. But in his own observation
he points to some of the grave aspects of the problem and
Mr. Jarring says in his report:

52. Un fait que je voudrais souligner, c'est que - sans
que nous le lui ayons demande, car nous n'avons fait
qu'exprimer en cette circonstance notre point de vueM. Jarring a parle de graves problemes. J'espere que je
ne devoile aucun entretien prive. Nous considerions
que M. Jarring etait venu dans notre pays en tant que
personnalite neutre bien connue, sur la demande du
Conseil de securite, qu'il devait allegeance au Conseil de
securite, c'est-a-dire a la Charte, et qu'il etait charge
d'examiner le probleme au fond. Or, dans son rapport,
M. Jarring souligne certains graves aspects du probleme,
et il declare:
« ... Je n'ai pas perdu de vue les graves problemes
que pourraient soulever l'organisation et les resultats d'un plebiscite.» [8/3821, par. 10.]
Dans la declaration qu'il a faite au Conseil, sir Pierson
Dixon a cite ce passage du rapport [797e seance, par. 11].

". . . I was aware of the grave problems that
might arise in connexion with and as a result of ..."
[8/3821, para. 10.]
This is a phrase which was requoted by Sir Pierson
Dixon in his address to the Council. [797th meeting,
para. 11.]
53. Secondly - and I will return to this later when
I deal with it in full - there has been much play
made of the statement of Mr. Jarring in paragraph 13
of his report where he says:
" . . . the Government of India . . . felt aggrieved
that the Council had so far not expressed itself on
the question of what in the Indian view was aggression
committed by Pakistan on India. In the Indian
Government's view, it was incumbent on the
Council to express itself on this question and equally
incumbent on Pakistan 'to vacate the aggression'."
[8/3821, para. 13.]

53. En second lieu - et je reviendrai tout a l'heure
en detail sur ce point - la declaration de M. Jarring
qui figure au paragraphe 13 de son rapport a fait
robjet de nombreux commentaires :
« Le Gouvernement indien... etait del;u que le
Conseil ne se soit pas encore prononce sur ce qui, a
ses yeux, constituait une agression du Pakistan
contre l'Inde. A son avis, il incombait au Conseil de
se prononcer sur cette question, et il incombait tout
autant au Pakistan de mettre fin a l'agression.»
[8/3821, par. 13.]

54. This has been interpreted by some - not by
Mr. Jarring, for Mr. Jarring has been content to leave
it for other people to understand - as to say that
this question is no longer under consideration, that it
has gone into the limbo of history, whatever it was,
and that in any case, there was no view expressed by
the Security Council in this matter. No procedures that
have been followed are based on one view or another.
That is not our position, as I shall make clear when
we go on.

54. Cette declaration a ete interpretee par certains non pas par M. Jarring, car M. Jarring a prefere la laisser
interpreter par d'autres - comme signifiant que cette
question ne se pose plus, qu'elle est tombee dans l'oubli,
et qu'en tous cas le Conseil ne s'est pas prononce sur ce
point et qu'aucune des procedures suivies n'a ete inspiree par telle ou telle fal;on de voir. Cette interpretation n'est pas la notre, ainsi que je le montrerai tout a
l'heure.

55. The third aspect, and this is important, is that
Mr. Jarring, in addressing the Council the other day,
said:
" In my report, I established that a deadlock had
been reached between India and Pakistan on part
I of the resolution of 13 August 1948, and in particular
on paragraphs Band E of that part." [798th meeting,
para. 40.]
Therefore, as far as we are concerned, there is a deadlock
in the sense of proceeding with whatever resolutions
we are engaged by. But there is no deadlock in relation
to the title or in relation to the sovereignty of the
country. But that deadlock is centred on part I.

55. Le troisieme fait - et c'est la un point important -, c'est que M. Jarring a declare l'autre jour au
Conseil :
« J'ai fait ressortir dans mon rapport que l'Inde et
le Pakistan se trouvent dans une impasse en ce qui
concerne la premiere partie de la resolution du
13 aol1t 1948, notamment les paragraphes B et E.»
]798e seance, par. 40.]
Ainsi, pour nous, il y a impasse en ce qui concerne la
mise en reuvre des resolutions que nous avons acceptees. Mais il n'y a pas impasse pour ce qui est des droits
ou pour ce qui est de la souverainete du pays. Il n'y a
d'impasse que dans la premiere partie dela resolution.

14

56. Therefore, if this statement of Mr. Jarring has
to have any value, it rules out any discussion of part 11
before part I is disposed of; that is, it has narrowed
considerably. If the statement of the representative of
the United States is to be entertained when he says,
" it is from that report that our current sessions start."
[797th meeting, para. 28.] I do not say it should end
there. But it appears to us that the deadlock has been
reached. This is where it is deadlocked and unless
and until we are able to resolve it, it is not possible,
according to Mr. Jarring's own interpretation, to
proceed on the rails that he has set.

56. Par consequent, si la declaration de M. Jarring a
une valeur quelconque, elle exclut toute discussion sur
la deuxieme partie de la resolution jusqu'a ce qu'une
decision soit intervenue sur la premiere partie. Ainsi,
le champ de la discussion se retrecit considerablement.
S'il est vrai que, selon la declaration du representant
des Etats-Unis, « c'est la presentation de ce rapport qui
marque le point de depart de la presente serie de seances
du Conseil. [797e seance, par. 28], cela ne signifie pas
que le Conseil doive s'arreter la. Mais il nous semble que
nous soyons parvenus maintenant a l'impasse. C'est la
que se trouve l'impasse et, a moins que nouS ne parvenions a en sortir, il n'est pas possible, selon M. Jarring
lui-meme, de continuer sur la voie qu'il a tracee.

57. Mr. Jarring says:
". . . I established that a deadlock had been
reached between India and Pakistan on part I of
the resolution of 13 August 1948, and in particular
on paragraphs Band E of that part." [798th meeting,
para. 40.]
It is very important because certain delegations, like
your own, Mr. President, have gathered the mistaken
impression, if I may submit, that this view of ours
is an afterthought. But I will come to that at an appropriate time.

57. M. Jarring dit au Conseil :
« J'ai fait ressortir... que l'Inde et le Pakistan
se trouvent dans une impasse en ce qui concerne la
premiere partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948,
notamment les paragraphes B et E.)) [798e seance,
par. 40.]
Cela est tres important, car plusieurs delegations, dont
la votre, Monsieur le President, ont l'impression inexacte
que notre opinion sur ce point nous est venue apres
coup. Mais je reviendrai sur cette question en temps
voulu.

58. Part I is not implemented because, contrary to
the usual conception, part I is not just a cease-fire
order. If one looks at the resolution of 13 August 1948,
one will find that this resolution is divided into three
parts. The cease-fire order relates only to paragraph A
of part I. It is usually mistakenly construed that the
whole of part I is the cease-fire part. The cease-fire
order is paragraph A of part I. That cease-fire order,
thanks to the wisdom of the Pakistan and Indian
Governments and people, has been carried out, and
despite such vicissitudes as might have occurred, is
maintained. Therefore, the cease-fire order is only
section A of part I. But when we say that part I has
not been carried out, it is in regard to the remainder.
In regard to the remainder, paragraphs Band E are
the more important parts. I find it difficult to deal
with the whole of this problem in the context of the
present status of this discussion in the Council, because
there are seven or eight members who have spoken
from different points of view and laid different emphasis,
and almost led us to think in one direction or another.
As far as we are concerned, we regard it as our duty
to consider each of these statements, and not to say
that this comes from this country and that that comes
from that country; as far as we are concerned, they all
come from members of the Security Council. Therefore,
when I come to that, I will deal with it in detail.

58. La premiere partie de la resolution n'a pas ete
mise en ceuvre car, contrairement a ce que l'on croit
generalement, elle ne constitue pas seulement un ordre
de suspension d'armes. Si l'on considere la resolution du
13 aout 1948, on constate que cette resolution est c~ivisee
en trois parties. Seul, le paragraphe A de la premiere
partie concerne l'ordre de suspension d'armes. On croit
generalement, a tort, que toute la premiere partie de la
resolution a trait a la suspension d'armes. La suspension d'armes ne constitue que le paragraphe A de la
premiere partie de la resolution. Grace a la sagesse dont
ont fait preuve les gouvernements et les populations
du Pakistan et de l'Inde, l'ordre de suspension d'armes
a ete execute et, en depit de toutes les vicissitudes, il a
ete maintenu. Ainsi done, la suspension d'armes ne
constitue que le paragraphe A de la premiere partie.
Mais, lorsque nous disons que la premiere partie de la
resolution n'a pas ete mise en ceuvre, nous voulons
parler du reste de cette premiere partie. Et en ce qui
concerne ce reste, ce sont les paragraphes B et E qui
sont les plus importants. Il m'est difficile de traiter de
l'ensemble de la question dans l'etat actuel de la discussion. Sept ou huit membres du Conseil ont en effet
expose des opinions differentes, ils ont signale divers
aspects du probleme et nous ont presque impose tel
ou tel point de vue. En ce qui nous concerne, nous
considerons qu'il est de notre devoir d'examiner chacune des opinions exprimees, sans nous preoccuper de
savoir de quel pays elles emanent. Pour nous, elles
emanent toutes de membres du Conseil de securite. Je
reviendrai d'une fa'ton detailIee sur ce point lorsque je
parlerai de cet aspect de la question.

59. Our position has been that of part I, paragraph B
of the resolution of 13 August 1948 has not been
implemented. Paragraph B says:
" The High Commands of the Indian and Pakistani
forces agree to refrain from taking any measures
that might augment the military potential of the

59. Nous estimons que le paragraphe B de la premiere
partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948 n'a pas ete mis
en ceuvre. Le texte du paragraphe B est le suivant :
« Les hauts commandements des forces de l'Inde
et du Pakistan acceptent de s'abstenir de toutes
mesures qui pourraient augmenter le potentiel mili-

15

forces under their control in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir!'
Here, may I draw the attention of the representative
of the United Kingdom, in view of what he has told
us, to the fact that this resolution goes on to put in
brackets these words:
" (For the purpose of these proposals 'forces under
their control' shall be considered to include all forces,
organized and unorganized, fighting or participating
in hostilities on their respective sides) " - " respective sides" meaning the invaded and the invader.

taire des forces placees sous leurs ordres dans I'Etat
de Jammu et Cachemire.»
Etant donne ce qu'a declare le representant du Royaume
Uni, je me permets d'appeler son attention sur le fait
que, dans la resolution, ce paragraphe est suivi d'une
phrase placee entre parentheses et dont le texte est le
suivant :
« (Aux fins des presentes propositions, l'expression
« forces placees sous leurs ordres» comprend toutes
les forces, organisees ou non, qui combattent ou participent aux hostilites de l'un ou l'autre cOte.») l'un ou l'autre cote signifiant le pays envahi ou le
pays envahisseur.

60. Therefore, the augmentation for which the key 60. Par consequent, la date clef est celle de I'adoption
date is the date of the acceptance of the resolution goes de la resolution, en ce qui concerne cette augmentation,
back to this date. Now I should like to ask what would qui doit donc etre consideree a partir de cette date. Je
happen if the Security Council had on a certain date voudrais maintenant demander aux membres du Conseil
called upon the parties concerned not to augment the ce qui peut se passer lorsque le Conseil de securite, aune
strength of their forces or to do anything that might certaine date, invite les parties interessees a ne pas
worsen the situation and if the parties did accept that augmenter le potentiel militaire de leurs forces ou a ne
resolution, as was the case with the Security Council rien faire qui soit susceptible d'aggraver la siuation et
resolution of 17 January 1948.
que les parties acceptent cette resolution, comme ce
fut le cas pour la resolution du Conseil de securite en
date du 17 janvier 1948.
61. The Security Council called upon India and
Pakistan to refrain from making statements or doing
or causing to be done or permitting any acts which
might aggravate the situation. On 17 January 1948
the Council passed this resolution. It is not necessary
in order to understand the position of the Government
of India even to go into what is the present position
in regard to the augmentation, because on 15 January
1948 the Pakistan Government sent its reply to the
Council in which it said that a certain number of
independent tribesmen and persons in Pakistan were
helping the azad Kashmir Government in their struggle
for liberty as volunteers, but that it was wrong to say
that Pakistan territory was being used as a base of
military operations and that it was also incorrect to
say that the Pakistan Government was supplying
military equipment, transport and supplies to the
invaders or that Pakistan officers were training, guiding
and otherwise helping them. That communication was
made to the Security Council on 15 January 1948.
[8/1100, annex 6, document 1.]

61. Le Conseil de securite a invite I'lnde et le Pakistan

a s'abstenir de faire aucune declaration, et d'accomplir,

de provoquer ou de permettre aucun acte susceptible
d'aggraver la situation. Le 17 janvier 1948, le Conseil a
adopte cette resolution. Il n'est meme pas necessaire,
pour comprendre la position du Gouvernement indien,
d'examiner la situation actuelle en ce qui concerne cette
augmentation parce que, le 15 janvier 1948, le Gouvernement du Pakistan a envoye au Conseil sa reponse.
Il declarait dans cette reponse qu'un certain nombre de
membres de tribus independants et de personnes originaires du Pakistan aidaient, en tant que volontaires,
le Gouvernement du Cachemire azad dans sa lutte pour
la liberte, mais qu'il etait faux de dire que le territoire
du Pakistan etait utilise comme base d'operations miIitaires, et qu'il etait egalement inexact de pretendre
que le Gouvernement du Pakistan fournissait de l'equipement militaire, des moyens de transport et des approvisionnements aux envahisseurs et que des officiers
pakistanais les entrainaient, les dirigeaient et leur pretaient assistance par d'autres moyens encore. Cette
communication a ete presentee au Conseil de securite
le 15 janvier 1948 [8/1100, annexe 6, document I].

62. O.!l 17 January 1948 the resolution was passed and
both countries accepted it. From that day onwards to
now, that injunction stands violated. 1 ask my friend
from the United Kingdom: If a country comes here
with a complaint and the defendant says, "I am not
guilty of this offence and/or these charges levelled
against me are not correct," and if those statements
are then taken at their face value, which we should
rightly do, and afterwards the obvious facts known to
t?verybody disprove this denial, then is it necessary
to bring in any other facts of augmentation? That is to
say, there was augmentation even in contradiction of
the 17 January resolution, even before we come to
13 August.

62. Le 17 janvier 1948, la resolution a ete adoptee,
et les deux pays l'ont acceptee. Depuis cette date, ses
dispositions sont violees. Je poserai donc a mon ami le
representant du Royaume-Uni la question suivante :
supposons qu'un pays presente une plainte au Conseil,
que le defendeur declare: « J e ne suis pas coupable et les
accusations portees contre moi ne sont pas fondees »,
que I'on prenne ces affirmations pour ce qu'elles sont,
ce qu'il est legitime de faire, et que, par la suite, des
faits manifestes connus de tous les dementent ; serait-il
necessaire alors de fournir de nouvelles preuves de
l'augmentation du potentiel militaire? En effet, ce
potentiel avait ete augmente en violation de la resolution du 17 janvier 1948, meme avant le 13 aoftt.

63. But since we have tak"! the view that part I of
the resolution of 13 August 1<.148 has not been com-

63. Mais puisque nous avons exprime l'opinion que la
premiere partie de la resolution du 13 aoftt 1948 n'a

1!)
«

pleted, we are content for the moment to rest on that
resolution itself. In this connexion, Sir Pierson Dixon
has dealt with this matter at some length. [797th
meeting, paras. 5 to 20.] I find it difficult to answer
the speech and to deal with these items separately
without duplication, so if I overlap a little, I hope you
will forgive me.

pas ete integralement appliquee, nous nous en tiendrons pour le moment a cette resolution elle meme. A
cet egard, sir Pierson Dixon a examine assez longuement
la question ]797e seance, par. 5 a 20]. Il m'est difficile de
repondre a son discours en examinant ses differents
points separement et sans redites. Aussi j'espere que,
si je me repete, on voudra bien m'en excuser.

64. First of all, I want to mention the contribution
made by the United Kingdom in this debate, parts of
which arouse responses in us which are of an appreciative
character; that is to say, we do not condemn them.
It is not our right to do so. The United Kingdom has a
responsibility as a permanent member of the Security
Council, as it told us, and it is its duty to say what
it wants to say. We are not here to attack this speech
nor to say that it springs from motives that are mala
fide or that there is an ulterior purpose in them. We
are able to understand part of it, to appreciate it even
if we cannot accept it. We are unable to agree with
part of it, and there are parts of it with which we
are in profound disagreement. Some of it springs from
misconceptions which are fundamental to the appreciation of this problem. We think that some parts of it
are tragic because they do so much' to take away from
the other parts which are useful for a constructive
solution. So I hope my colleague from the United
Kingdom will accept it from me that any observations
I make are entirely centered on the merits of this
matter. We do not take the view that the contribution
it has made is either an attempt merely to find fault
or to reject proper conclusions, but it is the view of
the United Kingdom, and it has been put to us.

64. Tout d'abord, je tiens a donner une place importante a 1'intervention du representant du RoyaumeUni dans ce debat. Certaines parties de cette intervention suscitent de notre part des reactions favorables;
je veux dire que nous ne les condamnons pas - d'ailleurs,
nous n'en avons pas le droit. En effet, le Royaume-Uni
assume des responsabilites particulieres en qualite de
membre permanent du Conseil de securite, ainsi qu'il
1'a deja indique, et il est de son devoir de s'exprimer
comme ill'entend. Nous ne nous proposons pas d'attaquer son discours ni de soutenir qu'il est inspire par des
motifs qui laisseraient supposer de la mauvaise foi ou
impliqueraient des intentions cachees. Nous en comprenons certaines parties et nous en reconnaissons 1'interet,
meme si nous ne pouvons l'approuver. Ce discours
comprend egalement des parties qu'il nous est impossible d'accepter et des parties que nous desapprouvons
nettement. Certains passages decoulent de conceptions
erronees qui sont d'importance fondamentale si l'on
veut comprendre le probleme. A notre avis, il est infiniment regrettable que ce discours contienne certaines
declarations telles que la portee de certaines parties qui
pourraient contribuer utilement a une solution constructive se trouve considerablement diminuee. J'espere
que le representant du Royaume-Uni acceptera que je
fasse porter mes observations uniquement sur le fond
du probleme. Nous ne pretendons pas qu'il ait vise dans
son discours a formuler des critiques ou a rejeter les
conclusions qui s'imposent ; la delegation du RoyaumeUni voulait exprimer son opinion, et c'est ce qu'elle a
.fait.

65. Sir Pierson Dixon tells us - and I do not know
on what authority" I am glad that the representative of India, in
his speech at the 795th meeting, accepted this resolution as engaging India, tGgether with the two resolutions of the United Nations Commission for India
and Pakistan." [797th meeting, para. 4.]

65. Sir Pierson Dixon a declare - et j'ignore sur quoi
il fondait cette declaration - :
« J'ai entendu avec satisfaction le representant de
l'Inde declarer, dans !'intervention qu'il a faite a la
795 e seance, que l'Inde se considerait comme liee
par cette resolution, de meme que par les deux resolutions de la Commission des Nations Unies pour
I'lnde et le Pakistan.» [797e seance, par. 4.]
Il faisait allusion a la resolution du 17 janvier 1948. Je
voudrais que le representant du Royaume-Uni m'indique
un cas, un seul, oil un representant du Gouvernement
de l'Inde au Conseil ou ailleurs ait nie que nous ayons
accepte la resolution du 17 janvier 1948. Bien plus, nous
ne pretendons pas, mais nous affirmons, Car les faits le
prouvent, que nous avons scrupuleusement et religieusement observe cette resolution. Jamais il n'a ete formule contre nous de plainte pour nous accuser d'avoir
augmente nos forces sa.ns que nous n'ayons pris immediatement les mesures necessaires - non pas, bien
entendu, pour diminuer nos effectifs, car nous ne les
avions pas augmentes - pour elucider la question.

This is in reference to the resolution of 17 January 1948.
I should like the representative of the United Kingdom
to point out to me one instance, not more than one,
where a representative of the Government of India
at this Council or anywhere else and at any time
repudiated that we had accepted that resolution of
17 January 1948. What is more, it is our submission,
not our contention, to this Council as a matter of fact
that we have scrupulously and religiously observed this.
There was never a time when a complaint was made
against us that there were augmentation of our forces
that we did not immediately take the necessary steps,
not for a withdrawal of the augmentation because we
had not done anything of that kind, but for further
elucidation.
66. There has been no augmentation of the armed
forces in India either of the militia or of the regular
Indian army or other State forces in the region of

66. Il n'y a eu aucune augmentation des forces armees
de l'lnde, qu'il s'agisse de la milice ou de l'armee indienne
reguliere ou d'autres forces de I'Eta.t dans la partie

India which is Jammu and Kashmir, since we engaged
ourselves by this resolution on 17 January 1948.
We have done nothing to augment the forces there
since we accepted the resolution on 13 August 1948.
It is not necessary for me to go into the exact number
of forces there are on the territory. It is known to the
United Nations observers. It is not possible in a system
of government like ours to augment troops or equipment
without public debate. Therefore when the United
Kingdom representative says that we accepted that
resolution at the 795th meeting - unless I am mistaken
and as it may be a bad reading of English, if means
that it is only at the 795th meeting that we had accepted
it - I should like this to be accepted as a request to
modify his view on this question. We have always
accepted it and we have always followed it. That is
why during the period from 17 January 1948 until
the time of the cease-fire we have struggled hard not
only in regard to the letter of this resolution but also
in terms of the spirit of the resolution to carry it out.
That is with regard to augmentation.

de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire occupee par l'Inde
depuis que nous nous sommes engages, a l'egard de la
resolution du 17 janvier 1948. Nous n'avons rien fait
pour augmenter nos forces dans cette region depuis
que nous avons accepte la resolution du 13 aout 1948.
II n'est pas necessaire que j'indique les effectifs exacts
des forces qui existent sur notre territoire. II est connu
des observateurs des Nations Unies. II est impossible,
dans un regime comme le notre, d'augmenter les effectifs des troupes ou l'equipement sans qu'il y ait des
debats publics. Par consequent, etant donne que le
representant du Royaume-Uni dit que nous avons
accepte cette resolution a la 795 e seance - et, a moins
que je ne me sois trompe et que j'aie mal interprete
son langage, cela signifie que c'est seulement a la
795 e seance du Conseil que nous 1'avons acceptee -,
je lui demande maintenant de modifier son opinion
sur la question. Nous avons toujours accepte cette
resolution et nous nous y sommes toujours conformes.
C'est pourquoi, au cours de la periode qui s'etend du
17 janvier 1948 a 1'epoque du cessez-le-feu, nous avons
deploye le maximum d'efforts, non seulement pour
respecter 1'esprit de cette resolution, mais egalement
pour la mettre en application. C'est la tout ce que
j'avais a dire au sujet de 1'augmentation.

67. But the Security Council resolution of 17 January
1948 relates to both paragraphs Band E of part I
of the Commission's resolution of 13 August 1948. It is
no exaggeration to say that no countries today have
closer and more friendly relations - not alliancesthan the United Kingdom and my own. We have been
through times of conflict, not of armed conflict but
conflict of opinion, conflict of positions, and such
arrangements as we have in our relations are based
upon mutual confidence. And the very fact is that
even on this vital issue - and I must say it hereIndia is the successor to the British Empire in India,
as I shall point out later on; it is not a new State,
and it has taken over the responsibility, the assets
and liabilities of the British Empire in India, and this
is a relevant matter because of the statements made at
this table.

67. Mais cette resolution du Conseil de securite en
date du 17 janvier 1948 est en relation a la fois avec
les paragraphes B et E de la premiere partie de la resolution adoptee par la Commission le 13 aoftt 1948.
II n'est pas exagere d'affirmer qu'il n'existe pas aujourd'hui de pays qui aient entre eux des relations plus
etroites et plus cordiales que le Royaume-Uni et mon
pays - il ne s'agit pas d'alliance. Nous avons traverse
des periodes de conflit, non pas de conflit arme, mais
de conflit d'opinions et de conflit d'attitudes, et nos
relations actuelles sont fondees sur une confiance
mutuelle. II ne faut pas oublier, et je dois le rappeler
ici, que, pour une question aussi importante, 1'Inde
a succede aux Indes britanniques ; 1'Inde n'est pas un
nouvel Etat, et s'est chargee des responsabilites, de
1'actif et du passif, de 1'Empire britannique aux Indesc'est la une remarque pertinente en raison des declarations qui ont ete faites ici.

68.

Sir Pierson Dixon went on to say:
". . . we attach the greatest importance to both
the letter and the spirit of part I, paragraph E of
the resolution of 13 August 1948." [797th meeting,
para. 5.]
That is the part that asks people not to aggravate the
situation, by the propaganda war of hatred; it does not
relate to the augmentation of military potential.

68.

69. Mr. Jarring reported that
". . . the Government of India laid particular
emphasis on the fact that, in its view, two factors
stood in the way of the implementation of the two
resolutions adopted by the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan." [8/3821, para. 13.]

69. M. Jarring a dit ce qui suit:
« Au cours de nos entretiens, le Gouvernement
indien a insiste tout particulierement sur le fait que,
a son avis, deux obstacles empechaient la mise en
reuvre des deux resolutions de la Commission des
Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan.» [8/3821,
par. 13.]
En ce qui concerne 1'attitude de 1'autre partie au differend - et il ne s'agit pas d'une partie placee sur un
pied d'egalite avec l'Inde, mais d'une partie qui est

With regard to the attitude of the other party
concerning this matter - not an equal party, but
the defendant in this action - there has been conduct

18

Sir Pierson Dixon a declare :
attachons la plus grande importance tant
a la lettre qu'a 1'esprit du paragraphe E de la premiere partie de la resolution adoptee par la Commission le 13 aoftt 1948.» [797e seance, par. 5.]
C'est-a-dire a la partie de la resolution oil les peuples
des deux pays sont invites a ne pas adopter une attitude de nature a aggraver la situation en se livrant
a une campagne de haine - il ne s'agit pas la de lp.,
question de 1'augmentation du potentiel militaire.
«( Nous

of threatening even in this Security Council, while
today, after the last series of meetings, financial aid
is given and intelligence officers and personnel are
sent to Kashmir to stir up trouble. And when
sabotage and violence are being carried out in our
country, then it is not right for us not to complain.

defenderesse -, elle a ete mena{lante au sein meme
du Censeil de securite et, maintenant, apres la precedente serie de seances, on accorde une aide materielle,
on envoie au Cachemire des agents de renseignements
afin d'y fomenter des troubles. Lorsque des actes
de sabotage et de violence sont perpetres dans
notre pays, nous ne pouvons pas ne pas nous
plaindre.

70. However, where we join issue with our distinguished friend is in this matter of making an appeal
for what one might call good manners, if nothing
else. I do not doubt justice can be even-handed; but
everything need not be even-handed. I think it is
sent to the wrong address as far as we are concerned.
We ask the representative of the United Kingdom this
- as we have a right to ask, because we are members
of a political family and we exchange information and
tell them when we disagree. We would like to know
what responsible person in India, what responsible
authority in India, what responsible decision in India
militates against paragraph E of part I of the resolution
of 13 August 1948. We have cited instance after instance.
What is more, we do not have to cite instances. There
are threats of violence, even in this Council itself, of
what would happen to us if this or that were not done.
Therefore, I am saying all this because we cannot
entertain an approach to this problem as if there were
two parties equally guilty - a plaintiff and a defendant
to be regarded in the same manner. Therefore, that is
our position when the representative of the United Kingdom, followed by the representative of Australia, tries
to find fault with us equally - although I am afraid
that in the case of the representative of Australia
he finds it very difficult to give an instance, so that
he has put his foot in it.

70. Cependant, il est un point sur lequel nous desapprouvons entierement 1'0pinion du distingue representant du Royaume-Uni, c'est au sujet de l'appel
qu'il lance en faveur de ce que 1'0n pourrait appeler,
avec moderation, les bonnes manieres. Je ne doute
pas que la justice doive etre impartiale, mais tout
ne doit pas rassembler a la justice. Je pense que cet
appel ne nous est pas destine. Nous poserons au representant du Royaume-Uni la question suivante - et
nous avons le droit de le faire parce que nous sommes
membres d'une meme famille politique, que nous
echangeons des renseignements avec le Gouvernement
du Royaume-Uni et que, lorsque nous sommes en
desaccord avec lui, nous l'en informons. Je voudrais
savoir quelle attitude de la part d'un dirigeant indien
ou d'une autorite indienne, quelle decision importante
prise dans l'Inde, n'ont pas ete conformes au paragraphe E de la premiere partie de la resolution du
13 aout 1948. Nous avons cite maints exemples. Pourtant, nous ne sommes pas tenus d'en citer. On nous
menace d'actes de violence, au Conseil meme, on nous
fait savoir ce qui nous arriverait si nous ne prenions
pas telle ou telle mesure. Si je donne ces precisions,
c'est parce que nous ne saurions admettre que 1'0n
aborde le probleme comme s'il existait deux parties
dont les culpabilites seraient egales, un demandeur
et un defendeuf que 1'0n devrait considerer de la meme
maniere. Telle est donc notre position a l'egard du
representant du Royaume-Uni et du representant de
l'Australie, qui essaient de repartir egalement les
torts entre nous. Pour ce qui est du representant de
l'Australie, il lui est tres difficile de fournir un exemple,
de telle sorte que c'est une erreur de sa part que d'avoir
adopte cette attitude.

71. Then comes the question of paragraph E. I am
not saying that some newspapermen have not written
here or there something that was irresponsible. I am
not admitting it, but it may well be. I ask where either
a representative volume of public opinion, representative statesmen or persons in public life and authority,
or any institution such as Parliament or the Government of India have sought to violate this, and where,
if any odd person has. done so, that has ever been
condoned by the Government of India.

71. Nous arrivons maintenant au paragraphe E. Je
ne pretends pas que, dans une publication ou une
autre, des journalistes n'aient pas ecrit quelque article
a la Iegere. Non pas que je le reconnaisse, mais cela
est fort possible. Je vous le demande, y a-t-il une
fraction importante de l'opinion publique, des hommes
d'Etat influents, des autorites ou des personnes jouant
un role important dans la vie publique ou des institutions, comme le T'arlement ou le Gouvernement de
I'Inde, qui aient cherche a violer cette disposition?
Si la moindre tentative a ete faite en ce sens, a-t-elle
jamais ete toleree par le Gouvernement de l'Inde?

72. If we had not always worked for the maintenance
of the atmosphere that is necessary for the conduct
of negotiations, how would we complain? How would
we place so much insistence on this matter, if we
ourselves were guilty? If we were always shouting at
~hem, if we were also carrying on psychological war,
If we also believed in hatred, if we believed in jehad
and if we believed in taking the law into our own
hands, it would be very unwise on our part to make

72. Si nous ne nous etions pas toujours efforces de
maintenir une atmosphere favorable au developpement des negociations, comment pourrions-nous
nous plaindre? Comment pourrions-nous insister de
cette maniere sur ce point si nous etions nous-memes
coupables ? Si nous ne cessions de mener une propagande hostile, si nous faisions nous aussi une guerre
psychologique, si nous aussi nous croyions en la haine,
si nous croyions au djihad et si nous croyions que 1'0n

19

complaints because we would then be living in a glass
house. We do not do that.

doit se faire justice soi-meme, il serait deraisonnable
de notre part de nous plaindre, parce qu'il faut etre
sans defauts pour critiquer autrui. Nous ne pratiquons
pas ce genre de politique.

73. We want to ask the representative of the United
Kingdom to take this request of ours into account
and to tell us, on the one hand, what makes him think
that it is only at the 795th meeting that we accepted
the resolution of 17 January 1948 and also, on the
other hand, what makes him think that we are in the
same position with regard to part I, paragraph E of
the resolution of 13 August 1948. This is one of the
many factors that make further progress difficult. But
Sir Pierson Dixon says, "But in my view paragraph E
must be interpreted even more widely than that."
[797th meeting, para. 5.] Now we entirely agree. That
is why, even as early as five or six years ago, my Prime
Minister asked the then Prime Minister of Pakistan
that whatever our difficulties were as between our two
countries we should not settle them by war. Every
time we have brought that forward, the answer has
been, " Do something else." If something else is done,
however, the declaration does not become necessary.
Thus our position with regard to this is that paragraph E
must be widely interpreted, as was suggested by the
representative of the United Kingdom. And he himself
gives the reasons. He gives examples.

73. Je voudrais demander au representant du Royaumede tenir compte de la demande que je viens de
formuler et de nous dire ce qui lui fait croire, d'une
part, que ce n'est qu'a la 795 e seance que nous avons
accepte la resohdon du 17 janvier 1948, et, d'autre
part, que nous adoptons la meme attitude en ce qui
concerne le paragraphe E de la premiere partie de la
resolution du 13 aoftt 1948. C'est la rune des nombreuses
raisons qui rendent difficile tout progres vers un reglement de la question. Sir Pierson Dixon a declare :
« Mais j'estime qu'il faut donner a ce paragraphe
[paragraphe E] une interpretation plus large encore.»
[797e seance, par. 5.] Sur ce point, nous sommes entierement d'accord avec lui. C'est pourquoi, il y a cinq
ou six ans, le Premier Ministre de I'Inde a declare
au Premier Ministre du Pakistan que, quels que soient
les difIerends qui opposent nos deux pays, nous ne
les reglerions pas par la guerre. Chaque fois que nous
avons enonce cet argument, on nous a repondu : « Faites
autre chose.» Cependant, si I'on fait autre chose, cette
declaration cesse d'etre necessaire. Notre avis sur ce
point est que le paragraphe E doit etre interprete
dans un sens large, comme I'a suggere le representant
du Royaume-Uni. Il en donne lui-meme les raisons
et fournit des exemples a ce sujet.
74. Nous avons ete accuses de genocide au Conseil
et, jusqu'a present, nous n'avons pas pris la peine de
protester contre cette accusation, parce qu'elle est
fantaisiste. Le Gouvernement du Pakistan a ratifie
la Convention sur le genocide il y a quelques semaines.
Il aurait dft le faire depuis longtemps. On nous accuse
de genocide, et le representant de l'Australie, pour
etre equitable envers les deux parties, declare que le
Pakistan a tort d'accuser l'Inde de ce crime [798e
seance, par. 3]. Cette accusation ne contribue pas a
arranger les choses. Mais, dit-il, le representant de
~'I~de a e~~lement tort de parler de ce qui s'est passe
c; ia frontlere...
Un~

74. We have been charged in the Council- and until
now we have not bothered to protest about it because
it is a wild charge - with genocide. The Convention
on Genocide is one that the Pakistan Government
ratified a few weeks ago. It should have done so long
ago. We are charged with genocide, and the representative of Australia, in order to be fair to each of us,
says that it is wrong for Pakistan to charge India
with genocide. [798th meeting, para. 3.] It does not
help. But it is equally wrong, he says, for the representative of India to speak about what happened on
the frontier.
75. Now what did I say happened on. the frontier?
I said that on the international frontier between India
and Pakistan there is no regular army on our side.
There are only armed police. If there are small incidents,
they are not taken much notice of, but are settled
some way or other. But if there is a big one, sometimes
you have to resist it. But I said nothing about what
happens on the frontier. We have no frontier dispute.
It would be wrong on our part to bring a frontier
dispute to the Security Council. We are not going to
get entangled in the Security Council on a question of
frontier disputes.

75. Or, qu'ai-je dit qui se passait a la frontiere?
J'ai dit que l'Inde ne maintenait aucune armee a la
frontiere qui la separe du Pakistan, qu'elle n'y maintenait que des forces de police armee. Lorsque de
petits incidents se produisent, on n'y attache pas beaucoup d'importance et on s'arrange pour les regler d'une
fal,(on ou d'une autre; mais s'il se produit un incident
important, il faut etre en mesure de resister. Je n'ai
rien dit au sujet de ce qui se passe a la frontiere. Il
n'y a pas de difIerend au sujet de la frontiere. Nous
aurions tort de faire etat d'un difIerend de ce genre
devant le Conseil de securite. Nous ne voulons pas
nous empetrer ici dans une afIaire de difIerend frontalier.

76. The representative of Australia says, "We deplore
charges of genocide, and we deplore the other charges."
Well, there are several ways of being fair, but to
attribute to us something that we have not said,
something that would put us in the same category as
the other party, does not help the situation. If they
want to get a better atmosphere, they must make a
distinction between the party that contributes to
worsening the atmosphere and the party that does not.

76. Le representant de I'Australie dit : « Nous deplorons les accusations de genocide, et nous deplorons
les autres accusations.» Il y a certes plusieurs fal,(ons
d'etre juste, mais nous attribuer quelque chose que
nous n'avons pas dit, quelque chose qui nous placerait
sur le meme pied que I'autre partie, n'est pas fait
pour ameliorer la situation. Si l'on veut assainir l'atmosphere, il est essentiel d'etablir une distinction entre
ceux qui contribuent a I'empoisonuer et les autres.

I

I would like the representative of Australia to tell us
some time, publicly or privately, what we have said
about the frontier which upsets him.

Je se7ais heureux que le representant de I'Australie
nous -0xplique, en public ou en prive, ce qui lui deplait
dans ce que nous avons dit au sujet de la frontiere.

77. If the reference is to our giving facts and figures
with regard to sabotage and murder, the use of conspiratory intelligence men, some of whom we have got,
or to spending the Pakistan taxpayers' money - which
is their sovereign right - in trying to corrupt our
people, well, that is inside our country and not on the
frontier. If the reference is to the frontier in the sense
of the cease-fire line, under the agreement reached
by the Security Council, no one who belongs to the
army or anything of that character can go within
500 yards. There is a 500-yard margin on either side
of the cease-fire line in which no forces either of Pakistan
or of India can come, at least publicly, and so far as
we are concerned we do not go there. Furthermore,
the United Nations observers are there. Therefore,
with great respect, I would like to ask our colleague
from Australia to exempt us from this charge.

77. S'il s'agit des faits et des chiffres que nous avons
cites au sujet des sabotages et des assassinats, des menees
subversives d'agents secrets, dont nous avons capture
quelques-uns, ou du financement, au moyen de l'argent
des contribuables pakistanais - ce qui est leur droit
souverain - d'une tentative de corruption de notre
peuple, tout cela concerne I'interieur de notre pays,
et non pas la frontiere. S'il s'agit de la frontiere au sens
de la ligne de suspension d'armes, I'accord auquel est
parvenu le Conseil de securite dispose que personne
appartenant de pres ou de loin it. I'armee ne peut s'en
approcher de moins de 455 metres. Il y a, de part et
d'autre de la ligne de demarcation de la suspension
d'armes, une bande de 455 metres de large, dans
laquclle ni les forces pakistanaises ni les forces indiennes
ne peuvent penetrer, tout au moins ouvertement;
en tout cas, les forces indiennes n'y penHrent pas.
De plus, des observateurs des Nations Unies s'y trouvent. En consequence, je demanderai tres respectueusement a mon collegue australien de bien vouloir ne
pas nous impliquer dans cette accusation.

78. ! can quite understand that both the United
Kingdom and Australia do not want in this issue to be
regarded as finding fault with anyone, and one way
of not finding fault with one person is to find fault
with both. If you abuse both sides you are usually
rega.rded as impartial. But impartiality must be combined with a relation to facts. That is my submission.

78. Je comprends parfaitement que, pans cette question, le Royaume-Uni et I'Australie ne veuillent pas
avoir I'air d'incriminer qui que ce soit, et une fac;on
de ne pas incriminer une partie est d'incriminer les
deux. En disant du mal des deux parties, on passe
generalement pour impartial. Mais je pretends que
l'impartialite doit reposer sur les faits.

79. Sir Pierson Dixon continues:
"I would wish to appeal to both India and
Pakistan to do their utmost, in the words of part I,
paragraph E, of the resolution, ' to assist in creating
and maintaining an atmosphere favourable to the
promotion of further negotiations'. " [797th meeting,
para. 7.]

79.

I am quite at liberty to say - I speak on behalf of
my Government and of the people of India in fully
responding to this appeal - that we want, not only in
this matter, but generally, to live on terms of friendship
and amity with our neighbours. We do not feel that
they are a strange people or that it is our business
to be in competition with them. Their prosperity is
our prosperity, but it requires two to make it possible.
We have done a great deal in other spheres, whatever
we can, to bring this about, but we cannot do so at the
expense of our sovereignty and the self-respect of
our people.

Sir Pierson Dixon poursuit :
({ J e voudrais... adresser un appel a la fois a
I'Inde et au Pakistan pour que, selon les termes
du paragraphe E de la premiere partie de la resolution, ils fassent tout ce qui est en leur pouvoir pour
aider « it creer et it maintenir une atmosphere favorable au developpement de nouvelles negociations.»
[797e seance, par. 7.]
En repondant sans reserve it cet appel, au nom de mon
gouvernement et du peuple indien, je suis autorise
it dire que, non seulement pour cette question, mais en
general, nous voulons vivre en bonne amitie avec nos
voisins. Nous ne pensons pas que les Pakistanais soient
completement des etrangers, ni que nous devions
rivaliser avec eux. Leur prosperite et la ntltre ne font
qu'un, mais il faut etre deux pour la realiser. Nous
avons fait beaucoup de choses dans d'autres domaines
- tout ce que nous avons pu -, pour y parvenir, mais
il nous est impossible de le faire au detriment de notre
souverainete et de la dignite de notre peuple.

80. Therefore, so far as the appeal is concerned, I will
not say that it was unnecessary, because you can
always appeal for good things. There can be no limit
to the doing of good. Therefore, we do not object to
the appeal. We will only say that we have done the
best we can. We keep on trying to do it, and we a.ccept
advice.

80. Par consequent, je ne dirai pas que cet appel etait
inutile, car les bonnes intentions sont toujours louables.
On ne saurait fixer de limites it. la recherche du bien.
Nous ne faisons done pas d'objection it cet appel. Nous
nous bornerons it dire que nous avons fait tout ce qui
nous etait possible de faire, que nous continuons de le
faire, et que nous acceptons les conseils qui nous sont
donnes.

81. Now Sir Pierson Dixon continues, and this is
where the trouble comes. He asks:

81. Mais sir Pierson Dixon demande ensuite, et c'est
hi. que les difficultes commencent :

" What other impediments to progress did
Mr. Jarring report? He said that the Government
of India felt aggrieved that the Council had so far
not expressed itself on the question of what in its
view was aggression committed by Pakistan on
India." [Ibid., para. 8.]
Then he goes on to speak of the view of the United
Kingdom as expressed by Sir Alexander Cadogan and Sir
Gladwyn Jebb, which I do not want to go into,
because that itself would lead to a long argument as to
what exactly they did say.
Sir Pierson Dixon goes on to say:
" I do not feel that it would contribute to progress
if we were to go over this ground again. . . Since
neither Her Majesty's Government nor the Security
Council has felt able to pronounce on the Indian
case on this aspect of the question, and since this
is, so to speak, the major premise in the Indian
argument as developed by Mr. Krishna Menon, it
follows that we are unable to accept many of the
deductions which have been drawn, however logically
they might seem to ensue if the major premise
were accepted." [Ibid., para 10.]

82.

.

That is the way a very cultivated English scholar tells
you: "I don't want to listen to you. What you say
may be very sensible - if it made sense. It doesn't
make sense, so I don't want it." I am accustomed to
that: I lived with them for twenty-eight years.

« Quels sont les autres obstacles au progres que
M. Jarring a signaIes ? Il a dit que le Gouvernement
indien regrettait que le Conseil ne se soit pas jusqu'a
present prononce sur la question de I'agression que,
selon ledit gouvernement, le Pakistan aurait commise
contre l'Inde.» [Ibid., par. 8.]
Sir Pierson Dixon fait ensuite etat du point de vue du
Royaume-Uni tel qu'il a ete expose par sir Alexander
Cadogan et sir Gladwyn Jebb, et dont je ne parlerai
pas, car cela entrainerait une longue controverse sur
le sens exact de leurs declarations.

82.

Sir Pierson Dixon poursuit :
« Je crois que ce ne serait guere faciliter des progres

que de rouvrir la discussion sur ce point... Etant
donne que ni le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste ni le
Conseil de securite n'ont ete en mesure de se prononcer
sur la these indienne concernant cet aspect de la
question, et comme cette these constitue, pour ainsi
dire, la premisse fondamentale du raisonnement du
Gouvernement indien tel qu'il a ete expose par
M. Krishna Menon, il s'ensuit que nous ne sommes
pas en mesure d'accepter un grand nombre des deductions qui ont ete tirees de cette premisse, si logiques
qu'elles puissent paraitre une fois la premisse fondamentale acceptee.» [Ibid., par 10.]
Cela, c'est la maniere pour un Anglais erudit et tres
cultive de vous dire: « Je ne veux pas vous entendre;
ce que vous dites serait interessant, si cela avait un
sens; mais cela n'en a pas, aussi n'en veux-je rien
savoir». J'en ai I'habitude : j'ai frequente ses semblables
pendant 28 ans.

83. We regard this major premise as not only true
but as basic and fundamental. On behalf of the Government of India, I wish to state that our position is not
that the Security Council has not pronounced itself on
aggression, b,'(;ause the resolutions are based upon the
sovereignty of India over its territory. These resolutions
do not make any reference to Pakistan. India had to
do the publicity, India had to make the appeal, India
had to keep law and order. All these matters will come
up later on. Therefore the resolutions that we speak
of do not put this issue in cold storage. It is quite true
that Pakistan has not been branded as aggressor.
Parhaps it is our fault; we did not ask for it at that
time. We said that we did not want any name-calling,
that we wanted them to call off the aggression. That is
all we ask even today.

83. Nous estimons que cette premiere premlsse est
non seulement vraie, mais essentielle et fondamentale.
Au nom du Gouvernement de I'Inde, je tiens it declarer
que nous n'estimons pas que le Conseil de securite ne
s'est pas prononce au sujet de I'agression, parce que
les resolutions sont fondees sur la souverainete de
I'Inde sur son propre territoire Elles ne mentionnent
pas le Pakistan. L'Inde devait tenir tout le monde au
courant, l'Inde devait lancer l'appel, l'Inde devait
maintenir l'ordre public. Nous en viendrons plus tard
it ces questions. Les resolutions ne renvoient donc pas
cette affaire de favon indefinie. Il est parfaitement
exact que le Pakistan n'a pas ete denonce comme
agresseur. Cela est peut-etre de notre faute : nous ne
I'avons pas demande a l'epoque. Nous aVOIlS dit que
nous ne voulions aucune invective, que nous voulions
que le Pakistan mette fin a l'agression. C'est la tout
ce que nous demandons encore aujourd'hui.

84. Therefore, it is not our position that aggression
has to be proved. It is our position that the resolutions
by which we are engaged - the resolutions which,
with all their conditions and with all their sequences,
which are important in this matter, were formulated
and accepted - are built upon the basis that India
had made a complaint of the violation of its territory.
India was the complainant. It was, I think, Mr. Warren
Austin, who was then the representative of the United
States, who said that India was h~re because the
external sovereignty of Kashmir had been handed
over by the Maharaja to India, and Pakistan was
here .and had the rights of a defendant, because it was

84. Par consequent, nous n'estimoIls pas que l'agression doive etre prouvee; nous estimons que les resolutions qui nous lient - resolutions qui, avec toutes
leurs conditions et toutes leurs series de dispositions,
qui sont importantes en la matiere, ant ete formulees et
acceptees - sont fondees sur le fait que l'Inde s'est
plainte d'une violation de son territoire. C'est I'Inde
qui etait le plaignant. Je crois que c'est M. Warren
Austin, qui representait alors les Etats-Unis, qui a dit
que l'Inde s'etait adressee au Conseil parce que l~
souverainete exterieure du Cachemire lui avait ete
remise par le maharajah et que le Pakistan, dont les
forces se trouvaient au Cachemire, se presentait comme
9.9.

j

a sovereign State. Pakistan is a sovereign State, but
has no sovereignty over Kashmir.

defendeur, en sa qualite d'Etat souverain. Le Pakistan
est un Etat souverain, mais n'a aucune souverainete sur
le Cachemire.

85. Therefore, the question is not that this is a side
issue. This is the basic issue, and it is the major premise.
If the representative of the United Kingdom does not
accept that major premise, I am afraid that he is
straying away from the principles of the United Nations
Charter. And I am sure that, with the close relationships
we have with them ~ there is nothing private about
it - we have another bone to pick in this matter. In
regard to other members of the Security Council, this
may be only a matter of the Charter. But the United
Kingdom is a party to these boundaries. The United
Kingdom is not only bound by the Charter, but is
bound by the tripartite agreement in regard to the
settlement in India. Therefore, for the United Kingdom,
especially in the context of the time, to take up this
view would be a wrong one. We are not therefore
prepared to admit that there has been no aggression.

85. Il ne s'agit donc pas d'une question secondaire.
C'est au contraire la question fondamentale, et c'est
sur elle que s'appuie ma premisse fondamentale. Si le
representant du Royaume-Uni n'accepte pas cette
premisse, je crains qu'il ne s'ecarte des principes de la
Charte des Nations Unies. Je suis d'autre part certain,
etant donne les relations etroites que nous entretenons
avec ce pays - il n'y a rien la de prive - que nous
aurons une autre question a regler a cet egard. Pour
les autres membres du Conseil de securite, il peut ne
s'agir que de l'application de la Charte. Mais le
Royaume-Uni a participe a la delimitation des frontieres
dont il s'agit. Le Royaume-Uni n'est pas seulement
lie par la Charte, il est lie par l'accord tripartite relatif
a la delimitation des frontieres de I'Inde. Par consequent,
et surtout si l'on se replace a l'epoque ou cet accord
a ete conclu, le Royaume-Uni aurait tort de soutenir
cette opinion. Nous ne sommes done pas disposes a
admettre qu'il n'y a pas eu d'agression.

86. From there, let us proceed to the facts of the case.
I will not go into an analysis of the resolutions of
13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949. I did that early
this year at great length and, if the representative of
the United Kingdom will give us the assistance of
going to them again, he will see our point of view.

86. Cela etant etabli, venons-en aux faits. Je n'ai
pas !'intention d'analyser les resolutions du 13 aout
1948 et du 5 janvier 1949. Je l'ai deja fait, tres longuement, au debut de l'annee, et si le representant du
Royaume-Uni se reporte aux comptes rendus, il comprendra mon point de vue.

87. Part 11, section B (3) of the resolution of 13 August
1948 says:
"The Government of India will undertake to
ensure that the Government of the State of Jammu
and Kashmir will take all measures within its power
to make it publicly known that peace, law and
order will be safeguarded and that all human and
political rights will be guaranteed." [S/1100, para. 75.]

87. Le paragraphe 3 de la section B de la deuxieme
partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948 est ainsi conc;ue :
« Le Gouvernement de I'lnde s'engagera a veiller
a ce que le Gouvernement de I'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire prenne toutes mesures en son pouvoir
pour faire savoir a tous que la paix et l'ordre public
seront sauvegardes et que tous les droits de I'homme
et les droits politiques seront garantis.» [S/1100,
par. 75.]

88. I should like to ask the representative of the
United Kingdom how the Government of India guarantees human and political rights inside a territory
in which it is not sovereign. How does it make it publicly
known that peace, law and order must be safeguarded?
It is because it is its responsibility. The Security Council
is saying that" You must keep your house in this way,
you must keep your people in this way." The resolution
reads: "The Government of India will undertake ... ".
We give an undertaking in regard to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir. There is no reference, in any of
the Security Council records, to two States of Jammu
and Kashmir. There is only one State of Jammu and
Kashmir. And, what is more, the Security Council
proceedings speak expressly about the sovereignty of
the Jammu and Kashmir Government in the sense of
its full authority.

88. Je voudrais demander au representant du
Royaume-Uni comment le Gouvernement de I'lnde
peut garantir les droits de I'homme et les droits politiques a l'interieur d'un territoire dont il n'est pas
souverain. Comment peut-il faire savoir a tous que la
paix et l'ordre public doivent etre sauvegardes? C'est
parce que I'Inde en est responsable. Le Conseil de securite declare : « Vous devez tenir votre maison ainsi,.
vons devez gouverner votre peuple de cette fac;on.»
La resolution enonce : « Le Gouvernement de I'lnde
s'engagera... ». Nous prenons un engagement a l'egard
de I'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire. Aucun des documents
officiels du Conseil de securite ne mentionne deux
Etats de Jammu et Cachemire. Il n'y a qu'un seul
Etat de Jammu et Cachemire. En outre, les procesverbaux du Conseil de securite mentionnent expressement la souverainete du Gouvernement de Jammu
et Cachemire, entendant par la son autorite pleine
et entiere.
~;,! \!t¥,1
89. Dans une intervention anterieure, j'ai fait observer
que, par cette resolution, la Commission avait confere
a l'Inde la responsabilite d'aider les autorites locales a
faire respecter l'ordre public - non pas les autorites
locales en dec;a de la ligne de suspension d'armes, OU
l'Inde a pleine juridiction, mais dans l'ensemble du
territoire. D'ailleurs, l'ensemble de la reference a l'auto-

89. On an earlier occasion, I pointed out that in this
resolution the Commission had placed upon India the
responsibility of assisting the local authorities in the
observance of law and order - not the local authorities
on that side of the cease-fire line in which there is full
administration by India, but in the whole place. And
the whole reference to local authority is an indication
23

that there is only one governing authority in the whole
place, and that is Jammu and Kashmir. On account
of the invasion, control having disappeared, there were
some local agencies which ware not able to maintain
law and order. It was agreed at that time - and the
correspondence between Mr. Lozano and the Prime
Minister of India, which is part of the documents, ma y
be read in this connexion - that within the lines then
existing (not the cease-fire line, but the lines then
existing) these local authorities were to be assisted in
their task by India. That could only be possible
because there was no other authority there. Therefore,
if India was sovereign over the whole territory of
Jammu and Kashmir, the 84,000 square miles of it,
then, if 42,000 square miles are annexed by someone
else and foreign troops are there, if they are kept as
part of the army of the other side, if they enter into
agreements ljke the one on the Mangla Dam which
they are not competent to enter into, then you have
aggression.

rite locale indique qu'il n'y qu'une seule autorite gouvernementale dans tout le territoire, qui est celle de
Jammu et Cachemire. L'exercice de I'autorite ayant
cesse du fait de !'invasion, il existait des organismes
locaux, qui se trouvaient dans I'impossibilite de maintenir I'ordre public. On a admis it I'epoque - et on
peut it ce sujet se reporter it la correspondance entre
M. Lozano et le Premier Ministre de l'Inde, qui fait
partie des documents du Conseil - qu'en dega des
lignes alors existantes (non pas la ligne de suspension
d'armes, mais les lignes de demarcation alors existantes)
l'Inde devait aider ces autorites locales it s'acquitter
de leur tache. Cela n'etait possible que parce qu'il n'y
avait pas d'autre autorite dans le territoire. Par consequent, si I'Inde est souveraine sur I'ensemble du territoire de Jammu et Cachemire, sur les 84.000 milles
carrl~s qui le composent, et si 42.000 milles carres sont
annexes par quelqu'un d'autre et occupes par des
troupes etrangeres, des troupes qui font partie de
I'armee de I'autre partie, si d'autre part des autorites
etrangeres signent des accords, comme celui sur le
barrage de Mangla, qu'elles ne sont pas habilitees a
signer, on se trouve en presence d'une agression.

90. If the territory was not sovereign, if it was a
disputed territory, that would be a different question.
But this resolution refers to the whole of Jammu and
Kashmir as being one place. It recognizes the sovereignty
of the Government of India; it recognizes its responsibility for the maintenance of law and order. And, what
is more, as I pointed out to the Security Council on
an earlier occasion, India told the Commission at that
time that she would have to protect the caravan routes,
the trade routes, leading out of India on her frontiers.
And it was agreed that when the. Government of India
made a representation of that kind, it was time to
go - in fact, the various posts to which they should
be sent, and so on, were discussed at that time.

90. Si le territoire n'etait pas souverain, si sa souverainete etait contestee, il en serait autrement. Mais la
resolution mentionne I'ensemble de Jammu et Cachemire comme une entite unique. Elle reconnait la souverainete du Gouvernement de I'Inde; elle reconnait
qu'il est responsable du maintien de I'ordre public.
En outre, comme je I'ai fait observer au Conseil de
securite lors d'une intervention anterieure, l'Inde a
alors dit it la Commission qu'elle devrait proteger les
routes des caravanes, les voies commerciales, qui
franchissent les frontieres de I'Inde. Il a ete reconnu
que lorsque le Gouvernement de I'Inde faisait une
representation de ce genre, on pouvait prendre des
decisions - en fait, les divers postes it pourvoir, et
d'autres questions, ont ete examines it I'epoque.

91. So it is not as though there were two countries
and the sovereignty of the Union did not run into
this place. Our position is that the whole of the territory
of Jammu and Kashmir is part "If the Union of India,
and half of it is under foreign occupation. It is in that
area that there has been augmentation, and it is kept
under foreign occupation by the use of these forces.

91. Ce n'est donc pas comme s'il y avait deux pays
et que la souverainete de I'Union indienne ne s'etende
pas it ce territoire. Nous estimons que I'ensemble du
territoire de Jammu et Cachemire fait partie de I'Union
indienne, et que la moitie de ce territoire est sous
occupation etrangere. C'est dans cette region qu'il y a
eu augmentation d'effectifs, et c'est cette region qui
est occupee par les memes forces etrangeres.

92. Then we come to a distinguished jurist who is
now, I believe, a Judge of the Supreme Court of
Australia - Sir Owen Dixon. These are part of the
Security Council documents, so I do not have to ask
anybody's permission to read them. Sir Owen Dixon
said:
" ... when the frontier of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir was crossed on, I b~lieve, 20 October 1947,
by hostile elements, it was contrary to international
law, and [that] when, in M'lY 1948, as I believe, units
of the regular Pakistan forces moved into the territory
of the State, that too was inconsistent with international law." [S/1791, para. 21.]

92. Permettez-moi maintenant de citer un juriste
distingue qui est maintenant, je crois, juge it la Cour
supreme d' Australie, sir Owen Dixon. Je prendrai ces
citations dans des documents du Conseil de securite,
aussi n'ai-je besoin de la permission de personne pour
les lire. Sir Owen Dixon a declare :
« Le passage de la frontiere de I'Etat de Jammu
et Cachemire par des elements hostiles, le 20 octobre
194:7, si je pouvais me fier it ma memoire, etait
contraire au droit international, et [que] !'invasion
du territoire de I'Etat par les unites de I'armee reguliere du Pakistan, effectuee it ma connaissance en
mai 194:8, etait, elle aussi, contraire au droit international.» [S/1791, par. 2.]
En d'autres termes, si I'on pretend que le premier
passage etait uniquement le fait de bandes irregulieres
que le Pakistan etait incapable d'arreter, il reste le
second, qui a ete effectue par I'armee reguliere.

That is, if it is argued that the first had to do merely
with mlraudars, irregulars whom they could not stop,
then th3re was the next on~, whan the regular army
crossed the frontier.

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _2.4

4

. . . ._ .............

93. It is not for me to go into the past history of
this; it is not necessary. What we are concerned with
is who had the sovereignty at this particular moment
_ whatever may happen tomorrow. And that sovereignty cannot be altered by an act of force. And that'
act of force is a violation of international law.

93. Il ne m'appartient pas de faire 1'historique de ces
evenements - ce n'est pas necessaire. Ce qui importe,
c'est de savoir qui avait la souverainete a ce moment
particulier, quoi qu'il ait pu se passeI' le lendemain.
Et cette souverainete ne peut pas etre modifiee par un
acte de force - acte de force qui est violation du droit
international.

94. It is not correct, if I may say so, to argue before
the Security Council that Sir Owen Dixon did not
believe this but merely said this, as has been implied.
There is no doubt that when the frontiers of a sovereign
State are crossed, when the territory of a sovereign
State is trampled upon in this way, there is strictly
a violation.

94. Il n'est pas correct, si je puis dire, de pretendre
devant le Conseil de securite que sir Owen Dixon a
dit tout cela sans y croire vraiment, comme on 1'a
laisse entendre. Il ne fait pas de doute que lorsque les
frontieres d'un Etat souverain sont franchies, quand
son territoire est pietine de cette fac;on, il s'agit, au sens
strict, d'une violation.

95. What is more, we have the evidence of Mr. Korbel,
who was a member, and for a time even Chairman, of
the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan.
After he left the Commission, he wrote a book entitled
Danger in Kashmir. This is not a partisan book in any
way; it does not plead our case. Mr. Korbel states
in that book:

" ... explained to the Pakistanis that the movement
of these troops into foreign territory without the
invitation of that territory's Government was a
violation of international law." 3

95. De plus, des preuves nous sont fournies a cet
egard par M. Korbel, qui a fait partie de la Commission
des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan et 1'a meme
presidee pendant un certain temps. Apres avoir quitte
la Commission, M. Korbel a ecrit un livre ayant pour
titre Danger in Kashmir. C'est un ouvrage objectif a
tous points de vue; il ne plaide pas notl'e cause. Voici
ce que M. Korbel ecrit dans ce livre :
( C'est alors qu'eclata la premiere des graves nouvelles. Sir Zafrulla Khan informa la Commission que
trois brigades pakistanaises se trouvaient sur le territoire du Cachemire depuis le mois de mai 2. »
Ainsi, apres avoir dit au Conseil qu'il n'y avait pas de
troupes pakistanaises au Cachemire, apres avoir nie
qu'une agression quelconque ait ete commise, sir Mohammed sir Zafrulla Khan a declare a la Commission qu'ily
avait trois brigafes pakistanaises au Cachemire depuis
le mois de mai 1948. Selon 1'explication donnee par le
Gouvernement pakistanais, la Commission n'existait
pas encore au moment oil la question fut soulevee devant
le Conseil de securite et oil le representant du Pakistan
declara qu'il n'y avait pas de troupes pakistanaises au
Cachemire. Par consequent, la Commission n'aurait pas
pu etre informee de ces faits. M Korbel signale dans son
livre que la Commission :
(c A explique aux Pakistanais que l'entree de ces
troupes en territoire etranger sans qu'elles y aient
ete invitees par le gouvernement de ce territoire constituait une violation du droit international 3. »

96. Thus, Mr. Korbel, who was at one time Chairman
of the United Nations Commission for India and
Pakistan, gives the facts of the movement of troops in
this territory; he gives the facts of this aggression; and,
what is more, he states that that was the opinion of
the Commission. I should therefore like to know what
basis there is for arguing that the Security Council has
not pronounced itself on this matter.

96. Ainsi, M. Korbel, qui fut a un moment president
de la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le
Pakistan, parle des mouvements de troupes qui ont
eu lieu dans ce territoire ; il cite des faits relatifs a cette
agression et, de plus, il declare que tel etait l'avis de la
Commission. J e voudrais donc savoir sur quoi l' on se
fonde pour affirmer que le Conseil de securite ne s'est
pas prononce sur cette question.

97. We are anxious to concede that the representative
of Australia meant well when he said that he did not
regard the Indian complaint as unworthy of examination. We must, however, place this limitation on that
appreciation: we cannot accept any statement that the
Security Council has not pronounced itself on India's
complaint. What we can say is that the vacation of

97. Nous sommes prets a reconnaitre que le representant de l'Australie etait bien intentionne lorsqu'il a
dit qu'il ne considerait pas la plainte indienne comme ne
meritant pas d' etre examinee. Il convient cependant de
formuler une reserve touchant cette appreciation. Nous
ne pouvons admettre l'affirmation selon laquelle le
Conseil de securite ne se serait pas prononce sur la

2 Josef Korbel, Danger in Kashmir, Princeton, New Jersey,
Princeton University Press. 1954, p. 121.
a Ibid., p. 140.

2 Josef Korbel, Danger in Kashmir, Princeton, New-Jersey.
Princeton University Press, edit., 1954, p. 121.
8 Ibid., p. 140.

" Then came the first bombshell. Sir Zafrulla Khan
informed the Commission that three Pakistani brigades had been in Kashmir territory since May." 2
Thus, after having told the Council that Pakistan
troops were not in Kashmir, after having denied that
there was any aggression, Sir Mohammed ZaJrullah
Khan told the Commission that three brigades of
Pakistan troops had been in Kashmir since May 1948.
The explanation given by the Pakistan Government
was that, when this matter had been raised before the
Security Council and the representative of Pakistan
had said that there were no Pakistan troops in Kashmir,
the Commission was not in existence and, therefore,
the Commission could not be informed. Mr. Korbel
states in his book that the Commission:

25

aggression - the action which should follow the
Council's pronouncement on India's complaint - has
been delayed.

plainte de l'Inde. Ce que l'on peut dire, c'est que les
mesures d'annulation de I'agression - c'est-a-dire la
phase qui doit suivre la decision prise par le Conseil de
securite au sujet de la plainte de l'Inde - ont ete
ajournees.

98. Since the question whether or not there has been
aggression is the major part of the case, it is my duty
to place before the Council, at least for the purposes
of the record, what the exact facts are.

98. Puisque la question de savoir si une agression a
ete ou non commise est l'aspect principal de cette
affaire, mon devoir est d'exposer les faits au Conseil tels
qu'iIs se sont produits, afin qu'au moins il en soit fait
mention au proces-verbal.

99. This is what the United Nations Commission for
India and Pakistan said in its third interim report:

99. Voici ce qu'a declare la Commission des Nations
Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan dans son troisieme
rapport provisoire :
« Au moment oil la Commission a adopte la resolution du 13 aout 1948, elle avait des raisons de croire
que les forces azad ne constituaient pas une force
militaire bien organisee et equipee et qu'en consequence, lorsque I'armee pakistanaise se serait retiree
de I'Etat, sa dissolution ne presenterait pas de difficulte majeure 4. »
Si j'ai donne lecture de ce passage, c'est parce que, pour
une raison que je ne puis pas comprendre, sir Pierson
Dixon a declare ce qui suit :
« Si j'ai bien compris M. Krishna Menon, iI s'est
preoccupe d'un principe qui figure dans la resolution
- le principe selon lequel les forces ne devraient pas
etre accrues apres le cessez-Ie-feu -» (c'est absolument exact) - « et d'une question qui n'est pas
traitee dans la resolution, a savoir la question des
forces du Cachemire azad. La Commission n'a pas
examine explicitement cette question. » [797e seance,
par. 14.]

" At the time that the Commission adopted the
resolution of 13 August 1948 it had reason to believe
that the 'Azad' forces did not constitute a properly
organized and equipped military force and that
consequently their disposal, once the Pakistan Army
had withdrawn from the State, would not constitute
a major difficulty." 4
I read that out because, for some reason which I am
unable to understand, Sir Pierson Dixon made the
following statement:
"If I understood Mr. Krishna Menon aright, he
was concerned with what is in the resolution - the
principle that forces should not be augmented after
the cease-fire [that is quite correct] and with
something that is not in the resolution; that is, the
question of Azad Kashmir forces. The Commission
did not explicitly deal with this latter point." [797th
meeting, para. 14.]
100. If Sir Pierson Dixon is adhering strictly to the
letter of this resolution and is saying that the resolution
does not ask for the vacation of the " Azad " Kashmir
forces, I should like to submit two observations.

100. Si sir Pierson Dixon s'en tient strictement it la
lettre de cette resolution et dit que cette derniere ne
reclame pas I'evacuation des forces du Cachemire
azad, j e voudrais faire deux remarques.

101. In the first place, we find the following sentence
in part I, paragraph B of the resolution of 13 August
1948 :
"(For the purpose of these proposals forces under
their control shall be considered to include all forces,
organized and unorganized, fighting or participating
in hostilities on their respective sides.)"

101. Tout d'abord, on trouve dans la resolution du
13 aout 1948 (l re partie, par. B) la phrase suivante :

102. At that time, the Pakistanis denied that they
kenw anything about these forces or had anything to
do with them. It was only afterwards that they admitted
that all these forces - thirty-two battalions - were
in Kashmir. If, therefore, the United Kingdom representative desires to adhere to the position that "the
Commission did not explicitly deal with this latter
point ", we are entitled to ask why the Commission did
not deal with" this latter point ". And the answer is :
because the Commission was not told; because the
facts were concealed from it. At that time, the Commission thought that these were irregular forces, which
presented no difficulty.

102. A cette epoque, les Pakistanais pretendaient qu'ils
ne savaient rien au sujet de ces forces et qu'ils n'avaient
rien a voir avec eIles. C'est seulement par la suite qu'ils
ont reconnu que toutes ces forces - 32 bataillons - se
trouvaient au Cachemire. Par consequent, si le representant du Royaume-Uni s'en tient au point de vue selon
lequel « la Commission n'a pas examine explicitement
cette question», nous sommes en droit de demander
pourquoi la Commission ne s'est pas occupee de « cette
question». Et la reponse est la suivante : c'est parce
que la Commission n'a pas ete informee, parce qu'on
lui a cache les faits. A cette epoque, elle pensait qu'U
s'agissait de forces irregulieres, qui ne soulevaient
aucune difficulte.

C Official Records of the Security Council. Fourth Year, Special
Supplement, No. 7, document 8/1430, para. 204.

C Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiU, quatrieme
annee, SuppUment special nO 7, document 8/1430, par. 204.

« (Aux fins des presentes propositions, I'expression

« forces placees sous leurs ordres» comprend toutes

les forces, organisees ou non, qui combattent ou participent aux hostiIites de l'un ou l'autre cote.»)

,,26..

103. At a later point of its third interim report, the
Commission gives another version of the situation, as
follows:
" There is, indeed, no doubt that the azad forces
now have a strength which changes the military
situation and to that extent makes the withdrawal
of forces, particularly those of India, a far more
difficult matter to arrange within a structure which
considers only the regular forces of two armies.
Although it might be a matter of discussion whether
the numerical strength of the azad Kashmir forces
has actually increased since August 1948, there is no
question that those forces, who have since then been
working in close co-operation with the Pakistan
regular Army and who have been trained and officered
by that Army, have increased their fighting strength.
It is reasonable to suppose that, if the Commission
had been able to foresee that the cease-fire period
would be prolonged throughout the greater part of
1949 and that Pakistan would use that period to
consolidate its position in the azad territory,
the Commission would have dealt with this question
in part II of the resolution of 13 August." 5

103. La Commission donne, dans un autre passage de
son troisieme rapport provisoire, une version differente de la situation, qui est la suivante :
« Il est, de fait, incontestable que les forces azad
sont maintenant assez fortes pour modifier la situation militaire; dans ces conditions, il est bien plus
difficile d'organiser le retrait des forces - celles de
I'lnde, notamment - dans le cadre de dispositions
qui ne tiennent compte que des forces regulieres
des deux armees. On peut se demander si l'effectif
numerique des forces azad a reellement augmente
depuis le mois d'aout 1948, mais il ne fait pas de
doute que, ayant, depuis lors, opere en liaison etroite
avec I'armee reguliere pakistanaise, ayant ete instruites et commandees par des officiers de cette
armee, ces forces ont sensiblement augmente leur
puissance de combat. On peut supposer a bon droit
que, si elle avait pu prevoir que la suspension des
hostilites se prolongerait pendant presque toute
I'annee 1949 et que le Pakistan mettrait cette periode
a profit pour consolider sa position dans le territoire
du Cachemire azad, la Commission aurait traite cette
question dans la deuxieme partie de la resolution
du 13 aout 5.!l

104. I make a present to the United Kingdom representative of that paragraph from the report. What is
the answer? It is that the Pakistan side used the
period in question to consolidate its position in the
azad territory. If that is not augmentation, in sheer
violation of the resolution of 13 August 1948, I should
like to know what it is. In the face of the concealment
of these facts from the Commission, how can it be
argued that we have brought extraneous matters into
this discussion ?

104. Je signale ce paragraphe du rapport de la Commission a I'attention du representant du RoyaumeUni. Que repond-on ? Que le Pakistan a mis ce temps a
profit pour consolider sa position dans le territoire azad.
Si ce n'est pas la une augmentation de son potentiel
militaire, ce qui constitue une violation flagrante de la
resolution du 13 aout 1948, je voudrais savoir ce que
c'est. Puisqu'on a dissimule ces faits a la Commission,
comment peut-on pretendre que nous avons introduit
dans le debat des considerations etrangeres a I'affaire ?

105. In the second place, before Mr. Jarring went to
India and Pakistan, we stated to the Council that these
resolutions could not be taken outside the context of
the assurances and explanations and guarantees publicly
given by the Commission, and thus by the Council.
Hence, whatever the Commission has stated as a
finding of fact does not have to go to arbitrators. The
Commission has found that these forces are there and,
what is more, that Pakistan used the truce period to
consolidate its position.

105. En second lieu, nous avons declare au Conseil,
avant que M. Jarring ne se rende en Inde et au Pakistan,
que I'on ne pouvait pas separer les resolutions en question des assurances, explications et garanties donnees
publiquement par la Commission et, par I'intermediaire
de celle-ci, par le Conseil. Quelles que soient des lors
les conclusions auxquelles la Commission est parvenue,
celles-ci ne doivent pas etre soumises a un arbitrage.
La Commission a constate que ces forces se trouvaient
dans le territoire et que, en outre, le Pakistan avait
profite de la treve pour consolider sa position.

106. The Foreign Minister of Pakistan thought fit
to say in his brief reply that I had suggested that there
had been some reduction of the azad forces - from
thirty-two battalions to twenty battalions. Of course,
that depends on how many men are in a battalion. The
fact is that there are more troops in the territory now
than there were before, even though the number of
battalions have been reduced owing to a reorganization.

106. Dans sa breve reponse, le Ministre des affaires
etrangeres du Pakistan a juge bon de dire que j'avais
donne a entendre que les forces azad avaient ete reduites
dans une certaine mesure, exactement de 32 a 20 batailIons. Bien entendu, tout depend du nombre d'hommes
que comporte un bataillon. En realite, il y a maintenant
dans le territoire plus de troupes qu'auparavant, meme
si, par suite d'une reorganisation, le nombre de bataillons
a ete reduit.

107. Then, there was a minority report by the Commission, which was not contradicted by the majority.
The minority report of the Commission comments as
follows on this violation:

107. Il y a eu ensuite un rapport elabore par le groupe
minoritaire de la Commission. Il n'a pas ete refute par
la majorite. Le rapport du groupe minoritaire de la
Commission commente cette violation ainsi qu'il suit :

Ibid., para. 225.

L·
i

"

..

• Ibid., par. 225.

27

"The azad forces meanwhile grew by the spring
of 1949 into thirty-two disciplined and fully armed
battalions, which, according to an evaluation of the
military adviser of the Commissiou, represent a
'formidable force'. Owing to this fact, which is at
variance wit" part I, section B of the said resolution,
forbidding boLl parties any increasing of their military potential, the situation has materially undergone
an absolute change and so a new problem was created
as to what, within the meaning of the resolution
represents the' bulk' of the Indian army in Kashmir.
From this have arisen logically further difficulties
concerning the disarming of the azad forces." 6

108. I do not want, in view of Mr. Jarring's position
that the deadlock relates to part I of the resolution,
to go into the question of the withdrawal of the bulk
of the forces or into the various other problems to which
reference has been made. However, the existence of
these azad forces, the fact that they have been consolidated, their presence in the territory after the adoption
of the resolution, the concealment of the facts from the
Commission and the Security Council, the statement
by the Commission itself that if it had known the facts
it would have included a reference to them in the resolution: all these are relevant points which emphatically
repudiate the position taken by the United Kingdom
representative - if he means by his statement that
"the Commission did not explicitly deal with this
latter point" that we have introduced extraneous
matters into the resolution. If, however, he means that
this is not so and if he asks us to infer that the reasons
why it is not so are the reasons which I have put forward, then I am grateful to him.

« Dans l'intervalle, les « forces azad» avaient
augmente et comprenaient, au printemps de 1949,
32 bataillons disciplines et completement armes,
ce qui, de l'avis du Conseiller militaire de la Commission, constituait une « force redoutable. )) A cause de
cette augmentation, contraire aux dispositions du
paragraphe B de la premiere partie de la resolution,
qui interdisent aux deux parties toute augmentation
de leur potentiel militaire, la situation s'est trouvee,
sur le plan materiel, modifiee de fond en comble;
un nouveau probleme s'est pose, celui de savoir quelle
signification donner dans la resolution au « gros») de
l'armee indienne au Cachemire. Il en est logiquement
resulte d'autres difficultes touchant le desarmement
des « forces azad ) 6.
108. Puisque M. Jarring estime que !'impasse concerne
la premiere partie de la resolution, je ne desire pas examiner dans le detail la question du retrait du gros des
forces ou les divers problemes dont on a parle. Cependant, ces forces azad existent, elles ont ete consolidees,
et elles sont ,restees dans le territoire apres l'adoption
de la resolution. D'autre part, on a dissimule les faits
a la Commission et au Conseil de securite. Quant a la
Commission elle-meme, elle a declare que, si elle avait
eu connaissance des faits, elle y aurait fait allusion dans
la resolution. Ce sont la tout autant d'eIements pertinents qui refutent nettement le point de vue du representant du Royaume-Uni si, en declarant que « la Commission n'a pas examine explicitement cette question ),
il voulait dire que nous avons introduit dans la resolution des considerations etrangeres. Si toutefois, ce n'est
pas ce qu'il a voulu dire et s'il nous dit qu'il en est ainsi
pour les raisons que j'ai indiquees, je lui en serai reconnaissant.

109.

Sir Pierson Dixon then said:
"Now these are very real problems; and the
Security Council must be deeply concerned at any
augmentation of military potential on either side."
[797th meeting, para. 14.]
As a general proposition, no one can quarrel with that.
But we have not augmented the military potential,
and the United Kingdom knows that that is true. I shall
not go into the question of how the United Kingdom
knows that we have not augmented the military potentbl. Sir Pierson Dixon's advisers are in full possession
of the facts. If it came to a challenge, I would disclose
the facts.

109. Sir Pierson Dixon a ensuite declare:
« Il s'agit la de problemes tres importants, et le
Conseil de securite ne peut qu' etre profondement preoccupe par toute augmentation du potentiel militaire,
d'un cote ou de l'autre. » [?'97e seance, par. 14.]
S'il s'agit d'une idee generale, personne ne peut la
contester. Mais nous n'avons pas augmente notre potentiel militaire, et le representant du Royaume-Uni le
sait bien. Je n'examinerai pas dans le detail la question
de savoir comment il sait que nous n'avons pas accru
notre potentiel militaire. Les conseillers de sir Pierson
Dixon connaissent parfaitement les faits. S'il y avait
une contestation a ce sujet, je donnerais des precisions.

110. We refuse to be put into the position of being
in the same book with others who are trying to conceal
facts from the Security Council. The Government of
India has not in one instance gone back on any international obligation. In fact, we inherited from the
British the idea of paying our debts. We honour our
international obligations.

110. Nous n'admettons pas que l'on nous range parmi
ceux qui tentent de dissimuler des faits au Conseil de
securite. En aucun cas, le Gouvernement de I'Inde n'a
recuIe devant une obligation internationale. Ce sont les
Britanniques, precisement, qui nous ont Iegue l'idee
que nous devions payer nos dettes. Nous faisons honneur, pour notre part, a nos obligations internationales.

111. The problem of augmentation is a real problem,
but the complaint must be sent to the right address-not
to us. We have not done any augmenting. In fact, the
forces in the area over which we have effective control
are not today beyond the limits set at the time in ques-

111. L'augmentation du potentiel militaire pose un
veritable probleme, mais c'est a ceux que cela concerne
qu'il faut adresser une plainte a ce sujet, et non a nous.
Nous n'avons pas accru nos forces. Les forces stationnees
dans la region soumise a notre autorite effective ne

8 Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Slzpplement No 7, document S/1430/Add.3, pp. 196 and 197.

8 Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, quatrieme
annee. Supplement special no 7, document S/1430/Add. 3, p. 196
et 197.

28

tion; there has been no violation of the resolution in
any way.

depassent pas, a l'heure actuelle, la limitefixee a ce
moment-la. La resolution n'a ete vioIee d'aucune
maniere.

112. We regret that Mr. Jarring was unable to suggest
a means accessible to both sides, that is, to find a solution to this matter, but our answer to that is that the
facts were proved when the Council said that the azad
forces were there, when we had been told that they were
not there. What makes the more vicious part of it is
that the Commission's third interim report said that
had they known that Pakistan would use that period
to consolidate, that is, to perpetrate further aggression,
then they would have included that in the resolution.
How much plainer can it be put that this was a case of
aggression ?

112. Nous regrettons que M. Jarring n'ait pas ete en
mesure de proposer un moyen acceptable pour les deux
parties, autrement dit une solution, mais nous repondrons a cela que les faits etaient prouves lorsque le
Conseil a dit que les forces azad se trouvaient dans le
territoire alors qu'on nous avait affirme qu'elles n'y
etaient pas. Ce qui est plus grave, c'est que la Commission dit dans son troisieme rapport interimaire que, si
elle avait su que le Pakistan mettrait a profit ce delai
pour consolider sa position, c'est-a-dire perpetrer une
nouvelle agression, elle en aurait fait mention dans la
resolution. Est-il possible de dire de maniere plus nette
qu'ils'agissait d'une agression ?

113. After all, this is not a debating society, and what
we say we say for a purpose, and we would request
the representative of the United Kingdom to re-examine
this matter and to verify the sources of his information.
A man in his position must act on advice or, at least,
must tend to act on advi'ce. Sir Pierson Dixon went
on to say:

113. Apres tout, le Conseil de securite n'est pas un
groupe de discussion, et, ce que nous disons, nous le
disons a une fin precise. Nous voudrions que le representant du Royaume-Uni examine de nouveau cette
question et verifie ses sources d'information. Un homme
occupant une telle position doit agir avec circonspection,
ou tout au moins essayer de le faire. Sir Pierson Dixon
poursuit :
« Mais il ne nous suffit pas de constater les faits;
nous devons nous efforcer de trouver un moyen
propre a diminuer la tension, a diminuer le fardeau
des armements, et a remedier, de fal;on efficace, it
une situation qui se perpetue d'une maniere qui
n'avait jamais ete envisagee au moment de l'adoption des resolutions anterieures.» (797e seance, par. 15.]

" But we must do more than try to ascertain the
facts; we must try to find some method of reducing
the state of tension, of reducing the burden of armaments and of dealing effectively with a situation
which has become crystallized in a form never
contemplated when the resolutions were passed."
[797th meeting, para. 15.]
114. Is it sufficient for a representative of a great
Power, who is a common friend of both sides and who,
in this particular matter, owes us a moral obligation
because we obeyed the law, to make this statement as
an obiter dictum? Is it sufficient for them to say things
of that kind ?

114. Suffit-il que le representant d'une grande puissance, qui entretient des relations amicales avec les
deux parties en cause et qui a assume dans cette affaire
une obligation morale a notre egard parce que nous
avons oMi a la loi, fasse cette declaration comme
s'il s'agissait d'une simple opinion? Suffit-il qu'il dise
de pareilles choses ?

115. Sir Pierson Dixon said that we must do more
than try to ascertain the facts, we must try to find
some method of reducing the state of tension, but how
does one reduce the state of tension between an
invaded country and an invader, unless the moral
weight of the United Kingdom is thrown against
invasion? The United Kingdom should come forward
and say that, irrespective of what may be the future
solution, irrespective of the various other factors or of
any difficulties thereof, wrongs cannot be righted by
the wrong method. Invasion is invasion, even if it is
invasion of India. After all, the whole of history has
not yet been written. Sir Pierson Dixon tells us that
we must do more than ascertain the facts, but the facts
have been ascertained. They have been ascertained by
the Commission, and we are not willing to put that in
the melting pot.

115. Sir Pierson Dixon a dit que nous devons faire
plus qu'essayer de constater les faits, que nous devons
nous efforcer de trouver un moyen propre a reduire la
tension, mais comment reduire la tension entre un pays
envahi et un envahisseur si le Royaume-Uni n'use pas,
en face de l'agression, du poids que represente son
autorite morale? Le Royaume-Uni devrait dire que,
quelle que puisse etre la solution a laquelle on se rallie
a l'avenir, quels que soient les divers autres facteurs
ou les difficultes qu'elle suscite, on ne peut remedier
a un mal en utilisant une methode mauvaise. Une
invasion est une invasion, meme s'il s'agit de !'invasion
de l'Inde. Apres tout, on n'a pas encore ecrit toute
l'histoire. Sir Pierson Dixon nous dit que nous devons
faire plus qu'essayer de constater les faits, mais les
faits ont ete constates. lis ont ete constates par la
Commission, et nous ne sommes pas disposes a remettre
tout cela en question.

116. Sir Pierson Dixon said that we must try to find
some method of reducing the state of tension. Well,
to reduce the state of tension is what Mr. Jarring
referred to in connexion with paragraphs E and B,
and so far as paragraph B is concerned, we have fully
responded to the suggestion made by the representative
of the United Kingdom. We understand the spirit in

116. Sir Pierson Dixon a dit que nous devions essayer
de trouver un moyen propre a diminuer la tension.
C'est a cela que M. Jarring a fait allusion apropos
des paragraphes E et B, et, en ce qui concerne le paragraphe B nous avons pleinement repondu a la suggestion
du representant du Royaume-Uni. Nous comprenons
l'esprit dans lequel elle a ete faite. Nous ne la consi29.

which it was made. We do not regard it as an admonition or as patronizing. We accept it, and if in any way we
can further the spirit of conciliation in that way, if
there are any errors committed on our side - I do not
know of any, because we have been very meticulous
in this - we are quite prepared to accept information,
not dictation, from the United Kingdom.

derons ni comme une critique ni comme un acte de
condescendance. Nous l'acceptons et, si nous pouvons
developper de quelque maniere que ce soit l' esprit de
conciliation, si nous avons commis quelque erreur - et
it ma connaissance nous n'en avons commis aucune, car
nous avons ete tres attentifs -, nous sommes tout
disposes it accepter les indications que nous donnerait
le Royaume-Uni - mais non it subir ses ordres.

117. The United Kingdom, of all countries, is aware
that we have tried to reduce the state of tension. The
state of tension id not only in regard to Kashmir, the
reference made was to the two States. India is a country
in which the influx of refugees from the other side and
the various other factors that are taking place is creating a lot of public feeling, but in spite of that we have
tried to reduce the tension.

117. Le Royaume-Uni sait mieux que tout autre pays
que nous avons essaye de reduire la tension. Sir Pierson
Dixon ne parlait pas seulement de la tension au Cachemire, mais entre les deux Etats. L'lnde est un pays
ou I'opinion publique reagit vivement it l'aflluence des
refugies venant de l'autre cote de la frontiere et it
differents autres facteurs, et cependant nous nous
sommes efforces de reduire la tension.

118. With regard to reducing the burden of armaments,
one way would be not to supply more armaments to an
invading country. Therefore, we entirely agree with
this and, what is more, we accept the spirit in which
it was made. We share the view that the situation
should not be crystallized, because the cease-'fire line
was never intended as a political boundary. We withdrew an advancing army in order to stop the fighting
and because it was considered as a temporary expedient.
The situation has become crystallized in a form never
contemplated when the resolutions were passed. Therefore, we beg the United Kingdom to seek to implement
its own dictum in this matter, and if we can in any way
be helpful, we shall be willing to co-operate.

118. Un moyen de diminuer le fardeau des armements
serait de s'abstenir de livrer des armes it l'envahisseur.
Par consequent, nous sommes entierement d'accord avec
la suggestion du Royaume-Uni et, qui plus est, nous
approuvons les idees sur lesquellesalle est fondee. Nous
pensons, nous aussi, que cette situation ne doit pas
se prolonger, parce que la ligne de suspension d'armes
n'a jamais ete creee pour servir de frontiere politique.
Nous avons retire une armee qui avanc;ait afin de
mettre fin au combat et parce qu'une telle mesure etait
consideree comme provisoire. La situation a evolue
dans un sens qui n'avait jamais ete prevu dans les resolutions adoptees. Aussi demandons-nous au RoyaumeUni de s'efforcer d'appliquer ses propres principes dans
cette question, et, si nous pouvons etre de quelque
utilite, nous serons heureux d'apporter notre cooperation.

119. Therefore, the summary of the argument of the
representative of the United Kingdom is that there
must be a withdrawal of troops, starting from the
Pakistan side, and that he appealed to both sides to do
the utmost to create an atmosphere favourable to the
promotion of further negotiations. It is difficult to
carry on negotiations when there are large armaments
facing us, when the security - this is not a territorial
dispute over Kashmir - of India is in danger. No one
knows better than the United Kingdom that there
have been a great number of invasions into India from
the north-west.

119. Pour resumer le point de vue du representant du
Royaume-Uni, il doit y avoir retrait des troupes, it
commencer par le cote pakistanais; son appel est
adresse aux deux parties pour qu'elles fassent tout en
leur pouvoir pour creer une atmosphere favorable it
l'ouverture de nouvelles negociations. Il est difficile de
poursuivre des negociations lorsqu'on trouve devant soi
d'importants armements et que la securite de l'Inde
- il ne s'agit pas simplement d'un differend territorial
au sujet du Cachemire - est menacee. Personne mieux
que le Royaume-Uni ne sait que les invasions de l'Inde
sont souvent venues du Nord-Ouest.

120. Sir Pierson Dixon also said that "there is no
question here ~f interfering with national sovereignty"
[797th meeting, para. 21]. That relates to another problem altogether; it refers to problems raised by some
other countries, and therefore I shall have to leave
part of the other suggestion made by Sir Pierson Dixon
and Mr. Wadsworth till that particular subject comes up.

120. Sir Pierson Dixon a ajoute qu' « il ne s'agit pas
la de porter atteinte it la souverainete nationale»
[797e seance, par. 21]. Mais il s'agit la d'un autre probleme, lie it ceux que d'autres pays ont souleves; je
reprendrai donc cet aspect des suggestions formuIees
par sir Pierson Dixon et M. Wadsworth au moment
ou cette question sera abordee.

121. I will try to prove that it is not just a question
of aggression, but a violation of India's sovereignty,
violation of the decisions of the Security Council, both
in spirit and in law, and a continuing and cumulative
violation, that does not require a microscopic examination. These violations have been investigated, and they
have been found to be true by different people, whether
of Colombian, Czech or Australian nationality. Their
cases may have been in different contexts, it may be
that they have not wanted to pronounce themselves
on another aspect, but the fact that the territory has

121. J'essaierai de prouver qu'il ne s'agit pas seulement
d'agression, mais d'une violation de la souverainete de
l'Inde, d'une violation de l'esprit comme de la lettre des
decisions du Conseils de securite, d'une violation continue et repetee, qui n'a pas besoin, pour etre etablie,
d'un examen approfondi. Ces violations ont fait l'objet
d'enquetes; elles ont ete constatees par differentes personnes, de nationalite colombienne, tchecoslovaque ou
australienne. Il se peut qu'elles aient presente differemment leur point de vue, il se peut qu'elles n'aient pas
voulu se prononcer sur d'autres aspects, mais il n'en

I
30

been violated, the fact tl:at foreigners - foreigners in an
international sense - have come into the territory of
India, that has been proved. It does not require any
further examination. The facts have been found and,
therefore, it lies now in the lap of the Security Council
to o.efend the principles of the Charter and to do justice.

reste pas moins que le fait que le territoire a ete viole,
que des etrangers - dans le sens international du
mot - ont envahi le territoire de I'lnde, a ete pleinement
etabli. La question n'appelle pas plus ample examen.
Les faits ont ete prouves : U appartient maintenant au
Conseil de securite de defendre les principes de la
Charte et de rendre justice.

122. Mr. Wadsworth, the representative of the United
States, told the Council that an equitable solution must
be found [797th meeting, para. 26]. Happily br us, the
American ideas of equity are those which we have
been educated to understand. Equity is the method of
implementing justice. Those who want to receive
equity must give equity. One cannot give equity to an
invader. We do not want anything inequitable to be
done to us.

122. M. Wadsworth, representant des Etats-Unis, a
declare au ConseU qu'U fallait trouver une solution
equitable [797e seance, par. 26]. Heureusement pour
nous, la notion americaine d'equite est la meme que
celle qui nous a ete inculquee. L'equite est l'administration de la justice. Ceux qui veulent en beneficier doivent
la pratiquer. On ne peut etre equitable vis-a.-vis d'un
envahisseur. Nous ne voulons pas que des mesures
inequitables nous soient appliquees.

123. There was a reference which we inferred - we
may be wrong - to be oblique support for the position
taken by Sir Pierson Dixon that all these matters are
past history and that we cannot go into all that. Sometimes it is a good thing to forget the past. Sometimes it
is convenient, but in this case the past lives in the
present.

123. M. Wadsworth a fait une allusion qui, selon nous
(mais nous pouvons nous tromper), vise a. appuyer indirectement la these soutenue par sir Pierson Dixon
10rsqu'U a dit que toutes ces questions appartiennent
au passe et que nous ne pouvons les prendre toutes
en consideration. II est quelquefois bon, il est quelquefois opportun, d'oublier le passe; mais, le cas echeant,
le passe se survit dans le present.

124. The representative of China made the observation that the Security Council had heard very elaborate
arguments on the Constitution of India. He spoke of the
law and on the backing of law, but these have no meaning, and, not only for the purpose of Kashmir, we as a
country cannot allow a statement of this kind made
before the Security Council, irrespective of its source,
to pass unanswered. Mr. Tsiang said:

124. Le representant de la Chine a fait observer que
le ConseU de securite avait entendu une argumentation
tres documentee sur la Constitution indienne. II a
parle du droit et des bases juridiques, mais cela n'a pas
de sens, et, en dehors meme de la question du Cachemire, nous ne pouvons pas nous permettre, en tant
que nation, de laisser sans reponse une declaration
de la sorte faite devant le ConseU de securite, quel
qu'en soit l'auteur. M..Tsiang a declare:
({ Tous les empires coloniaux s'appuient sur le droit.
lIs ont tous ete consolides au moyen de traites, de
conventions, de protocoles, d'accords, etc. L'Empire
britannique dans l'Inde reposait sur une base juridique extremement solide» - je dois avouer que
c'est la premiere fois que j'entends dire cela - « Au
moment oil. l'Inde a reclame l'autonomie, tous les
arguments juridiques du Royaume-Uni se sont trouves
reduits a. neant. Pourtant, Us se fondaient solidement
sur des traites diiment signes et ratifies, et qui
etaient meme sanctionnes par le temps et la tradition.
Lorsque le peuple indien a demande l'autonomie, les
documents juridiques que detenait le Royaume-Uni
n'ont plus semble avoir aucune portee morale ou
politique. Ce que le peuple inmen a exige et obtenu
du Royaume-Uni devrait, a mon sens, etre accorde
au peuple du Cachemire.» [797e seance, par. 51.]

" All colonial empires have the backing of law. All
of them have been fortified with treaties, conventions, protocols, agreements and what not. The
British empire in India had ample legal foundation.
[I will confess that this is the first time I have heard
that] In the face of India's claim to self-determination, all British legal claims were swept aside. These
claims were solidly based on treaties duly signed
and ratified, and even sanctified by time and tradi..:
tion. When the Indian people demanded self-determination, the legal documents in the hands of the
United Kingdom seemed to have no moral or political relevance. What the Indian peoples demanded
and won from the United Kingdom should, I hope,
be granted to the people of Kashmir." [797th meeting,
para. 51.]
125. Let me first deal with this. First of all, we did
not demand self-determination of the British. We asked
for the independence of our country and with this, in
the maturity and course of time, the United Kingdom
came into agreement. Therefore the arrangements that
were made were arrangements not of self-determination
but by an Act of the British Parliament, the Indian
Independence Act. No question of self-determination
was involveld in this matter; certain ad hoc arrangements were made and power was transferred to the new
authority. There was no plebiscite or anything of that
kind. Self-determination only came in in regard to
the fashioning of the Constitution, which we, as a

31

1Z5. Qu'U me soit permis de repondre au representant
de la Chine. Tout d'abord, nous n'avons pas demande
au Royaurne-Uni le droit de disposer de nous-memes.
Nous avons reclame l'independance pour notre pays,
et, avec le temps et l'evolution de la situation, le
Royaume-Uni a accede a. notre demande. En consequence, les mesures prises ne concernaient pas la
reconnaissance du droit d'un peuple a disposer de luimeme; elles ont ete adoptees en vertu d'une loi du
Parlement britannique, a savoir la loi sur l'independance de l'Inde. Il n'etait pas question de libre determination; certaines dispositions speciales ont ete
prises : le pouvoir a ete transfere a. la nouvelle autorite.

self-governing Dominion, fashioned later ourselves. To
suggest that Indian independence is based upon the
conception that is now being worked out in the 'wrong
way here would not be in accordance with history.

On n'a ni organise de plebiscite ni applique aucune
autre procedure de ce genre. La question de la libre
determination ne s'est posee qu'au moment d'elaborer
la Constitution, que nous avons redigee nous-memes,
par la suite, en tant que dominion dote de l'autonomie.
Dire que l'independance indienne repose sur une conception que 1'0n cherche maintenant a appliquer a
un probleme auquel elIa ne convient pas n' est pas
conforme a la verite historique.

126. To suggest that the laws and legal systems, the·
contracts, treaties, obligations and rights vested in the
British Empire disappeared with the transfer of power
would be a very serious thing for us. For one thing, we
should not now be a Member of the United Nations.
India is a successor State.

126. Affirmer que le droit et le systeme juridique, les
contrats, les trait~s, les obligations et les droits de
I'Empire britunnique ont disparu avec le transfert des
pouvoirs serait tres grave pour nous. Notamment, nous
ne devrions pas etre aujourd'hui Membre de 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies. L'lnde est un Etat qui a
succede a un autre,

127. I have no desire to weary the Council with our
domestic legislation which concerns mainly the United
Kingdom and ourselves, but the position of the Dominion of India is fully set out in the Indian Independence
Act of 1947. All those territories which were formerly
British India and which were duly constituted into the
Dominion of India are set out in it and therefore India
is the successor State. Whatever obligations rested on
the British Empire, either by statute, convention, law,
international practice or common custom, devolve
upon India. In that way we have taken on obligations
which we otherwise would not have taken on, and the
representative of the United Kingdom knows well that
we have not gone back on that position, even though the
responsibilities have sometimes been onerous.

127. Je ne desire nullement prendre le temps des
membres du Conseil en citant la legislation indienne,
qui n'interesse principalement que le Royaume-Uni et
notre pays; je dirai cependant que la loi de 1947 sur
l'independance de I'lnde definit parfaitement la position du dominion. Elle enumere tous les territoires qui
avaient fait partie de I'lnde britannique et qui ont
regulierement forme le Dominion de l'Inde. L'lnde est
donc un Etat qui a succede a un autre. Toutes les
obligations qui incombaient a I'Empire britannique,
qu'il s'agisse de statuts, de conventions, de lois, de
regles ou de coutumes internationales, sont transferees
a l'Inde. Nous assumons ainsi des obligations que nous
n'aurions autrement jamais acceptees, et le representant du Royaume-Uni sait tres bien que nous n'avons
jamais denonce ces obligations - qui, dans certains
cas, sont tres lourdes pour nous.

128. To suggest, therefore, that when the British went
away whatever treaties or agreements there were in
regard to these matters have disappeared, is a suggestion the purpose of which I do not know. The
foundation of the constituent relationship of Jammu
and Kashmir to the Union of India arises not from
any treaty made by the British with somebody else
but is part of the agreement to which Pakistan, India
and the United Kingdom were parties, and even if it
were true that previous treaties - foreign treatieslapsed, no agreement for this particular purpose, no
tripartite agreement between those parties such as
the agreement fOl.' the transfer of power, could possibly
be washed out.

128. Je ne vois donc pas de raisons qui permettent de
dire qu'au depart de l'administration britannique les
traites et accords relatifs a la question qui nous interesse sont devenus caducs. Les liens constitutifs qui
unissent I'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire a I'Union
indienne ne reposent sur aucun traite que les Britanniques auraient conclu avec un tiers, mais sur
l'accord auquelle Pakistan, l'Inde et le Royaume-Uni
sont parties, et meme s'il etait vrai que les traites
precedents - traites conclus entre Etats - ont cesse
d'exister, aucun accord a cet effet, je veux dire aucun
accord tripartite conclu entre les parties, tel que
I'accord sur le transfert des pouvoirs, ne peut etre
annule.

129. We want" to place it on record that we do not
accept the position stated here to the effect that because
British power was withdrawn from ladia all legal
obligations and legal rights and everything else that
flows from the position of a successor State departed
with them.

129. Nous voulons qu'il soit inscrit au compte rendu
que nous n'acceptons pas la these selon laquelle, par
suite du retrait des Britanniques, toutes les obligations
juridiques, tous les droits legaux et tout ce qui decoule
du fait qu'un Etat a succede it. un autre, ont disparu.

130. From that, the 1 ~presentative of China goes on
to say that India refuses to grant ~; fellow Asian people,
the people of Kashmir, the same rlfjllt which it demanded
from the British. Not only is the fact erroneous in
more than one particular, because India has not refused
to grant anything to a fellow-Asian people - the
people of Kashmir are Indians like everybody else
and have the same rights as other Indians, whether
Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Jains or whatever else
they may be. There is no question therefore of making

130. Le representant de la Chine a egalement dit
que l'Inde refuse d'accorder a un peuple frere d'Asie,
au peuple du Cachemire, les droits qu'il avait exiges
du Gouvernement britannique. Une telle affirmation est
fausse a bien des egards, puisque l'Inde n'a pas refuse
d'accorder quoi que ce soit it. un peuple frere d'Asie :
les habitants du Cachemire sont des Indiens comme les
autres; ils jouissent des memes droits que les autres
Indiens, qu'ils soient hindous, musulmans, chretiens,
djains, etc. On ne. peut donc parler de mesures discri-

j~res, et nous n'avons pas a reconsiderer la quesdiscrimination and there is nothing for us to reconsider !
in the matter. What has been conferred upon the tlOli. Ce qui avait ete autrefois accorde au peuple du
people of Kashmir has been extended by the Union Cachemire I'est toujours par I'Union, non a titre de
as a whole not in conferment of a gift but as the right don, mais en tant que droit d'un Etat constitutif.
of a constituent State. All those arrangements that Toutes les dispositions qui decoulent soit de la Consticome from the Indian Constitution and from the tution indienne, soit des accords d'accession, par
accession agreements, for example, are included. It exemple, sont visees. Il appartient a un Etat, lorsqu'il
is for a State, when acceding, to decide for itself what accede a I'Union, de decider en son propre nom ce
it is willing to hand over to the Central Government qu'il est dispose de transferer au gouvernement central,
and it is only in regard to defence, communications et ce n'est qu'en matiere de defense, de communications
and external affairs that there is any obligation. That et d'affaires etrangeres qu'il existe des obligations.
is the position of Kashmir as it is that of every other Telle est la situation qui existe pour le Cachemire
constituent State. I therefore submit that this state- comme pour tout autre Etat constitutif. Je declare
ment is historically in error and that is what we want done que la declaration du representant de la Chine
to put on record in order that there may be no question est contraire aux faits historiques : nous demandons
of challenging the position of the Government of que la presente declaration soit inscrite au compte
rendu afin que I'on ne puisse contester la position du
India.
Gouvernement de I'lnde.

131. We cannot ignore observations coming from
our very esteemed friend, General Romulo, the Philippine representative, in regard to this problem.
General Romulo tells the Council:
" It is clear that any claim by one party or the
other that any portion of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir is Indian or Pakistan territory would be
highly prejudicial to the implementation of the
two resolutions previously accepted by the two
parties." [?'98th meeting, para. 31.]

131. Nous ne pouvons passer sous silence les observations de notre excellent ami, M. Romulo, representant
des Philippines, sur la question a I'examen. Il a dit
au Conseil:
« Il est manifeste que si I'une ou I'autre des parties
pretend que telle ou telle portion de l'Etat de Jammu
et Cachemire appartient soit au territoire indien.
soit au territoire pakistanais, pareille revendication ne
peut que porter prejudice a la mise en reuvre des deux
resolutions de la Commission precedemment acceptees
par les deux parties.» [798e seance, par. 31.]

132. I submit that this is completely contrary to
the resolutions as they were passed, contrary to the
Commission's findings and a contradiction even in
respect of the resolutions. As I have pointed out so
many times, there is no reference to Pakistan in these
resolutions. The obligation is all placed upon India
and has been based upon the thesis that sovereignty
rests there together with the rights of defence and
the maintenance of order. I think this must have come
from some misconception of the situation. When the
question of the azad-Kashmir Government came under
discussion the Commission expressly informed the
Government of India that there would be no change
in sovereighty or status and that is one of the reasons
why the azad Government was not recognized. 'Ve did
not recognize it, and even the Government of Pakistan
said at the time that it did not recognize it. So it seems
to me quite clear that recognition of the local authorities, that is to say recognition that the local authorities were a fact, in no way changes the sovereignty
of India. It is therefore entirely incorrect from the
point of view of the Security Council resolutions and
the documents of the United Nations Commission for
India and Pakistan, which are plentiful in this matter.
Even if a different view is held, these facts cannot be
changed. It is not a question of whose territory it is,
whether it is Indian or Pakistan territory. It is Indian
territory, part of which is effectively under Indian
occupation and the rest of it is under invasionillegally annexed by Pakistan.

132. ,le declare qu'un tel point de vue est en complefe
contradiction avec les resolutions qui ont ete adoptees.
avec les conclusions de la Commission, et meme avec
les termes des resolutions. Comme je I'ai si souvent
souligne, les resolutions ne visent pas le Pakistan. Elles
n'in1posent des obligationsqu'a l'Inde, et se fondent
sur la these selon laquelle la souverainete sur I'Etat
de Jammu et Cachemire appartient it l'Inde, de meme
que le soin d'assurer la defense et le maintien de I'ordre.
Je pense qu'il doit y avoir quelque rnalentendu a ce
sujet. Lorsque la question du gouvernement du Cachemire azad a ete soulevee, la Commission a informe en
termes expres le Gouvernemen': J~ I'Inde qu'aucune
modification n'interviendrait en Cf-' qui concerne la souverainete ou le statut, et c'est une des raisons pour
lesquelles le gouvernement du Cachemire azad n'a pas
ete reconnu. Nous ne I'avons pas reconnu, et meme le
Gouvernement du Pakistan avait declare a l' epoque
qU'il.ne le reconnaissait pas. Il me parait done evident
que le fait de reconnaitre les autorites locales, c'est-adire I'existence des autorites locales, ne modifie nullement la souverainete indienne. L'opinion citee est done
tout it fait fausse du point de vue des resolutions du
Conseil de securite et de nombreux documents de la
Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan
traitant de la question. Meme si I'on soutient une these
differente, on ne peut changer les faits. T,a question
n'est pas de savoir it qui appartient 1(' territoire, a
l'Inde ou au Pakistan. Il s'agit d'un territoire indien,
dont une partie est effectivement occupee par I'Inde
et l'autre a ete envahie, et illegalement annexee au
Pakistan.

133. The representative of Iraq l ..tacie certain references which call for some elucidation. Here again
we do not regard any observation made by any member

133. Le representant de I'Irak a fait certaines allusions
qui appellent des eclaircissements. Je rappellerai que
nous considerons les diverses observations faites par les

of the CouncilJ whatever its political or military relations with uS J as anything but a representation of
their own views. The representative of Iraq said:
"The representative of India saw fit to enter
into a discussion of the purposes and objectives of
alliances and pactsJ and he made a point of mentioning several times during his statement the Baghdad
Pact, in which my country is a participant." [797tJz
meeting, para. 7?~]

membres du Conseil, quelles que soient les relations
politiques et militaires quJils entretiennent avec nous,
comme n'engageant que leur propre responsabilite. Le
representant de I'lrak a declare :
« Le representant de I'lnde a juge bon de discuter
les buts et les objectifs des alliances et des pactes,
et il a pris soin de mentionner a plusieurs reprises
dans sa declaration le Pacte de Bagdad, auquel mon
pays est partie.» [797e seance, par. 76.]

134. We have always said, and did so in the case
of United States military aid to Pakistan, as in the
case of the latter's membership of the Baghdad Pact,
that as sovereign countries it is up to them to join
this pact or that pact or the other. But also as a
sovereign State it is for us to express how the pacts
affect us. That is all we have said and whatever statements I have made here have had no other object.
In any case, what we said was that Pakistani statesmen
have stated that their purpose in joining the Baghdad
Pact was different from wliat was intended. We made
no reference to Iraq policy in this matter and we made
no reference at that time to the Baghdad Pact countries
having anything to do with the Kashmir question J
but now that this has been raised by Iraq, I propose
at the appropriate time to produce official statements
as to the views of certain Baghdad Pact members on
this question.

134. Nous avons toujours soutenu, notamment a
propos de l'assistance militaire pretee par les EtatsUnis d'Amerique au Pakistan et de I'adhesion au
Pacte de Bagdad, que les Etats souverains sont libres
d'adherer a tel ou tel pacte. Mais nous avons nousmemes le droit, en notre qualite d'Etat souverain,
d'exposer les consequences que ces pactes peuvent
avoir pour nous. Nous n'avons rien dit d'autre, et tel
etait le seul objet des declarations que j'ai faites ici.
Quoi qu'il en soit, ce que nous avons souligne, c'est
que, d'apres les hommes d'Etat pakistanais eux-memes,
le Pakistan, en adherant au Pacte de Bagdad, n'obeissait pas exactement aux memes motifs que les autres
signataires. Nous n'avons fait aucune allusion a la
politique suivie par l'Irak en la matiere, et nous n'avons
jamais dit, a l'epoque, que les pays signataires du
Pacte de Bagdad s'interessaient a la question du
Cachemire. Cependant, ce point ayant ete souleve par
I'lrak J je me propose de montrer, en temps voulu, ce
que pensent de la question certains signataires du
Pacte de Bagdad, en m'appuyant sur des declarations
omcielles.

135. The representative of Iraq said:
"To accuse Pakistan of trying to involve other
peoples of the Middle East in what the representative of India termed Pakistan's aggressive intentions against India is contrary to the facts of the
situation and surely a reflection on the intentions
and intelligence of other members of the Pact."
[797th meeting, para. 78.]
I leave it to the Council to say whether that is the
kind of statement that ought to be made about us
in regard to any strictly political submissions which
we may make to the Council. We do not insult the
intelligence of other people, because we do not like
our own intelligence insulted.

135. Le representant de I'lrak a declare :
« Accuser le Pakistan d'essayer de meler les autres
peuples du Moyen-Orient a ce que le representant
de l'Inde appelle « les desseins agressifs du Pakistan
a l'egard de 1'Inde "J c'est ne tenir aUCUi1 compte
des faits; c'est en verite elever des doutes sur les
intentions et sur l'intelligence des autres Etats
parties au Pacte.» [797e seance, par. 78.]
Je laisse au Conseille soin de decider s'il peut admettre
des declarations de ce genre a propos de nos interventions qui ont un caractere strictement politique.
Nous n'insultons pas a l'intelligence des autres, car
nous n'aimons pas qu'on insulte a la n()tre.

136. The GoVernment of Iraq handed over at New
Delhi an aide-memoire on 26 June 1956 in which it
said:
"The Government of Iraq desires to point out
that the Kashmir question is a factor of restlessness
and tension and it has its effects on the security of
this area, and Iraq being a Member of the United
Nations and the Baghdad Pact, feels that it cannot but be interested in anything that upsets the
security of this area, which is on the whole linke~
with the security of the world."

136. Le 26 juin 1956, le Gouvernement de I'lrak a
remis a New-Delhi un aide-memoire dans lequel il
est dit :
Cl Le Gouvernement de I'lrak tient a souligner
que la question du Cachemire est un facteur de
troubles et de tension et qu'elle peut avoir des
consequences facheuses pour la securite de la region:
en sa qualite de Membre de I'Organisation des
Nations Unies et de partie au Pacte de Bagdad,
l'Irak ne peut se desinteresser de ce qui touche a la
sccurite de la region, a laquelle est liee la securite
du monde.»

137. By implication the suggestion is that we have
been threatening somebody's security. Nobody has
suggested that we have been guilty of acts of aggression. I stated here in this Council, on behalf of the
Government of India, that J as at present constituted

137. C'est dire implicitement que nous avons menace
la s~curite de quelqu'un ; mais on n'a jamais ete jusqu\'t dire que nous nous etions rendus coupables d'actes
d'agression. J'ai declare au Conseil, au nom du Gouvernement de l'Inde, que J dans l'etat actuel des choses, -.-J

_ _ _ _IIIIi'·".c.•'"".'.,.,..."""'.- ~'..•".....
r-r.".,...' ................__......................;.__.._;,;,._:,;..~_~~-"nUI_ _

and for all present considerations, our rights across
the cease-fire line in the occupied area are legally,
politically, morally, internationally and every way
justified and any step which we take to restore our
authority will be justified. What is more, it is assured
in these resolutions in that the Commission itself
agreed to our having a force on the frontier to protect
our land under certain conditions.

nous avions, sur la zone occupee qui s'etend de l'autre
cbte de la ligne de suspension d'armes, des droits qui
se justifient sur tous les plans, juridique, politique,
moral, international, et que toutes les mesures que
nous pourrions prendre pour retablir notre autorite
seraient entierement justifiees. Bien plus, nos droits
se trouvent confirmes par les resolutions memes de la
Commission, qui a accepte que nous maintenions des
effectifs a la frontiere, sous certaines conditions, pour
assurer la protection de notre territoire.

138. Besides, the Commission has set out that in
regard to this area on the other side of the cease-fire
line, these local authorities were to function under
the surveillance of the Commission where necessary.
They were on our sovereign territory. Therefore, when
the representative of Iraq says that there is no relation
between this and that - I did not intend to bring
this up, but since the statement has been made, which
is none too friendly, I thought that the Council might
have the facts. This was not a mild statement made
in a newspaper, but a formal protest in a statement
by the Iraqi ambassador in New Delhi on 26 June 1956.
It is not as though the Iraqi ambassador said anything
against us; it is part of the Baghdad Pact view. The
British cannot tell us, because they are friends of ours.
I am not saying the Iraqis are not, but the British
are particular about what they say. They do not like
to be put in the wrong. They do not tell us these
things, but the Turkish Government did. The Turkish
Government's aide-memoire on 4 May 1956 - not
very far from 26 June 1956 - said:

138. D'autre part, la Commission a decide que, dans
la region qui s'etend de l'autre cbte de la ligne de
suspension d'armes, les autorites locales exerceraient
leur activite, le cas echeant, sous sa surveillance. La
region releve donc de notre souverainete. Aussi, lorsque
le representant de I'Irak affirme qu'il n'y a pas de
rapport entre les deux choses - je n'avais pas l'intention d'en pader, mais puisqu'une declaration a ete
faite a ce sujet, sur un ton que 1'0n ne saurait qualifier
d'amical, je cl'Ois que le Conseil devrait etre mis au
courant des faits. Il ne s'agit pas d'un quelconque
communique de presse sans grande importance, mais
bien d'une protestation officielle contenue dans une
declaration faite le 26 juin 1956 par I'Ambassadeur
de l'Irak a New-Delhi. Ce n'est pas que I'Ambassadeur
ait dit quoi que ce soit contre nous. Il s'agit d'un
point de vue que partagent les signataires du Pacte
de Bagdad. Les Britanniques ne peuvent pas nous le
dire, parce qu'il sont nos amis. Je ne dis pas que les
Irakiens ne sont pas nos amis, mais les representants
du Gouvernement britannique apportent une grande
attention a ce qu'ils disent. Ils n'aiment pas avoir a
reconnaitre qu'ils ont tort. Ils ne disent pas des choses
de ce genre, mais le Gouvernement turc l'a dit. Le
Gouvernement torc, dans son aide-memoire du 4 mai
1956 - date assez proche du 26 juin 1956 - s'exprimait ainsi :
« Etant donne que la question du Cachemire
inquiete un pays partie au Pacte de Bagdad» n'est-ce pas la la preuve que 1'0n lie les deux choses-,
« elle interesse les autres parties au Pacte, et, par
consequent, la Turquie.»
Si ce n'est pas la une declaration de caractere militaire, qu'est-ce donc ?

"Since the Kashmir problem is causing anxiety
in a country member of the Baghdad Pact [Now
what more evidence is required that these things
are connected?] it concerns the other members
of the Pact and, consequently, Turkey."
If this is not a military pronouncement, what else
is it?
139. The aide-memoire continues:
"Since the Kashmir problem is creating unrest
in the Middle East [I have not heard that the
Kashmir problem was creating unrest in the Middle
East. There are many other problems that are
creating unrest in the Middle East about which the
Baghdad Pact was able to do nothing] it concerns
the Baghdad Pact, which was set up for the defence
of that area and which consequently concerns Turkey
as well."

139.

140. I should like to ask both the representative of
the United States and the representative of the United
Kingdom some time whether this last statement is
correct in regard to all the members of the Pact. Is
that statement a defence against us, or do they challenge it? Do they subscribe to this statement because
it is spoken on behalf of the members of the Baghdad
Pact? I do not hold the United Kingdom responsible
for what the Turkish and Iraqi Governments say, but

140. Je voudrais demander, un jour, au representar
des Etats-Unis et au representant du Royaume-Una
si cette derniere declaration s'applique egalement a
tous les signataires du Pacte. Y voient-ils un instrument
de defense contre nous ? Ou refusent-ils d'y souscrire ?
La prennent-ils a leur compte parce qu'elle emane
d'un des membres du Pacte de Bagdad ? Je ne tjens
pas le Royaume-Uni pour responsable des declarations
du Gouvernement turc et du Gouvernement irakien,

L'aide-memoire poursuit
donne que la question du Cachemire provoque des troubles dans le Moyen-Orient» - je ne
savais pas que la question du Cachemire provo,"!uait
des troubles dans le Moyen-Orient: il y a bien d'autres
problemes qui suscitent des troubles dans le l\~oyen­
Orient et que le Pacte de Bagdad n'a pu resoudre « elle interesse les signataires du Pacte de Bagdad,
qui a ete conclu pour la defense de la region, et,
par consequent, eUe interesse aussi la Turquie.»)
« Etant

35

here is a public statement handed over as an aidememoire on 4 May.

mais il s'agit ici d'un document officiel, d'un aidememoire qui nous a ete remis le 4 mai.

141. We had no intention of bringing all this out
and, in fact, we should like to confine this problem
to its narrow Kashmir limits except in so far as we
are engaged by these resolutions.

141. Nous n'avions pas l'intention de soulever toutes
ces questions. En realite, nous aurions prefere nous
limiter plus etroitement a la seule question du Cachemire et nous nous proposons de le faire, dans la mesure
oil nous le permettent les resolutions considerees.

142. Before I leave this question of aggression: it
has been said that there has been no aggression by
Pakistan. It was so stated in the beginning and,
apparently, if the view is to be entertained - as the
Council has not pronounced itself on this - then I
think it is better to go to a first-hand source; and that
is Pakistan itself.

142. Avant d'en terminer avec cette question de
l'agression, je dois dire un mot de la these selon laquelle
le Pakistan n'aurait pas commis d'agression. Cette
these a ete soutenue au debut de nos deliberations et
si elle doit etre reprise, comme il est probable - le
Conseil ne s'etant pas prononce sur ce point -, je
pense qu'il conviendrait d'aller aux sources memes,
c'est-a-dire aux declarations du Pakistan.

143. Pakistan told this Council that its armies entered
territory of India for the protection of its frontiers.
Pakistan informed the Commission that its regular
forces had entered the State of Jammu and Kashmir
in self-defence. One of the reasons stated by Sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan to the Commission for the entry
of Pakistani troops into Kashmir was the " protection
of the territory of Pakistan from possible aggression
by Indian forces" [S/1100, para. 51].

143. Le Pakistan a dit au Conseil que ses armees
avaient penetre en territoire indien pour assurer la
protection de ses frontieres. Il a fait savoir a la Commission que ses forces regulieres etaient entrees dans
I'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire pour assurer sa legitime defense. Une des raisons invoquees par sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan pour justifier aupres de la Commission l'entree des troupes pakistanaises au Cachemire etait la necessite de protegeI' le territoire du
Pakistan contre une agression possible des forces de
l'Inde [S/1100, par. 51].

144. When we have come to this Council and said
that we do not want to deal with this aggression by
the invasion of Pakistan; when we have called back
troops that had advanced; when we have placed the
stress on the suspension of hostility; when we were
making all these efforts, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan said that he entered what, as I had pointed out,
is the sovereignty of the Union of India for the purpose
- not because they Wel"e attacked - of making a
protective arrangement. If this is not expansionism,
then what is expanionism? To protect the frontier of
one's country, one enters the other fellow's country.
While we did not, even by token invasion, go on to
the other side, the entry of Pakistani troops into
Kashmir by force was for the "protection of the
territory of Pakistan from possible aggression by
Indian forces". What country is safe in this world
if another country, because of possible aggression, is
going to lead its troops in there? There will be no
frontiers because, to protect a frontier, there will have
to be another frontier, and so on. This is what the
Viceroy of India, Lord Curzon, called expanding the
frontier.

144. Alors que nous declarions devant le Conseil
que nous ne voulions pas repondre a l'agression en
envahissant le Pakistan, alors que nous ordonnions
le repli de nos troupes et que nous insistions sur la
suspension des hostilite, alors que nous deployions
tous ces efforts, le Ministre des affaires etrangeres dll
Pakistan a dit que son pays - je l'ai souligne a l'epoqlle
- avait empiete sur la souverainete de l'Union indienne,
non pas parce qu'il avait ete attaque, mais parce qu'il
voulait mettre en place un dispositif de protection.
Si ce n'est pas la de l'expansionisme, qu'entend-on
par expansionnisme? Pour proteger ses frontieres
nationales, un pays envoie ses troupes dans le territoire d'un autre. Alors que nous nous sommes abstenlls
de franchir la frontiere, meme a titre symbolique, les
troupes pakistanaises sont entrees au Cachemire par
la force afin de (( protegeI' le territoire du Pakistan
contre une agression possible des forces de l' Inde».
Un pays peut-il se considerer en securite si un autre
pays peut y envoyer ses troupes sous le pretexte de
prevenir une agression ? Ses frontieres n'auraient plus
de raison d'etre, car, pour protegeI' une frontiere, il
faudrait en creel' une autre, et ainsi de suite. C'est
ce que lord Curzon, vice-roi des hIdes, appelait ( elargir
les frontieres».

145. If any final proof were necessary, then, it is
the statement made to this Council by no less a person
than the former Foreign Minister of Pakistan, who is
now a Judge of the International Court of Justice, that
the Pakistan army entered the territory of Jammu
and Klshmir not only to protect co-religionists, but
in order that the Pakistan frontier might not be invaded
by us.

145. Si une derniere epreuve etait necessaire, on la
trouverait dans la declaration faite au Conseil par une
personnalite ullssi cminente que l'anclen Ministl'e des
affaires ctrangeres du Pakistan, aujourd'hui juge it la
Cour internationale de Justice, selon laquelle l'al'mee
pakistanaise aurait pcnetrc dans le territoire de Jammll
et Cachemire, non seulement pour protegeI' ses coreligionnaires, mais pour nons empecher de franchir la
frontiere pakistanaise.

146. We do not wish for the time being to go into
the next phase, but if it should become necessary we

146. .le ne me propose pas pour le momen.t d'aborder
un nouvel aspect de la question; mais, si cela etait
36

{,

/

i
1

J

would be prepared· to produce evidence for the Council
showing what plans for the invasion of India were
prepared at that time and by whom. We are anxious
that this debate, however much we may be in our
rights, in presenting facts, does not bring about facts
that create more friction between countries and, as
I said, we wish to inform the Council - not because
the United Kingdom representative needs to know
it; he knows it, and our relations with the United
Kingdom are so close, and while we may disagree with
it, we have no desire to cause irritation, and we are
honestly convinced that a great many people in England
want to see an end of this question but they want to
see it end in their way - that the invasion of India
was calculated. What is more, it was calculated for
the purpose of the protection of Pakistan and it was
an attempt at forestalling at pushing away the invading
force coming from the Uri-Poonch-Naoshera area,
which was part of the sovereign territory of Jammu
and Kashmir.

necessaire, nous serions en mesure de produire des
documents qui prouveront au Conseil que des plans
ont alors ete etablis pour l'invasion de l'Inde, et lui
ferons connaitre les details de ce plan. Nous souhaitons
vivement eviter au cours de ce debat - quel que soit
le bien-fonde de notre position - de presenter des
faits qui risquent d'aggraver les dissensions entre les
pays. Comme je rai deja dit, tout ce que nous voulons,
c'est faire connaitre au Conseil - non pas au representant du Royaume-Uni, qui est deja au courant de
la chose, car nos relations avec le Royaume-Uni sont
fort etroites et, meme si certaines divergences de vues
nous separent, nous ne voulons aucunement irriter,
et nous sommes sincerement convaincus qu'au RoyaumeUni nombre de personnes souhaitent une solution,
mais une solution conforme a leurs vues - que l'inva-.
sion de l'Inde etait premeditee. Qui plus est, elle avait
pour but de protegeI' le Pakistan et de prevenir et de
repousser les forces d'invasion qui pourraient venir de
la region Uri-Poonch-Naoshera, qui fait partie du
territoire souverain de Jammu et Cachemire.

147. Finally, when we continue this debate, I would
like to deal with the suggestions which have been
made and to which I will come in a moment.

147. Enfin, lorsque nous poursuivrons ce debat, je
me propose d'examiner certaines suggestions qui ont
ete faites et sur lesquelles je reviendrai dans un moment.

148. Both Sir Pierson Dbwn and Mr. Wadsworth, the
representatives of tlle United Kingdom and the United
States, have said, as would be expected from them,
that we must proceed from the easy positions to tackle
the difficult ones; must accept areas of agreement and
make use of them before further progress can be made.

148. Le representant du Royaume-Uni, sir Pierson
Dixon, et le representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique,
M. Wadsworth, ont tous deux - comme on pouvait
s'y attendre de leur part - insiste sur la necessite
d'aborder les problemes faciles avant de s'attaquer
aux problemes difficiles, de rechercher les points sur
lesquels il existe un certain degre d'accord et de s'en
servir cornme base de depart pour de nouveaux progres.

149. If I may say so with great respect to Sir Pierson
Dixon, this reference to "areas of agreement" is a
classical British phrase in connexion with the Kashmir
dispute which was first used by Mr. Noel-Baker of
Corfu fame. Sir Pierson Dbwn said that we should
determine those points "where there is some area
of agreement between the parties and to see whether
progress can be made from those points." [797th meeting,
para. 11.]

149. Sir Pierson Dixon me pardonnera de lui faire
ohserver, tres respectueusement, que l'expression « un
cettain degre d'accord», que M. Noel-Baker, bien connu
depuis l'affaire de COl'fou, a ete le premier a utiliser,
est devenue pour les representants britanniques une
expression classique lorsqu'ils parlent du differend du
Cachemire. Sir Pierson Dixon a dit qu'il fallait rechercher les points « sur lesquels il existe un certain degre
d'accord entre les parties et... s'efforcer de realiser
des progres en pm'tant de ces points.» [797e seance.
par, 11.]

150. What areas of agreement? We do not agree and
Pakistan does not agree with regard to aggression.
How can a country that is invaded agree in tllls way?
There are no areas of agreement except that we are
engaged by these resolutions. What these resolutions
mean, however, is a matter which must be decided on
its mel'its. We are not prepared to accept an interpretation of these resolutions which is not consistent with
the facts or which has not been accepted at a previous
time. We are not prepared to say that because exploratory discussions may have takcn place at any time,
that is the way. We shall deal with that under dcmilitarization.

150. Mais qU'entend-on par « un certain degre d'accord ?» II n'existe aucun accord entre nous et le Paldstan sur la question de l'agression. Comment un pays
envahi peut-il souscrire a un accord sur ce point?
II n'existe aucun accord, dis-je, sauf en ce qui concerne
les obligations qui nous incombent en vertu des resolutions. En ce qui concerne la portee exacte de ces
resolutions, la question appelle une etude approfondie.
Nous ne sommes pas disposes, quant a nous, a accepter
d'interpretation qui ne soit pas conforme aux faits
ou que nous ayons rejetee anterieurement. Ce n'est
pas parce que certaines negociations preliminaires ont
eu lieu a un moment donne que nous devons admettre
que cette methode est la bonne. Nous en reparlerons
a propos de la demilitarisation.

151. While it is always nice to approach a problem 151. Certes, il est toujours agreable d'aborder les
from an agreeable and a peaceful point of view - and problemes dans un esprit amical et pacifique - et
that is the only approach we can make - we may not c'est la la seule fagon dont nous puissions les aborder-,
just get lost in these words, "there is some area of . mais nous devons nous garder de nous laisser entrainer
agreement between the parties." There is always some par les mots : « points sur lesquels il existe un certain

area of agreement. But to suggest that all that is
required is some small matter is not sufficient.

degre d'accord entre les parties». 11 existe toujours
un certain degre d'accord. Mais dire qu'il faut
bien peu de chose pour arriver a une solution ne
suffit pas.
.

152. The representative of the United States stated:
" The present case is different from that of many
problems which are brought before the Security
Council: we are fortunate in having an area of
agreement - and a large one - between the parties
and with the Council." [797th meeting, para. 31.]
But I am afraid that there is a large area where there
is no agreement - the 42,000 square miles of our
territory that is under occupation. It is a very considerable area. I am not comparing this State to the United
States, but I believe it is a pretty large place. Therefore
the areas of agreement in stricter political terms must
be confined to our engagement by these resolutions.

152. Le representant des Etats-Unis a dit :
« En l'occurence, contrairement a ce qui s'est passe
dans de nombreux autres cas portes devant le Conseil
de securite, nous avons la chance qu'il y ait une zone
d'accord appreciable entre les parties et au Conseil.»
[797e seance, par. 31.]
Je crains qu'il y ait une vaste zone oil n'existe aucun
degre d'accord : il s'agit des 42.000 milles carres de
notre territoire qui sont occupes. Cela est une superficie
considerable. Je ne songe pas a le comparer aux EtatsUnis d'Amerique, mais l'Etat en question n'en est pas
moins tres vaste. C'est pourquoi les points sur lesquels
un accord est possible - ces mots etant pris dans leur
acception politique la plus stricte se limitent
aux obligations qui nous incombent en vertu des
resolutions.

153. The Government of India stands committed by
the Security Council resolution of 17 January 1948.
We shall do nothing unless attacked to move from the
positions that existed at the time either to augment
our forces or to take any action. We shall at no time
indulge in hate propaganda or psychological warfare.
But we object to psychological warfare, to the introduction of religious fanaticism in these things, to the
stirring up of people on various grounds. Assuming for
argument's sake that sabotage and destruction were
going on inside Kashmir by terrorists or whoever it
may be, when we may have got those facts for the
information of the Council to show the complicity of
the other side in this matter and see another phase of
what was going on, what was the response of the
Foreign Minister of Pakistan? His response was, " Well,
if they have trouble, it is because the people are discontented." Is that the answer of one orderly Government
to another, to say that if there is sabotage or distress
in one country, they deserve it because they are not
well governed? It is surely the distress of the people.
I have produced evidence and, what is more, the
evidence is being given in the law courts. The approver
in this story was received by the Foreign Minister of
Pakistan and called as evidence.

153. Le Gouvernement de l'Inde se considere comme
lie par la resolution du Conseil de securite en date du
17 janvier 1948. A moins d'etre attaques, nous nous en
tiendrons aux positions que nous occupions a cette
date et nous ne ferons rien pour augmenter nos effectifs
ou prendre toute autre mesure. Nous ne nous livrerons
a aucun moment a une propagande de haine ou a la
guerre psychologique. Mais nous nous elevons contre
la guerre psychologique, contre le fanatisme religieux
que l'on mele a cette affaire, contre les diverses raisons
que l'on invoque pour soulever les populations. Prenons
le cas des actes de sabotage et de destruction accomplis
a l'interieur du Cachemire par des terroristes ou par
qui que ce soit. Alors que nous aurions pu porter les
faits a la connaissance du Conseil de securite pour
montrer la complicite de l'autre partie dans l'affaire et
reveler une phase nouvelle des evenements, quelle a ete
la reponse du Ministre des affaires etrangeres du
Pakistan? 11 a repondu : « Eh bien, s'ils ont des ennuis,
c'est parce que le peuple est mecontent.») Peut-on
admettre qu'un gouvernement qui se respecte dise a un
autre gouvernement que si des actes de sabotage sont
perpetres sur son territoire, si son peuple souffre, ce
peuple n'a que ce qu'il merite parce qu'il est mal
gouverne? Le peuple souffre, de toute evidence. J'ai
parle de preuves, et, qui plus est, ces preuves sont
soumises aux tribunaux. Celui qui a revele les faits
a ete re~m par le Ministre des affaires etrangeres du
Pakistan et a ete cite comme temoin.

154. To suggest, therefore, that there is an area of
agreement when there is promotion of this sort in our
country is an attempt at underground rebellion. It is
no answer from Sir Pierson Dixon - while we welcome
it - when he says that he is very sorry to hear about
this matter. So are we. We regret it. Terrorism does not
get anybody anywhere. What is more, it is only when
there is no mass support of a movement by individuals
that there is sporadic violence. If there is mass support,
then small efforts at violence are not necessary. Killing
off people here; putting a bomb in a mosque and saying
a Hindu did it; putting a bomb in a Hindu temple and
saying a Moslem put it there - this sort of thing is

154. Par consequent, dire qu'il existe un certain degre
d'accord lorsqu'une tentative de ce genre est faite dans
notre pays equivaut a une incitation a la revolte clandestine. Sir Pierson Dixon ne resout pas le probleme
lorsqu'il declare - ce dont nous lui savons gre - qu'il
regrette d'apprendre la chose. Nous sommes dans le
meme cas.. Nous le regrettons aussi. Le terrorisme ne
mene nulle part. De plus, ce n'est que lorsque la masse
se refuse a appuyer un mouvement declenche par
quelques individus qu'il se produit des actes sporadiques de violence. Si l'on a l'appui de la masse, les
actes de violence ne sont pas necessaires. Assassiner,
placer une bombe dans une mosquee et imputer le

38

done only because there is no mass support in order
to create mischief.

fait a un hindou, mettre une bombe dans un temple
hindou et en rejeter la responsabilite sur un musulman
- on ne recourt aces procedes que parce que la masse
refuse de participer a des desordres de plus grande
envergure.

155. To say that this represents areas of agreement is
far from true. The only areas of agreement are the
engagements in these resolutions - by the Security
Council resolution, which we have accepted fully, and
in regard to the two resolutions of the Commission,
having full regard for the sequence, the assurances
that have gone with them and the conditions under
which they were adopted and, what is more, all the
other submissions that we made the other day. India
has no desire to back out of any international obligation.
But equally it would be rather inappropriate, in my
submission, to hold that something is an international
commitment when it is not so. The commitments as
such arise in regard to the resolution of 13 August 1948.
Unless part I is performed, part Il does not exist.
Unless part Il is performed, part III does not come in.
What does part III say?

155. Dire done qu'il existe un certain degre d'accord
est loin de correspondre a la realite. L'accord n'existe
qu'en ce qui concerne les obligations decoulant de ces
resolutions : de la resolution du Conseil de securite, que
nous avons acceptee sans reserves, et des deux resolutions de la Commission compte tenu du deroulement
des evenements, des assurances donnees a leur sujet,
des circonstances de leur adoption et, ce qui est plus
important, de toutes les autres considerations que nous
avons exposees l'autre jour. L'Inde ne cherche nullement a se soustraire aux obligations internationales
auxquelles elle a souscrit. Mais il serait egalement
inadmissible de tenir pour une obligation internationale
ce qui ne l'est pas. Les obligations dont il s'agit ici sont
celles qui decoulent de la resolution du 13 aoftt 1948.
Tant que les dispositions de la premiere partie de cette
resolution ne sont pas appliquees, la deuxieme partie
n'existe pas. Tant que la deuxieme partie n'est pas
executee, la troisieme partie n'entre pas en ligne
de compte. Que dit-on dans cette troisieme partie?

"The Government of India and the Government
of Pakistan reaffirm their wish that the future status
of the State of Jammu and Kashmir [I would tell
my friend from the Philippines that there is no
reference to the present status of Jammu and Kashmir
being anything else] shall be determined in accordance with the will of the people and to that end,
upon acceptance of the truce agreement, both
Governments agree to enter into consultations with
the Commission to determine fair and equitable
conditions... " [8/1100, para. 75.]

« Le Gouvernement de I'Inde et le Gouvernement
du Pakistan affirment a nouveau leut desir que le
statut futur de I'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire» - je
fais observer a mon ami le representant des Philippines que la resolution ne dit pas que le statut actue!
est different - « soit fixe conformement a la volonte
de la population et, a cette fin, des l'acceptation de
l'accord de treve par les deux gouvernements, Us
conviennent d'entamer des negociations avec la
Commission afin d'etablir des conditions justes et
equitables... » [8/1100, par. 75.]

So it has nothing to do with discussing the present
status at all. It is a matter of a peace arrangement to
determine what can be done about the future.

Il ne s'agit done pas de discuter du statut actuel. Il
s'agit uniquement d'un arrangement pacifique en vue
de determiner ce qui pOUITa etre fait a l'avenir.

156. Whatever that may be, I should like to ask the
representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom to bring some realism into this talk about
areas of agreement. And the way to begin is with the
vacation of aggression. We do not say that part I is
the whole of the resolution. In view of what has been
going on in the last ten years, the peoples of India and
the world are able to believe that part I will remain
unperformed, for it is not sufficient for these armies
to march nine miles and for the hate propaganda to
cease for a week. It is necessary for us to feel safe and
secure in our own lands. We have no desire to go
anywhere else.

156. En tout etat de cause, je voudrais prier les representants des Etats-Unis et du Royaume-Uni de donner
un fondement plus concret a leurs declarations concernant les points sur lesquels il existe un certain degre
d'accord. La meilleure fal(on de le faire, pour commencer, serait de mettre fin a l'agression. Nous ne
pretendons pas que la premiere partie constitue toute
la resolution. Mais etant donne les precedents des
10 dernieres annees, les peuples de l'Inde et des autres
pays du monde sont fondes a penser que les dispositions
de cette premiere partie resteront inexecutees, car il
ne suffit pas d'obtenir que les armees se replient sur
15 kilometres ou que la propagande de haine soit
interrompue pendant une semaine. Ce qu'il faut, c'est
que nous nous sentions en securite dans nos pays
respectifs. Nous ne desirons aller nulle part ailleurs.

157. In my statement of 9 October [795th meeting]
I remarked on the meaning of the contents of this
expression " vacating of aggression ". It means vacating
annexation. I would like to ask the representative of
the United Kingdom: How can it be said on behalf
of the United Kingdom that there has been no violation

157. Le 9 octobre dernier [795e seance], j'ai expose au
Conseil ce que nous entendions par « mettre fin a
l'agression». Nous entendons par la : mettre fin a
l'annexion. Je voudrais poser au representant du
Royaume-Uni la question suivante : comment peut-on
declarer, au nom du Royaume-Uni, que ni l'esprit ni

39...

of the spirit or the letter of the Security Council resolution of 17 January 1948 when great parts of this territory - nearly half of it - have been annexed to
Pakistan, ruled by it? What is more, I have produced
before the Council the budget estimates of the Pakistan
Government showing allocations. I cited documents
which show that even the very information centre in
this country of the so-called azad Government is run
by the Pakistan Embassy. Therefore, when there is
an annexation of this kind, how can the United Kingdom
tell us, "We will forget the past and see where we are."
That is to say, the vacation of aggression, the removal
of this cause, the removal of the violation of our sovereignty. Trying to determine these matters by force,
taking the law into one's own hands and invoking the
Security Council, using the passage of ten years to
allow dust to cover up what has been discovered by
the Security Council- that is not the position a selfrespecting country can accept. Nor can we in fairness
to our people and the security of our territory accept
that situation.

la lettre de la resolution du Conseil de securite en date
du 17 janvier 1948 n'ont ete vioIes, alors que de grandes
parties du territoire dont il s'agit - pres de la moitie
de sa superficie - ont ete annexees par le Pakistan
et sont gouvernees par lui ? J'ai soumis au Conseil de
securite le budget du Gouvernement pakistanais, portant
indication des allocations de credit. J'ai cite des documents prouvant qu'aux Etats-Unis meme le centre
d'information du soi-disant gouvernement azad est
dirige par r Ambassade du Pakistan. Comment done, en
presence d'une telle annexion, le Royaume-Uni peut-il
nous dire : « Oublions le passe et voyons oil nous en
sommes.» Autrement dit : oublions de mettre fin a
I'agression, d'en determiner la cause, de remedier a
cette violation de notre souverainete. Essayer de
resoudre cette question par la force, pretendre rendre la
justice soi-meme en invoquant le Conseil de securite,
profiter de ce que 10 annees se sont ecouIees pour
enfouir sous la poussiere ce que le Conseil de securite
a mis a jour - ce n'est pas la une situation qu'un
gouvernement qui se respecte puisse accepter. Nous ne
pouvons pas I'accepter non plus sous peine de manquer
de loyaute envers notre peuple et de mettre en peril
la securite de notre territoire.

158. The first step, therefore, in order to bring about
this atmosphere of areas of agreement is to perform
part I of the resolution of 13 August 1948 according
to the construction of this resolution, according to the
whole history that has gone behind it, according to
the written assurances of the various Chairmen of the
Commission, Mr. Lozano most of all. These are not
individual assurances. They are documents which are
based on these adopted resolutions.

158. En consequence, la premiere mesure a prendre
pour creer un climat propre a favoriser la realisation
d'un certain degre d'accord est de mettre en amvre les
dispositions de la premiere partie de la resolution du
13 aout 1948, conformement a la structure meme de
cette resolution, conformement aux conditions de son
adoption, conformement aux assurances ecrites des
divers presidents de la Commission, et, notamment, de
M. Lozano. Il ne s'agit pas d'assurances emanant de
simples particuliers : il s'agit de documents fondes sur
les resolutions adoptees.

159. Unless part I of the resolution is performed,
part 11 does not come alive. It is just latent. It has
no meaning. Part I is performed by the total vacation
of aggression. We are not talking about part 11 now
or the forces that come under it, but the forces that
have come to the State since the passing of this resolution, their removal, the de-annexation of the territory,
the stoppage of psychological warfare and of the
encouragement of subversive activities inside our
country. I do not mean the expression of political
opinion. We do not object to that. I mean either the
financial or physical aid to subversive activity that
needs to be. found out. Unless these things cease,
part I is not operative. And if Mr. Jarring has said
one thing, it is the statement without a doubt that
he has established that part I is the cause of the deadlock. That is the position.

159. Tant que la premiere partie de la resolution
n'aura pas ete appliquee, la deuxieme partie restera
lettre morte. Elle restera en suspenso Elle sera denuee
de sens. Les dispositions de la premiere partie ne seront
executees que lorsqu'il aura ete totalement mis fin a
I'agression. Nous ne parlons pas pour le moment de la
deuxieme partie ni des forces dont il y est question,
mais des forces qui ont penetre dans le territoire depuis
l' adoption de cette resolution, de leur retrait, des
mesures a prendre pour mettre fin a I'annexion du
territoire, a la guerre psychologique et aux encouragements donnes aux activites subversives qui s'exercent
a l'interieur meme de notre territoire. Je n'entends pas
par la I'expression d'une opinion politique : nous ne
ferions aucune objection a cela. J'entends I'assistance
financiere ou materielle donnee a la subversion, et
qu'il faut reveler au grand jour. Tant que cet etat
de choses persistera, les dispositions de la premiere
partie ne seront pas realisees. Et, s'il y a quelque chose
de positif dans le rapport de M. Jarring, c'est la declaration selon laquelle, sans aucun doute, I'impasse
actuelle resulte de la premiere partie de la resolution.
Voila oil nous en sommes.

160. At the next session of the Security Council, with
your permission, Mr. President, and while we do not
accept any of the statements that have been made
on its behalf by the United Kingdom or by others,
we will deal with the problem of what is called " demilitarization " and the Graham reports.

160. Si vous le permettez, Monsieur le President, a
la prochaine seance du Conseil de securite, nous examinerons - encore que nous n'acceptions aucune des
declarations qui ont ete faites ici au nom du RoyaumeUni et d'autres - la question dite de la « demilitarisation» et les rapports Graham.

161. It will be very inappropriate for us to take this
piecemeal. It is a very large problem by itself. But
I would like to say here and now that we cannot agree
with the statement made by the representative of the
United Kingdom that demilitarization fares so well in
all these resolutions that have been spoken of. In fact,
the expression " demilitarization " does not occur anywhere in the resolutions. There are some arrangements
the effect of which would be to lessen the military
potential in two different places.

161. Nous aurions tout a fait tort d'aborder ce probleme de falion fragmentaire. n s'agit en efiet d'une
question fort vaste en soi. Mais je voudrais dire des
maintenant que nous ne pouvons nous ranger a I'opinion du representant du Royaume-Uni, aux yeux
duquel le probleme de la demilitarisation serait parfaitement traite dans toutes les resolutions dont nous
avons parle. En fait, le terme « demilitarisation» ne
figure nulle part dans ces resolutions. Celles-ci prevoient
certains arrangements qui auraient pour effet de reduire
le potentiel militaire en deux endroits differents.

162. But the suggestion that is given that the key
to this is all based demilitarization, and so on, that
is not correct. Anyway, I would not like to deal with
this piecemeal. What is more, I would like to submit
that while our position is that part I is not performed,
and part II is not worth debating, we feel that the
debate in the past has been fluctuant. What is more,
we have learned by experience that any constructive
suggestion one makes is likely yo be gotten hold of
and used against us. Therefore, we have to proceed in
this matter with the necessary caution.

162. Il est donc faux de laisser entendre que la demilitarisation est la clef du probleme. Quoi qu'il en soit,
je ne veux pas en traiter de falion fragmentaire. Je
voudrais ajouter que, si nous estimons que la premiere
partie de la resolution n'a pas eM appliquee et que la
deuxieme partie ne merite pas d'etre discutee, nous
pensons egalement que nos debats dans le passe ont
donne des resultats incertains. De plus, I'experience
nous a appris que l' on a tendance a se saisir de toute
suggestion constructive que nous presentons et de la
retourner contre nous. Nous devons donc proceder
dans cette affaire avec toute la prudence necessaire.

163. In view of the sources of the suggestion at this
moment - the United States, the United Kingdom and
others - and what is more, in view of the fact that
the Security Council is being treated to this, it is our
duty to express our opinion on that matter. Furthermore, we would not like to show any personal disrespect
to Dr. Graham, but we are prepared to deal with these
matters in due course. We are not prepared to admit,
in terms of Mr. Wadsworth's statement, that this
session proceeds from the Jarring report, added to
which is Dr. Jarring's own statement that the deadlock
is centred on the part I of the resolution of 13 August
1948.

163. Considerant quels sont les auteurs de la proposition qui nous est faite -les Etats-Unis, le RoyaumeUni et d'autres -, etant donne surtout que la question
a ete portee devant le Conseil de securite, il est de
notre devoir de vous faire connaitre notre opinion.
D'autre part, sans vouloir d'aucune falion manquer de
respect a la personne de M. Graham, nous reviendrons
sur ces questions au moment opportun. Nous ne sommes
pas disposes a admettre, comme I'a declare M. Wadsworth, que la presente session doit etre consacree au
seul rapport de M. Jarring, d'autant plus que M. Jarring
a dit lui-meme que la premiere partie de la resolution
du 13 aol1t 1948 est a l'origine de I'impasse oil nous
nous trouvons.

164. But if the permanent members of the Security
Council make a proposal of this kind, who are we just
to ignore them ? Therefore, we are quite prepared to
express our position in regard to this matter. However,
I would like to say that there are no proposals before
the Security Council. Neither we nor Pakistan, under
the Charter, are entitled to make proposals, and we
have no desire to make any. The Council has been
called, at the instance of Pakistan, for the consideration
of this question. At the present moment, therefore,
when we next meet, we would be in a position only to
deal with the issues posed in this matter by the United
Kingdom and the United States, and supported by
one or two others; not quite fully, but it something is
being done, they will not object to it.

164. Les membres permanents du Conseil de securite
ont fait une proposition : qui sommes-nous pour ~ous
desinteresser de leur initiative? Nous sommes done
prets a faire connaitre notre proposition en la matiere.
Toutefois, je tiens a dire que le Conseil de securite
n'est saisi d'aucune proposition a proprement parler.
Ni le Pakistan ni nous-memes ne sommes autorises,
aux termes de la Charte, a presenter de propositions au
Conseil de securite, et I'Inde n'a aucune envie d'en
presenter. Le Conseil a ete reuni sur la demande. dq
Pakistan pour examiner une question bien determinee.
Par consequent, la seule chose que nous puissions faire
pour le moment - c'est-a-dire lorsque nous reprendrons
nos debats -, c'est d'examiner les points que le
Royaume-Uni et les Etats-Unis d'Amerique ont souleves
avec un ou deux autres Etats; nous ne pourrons
peut-etre pas en traiter de falion tres detaillee, mais, si
nous en entreprenons I'examen, leurs delegations ne
souleveront pas d'objection.
165. Je me permets de faire observer qu'il ne serait
qu'equitable envers le Gouvernement de I'Inde que de
reconnaitre que l'historique de cette penible affaire
- je m'adresse ici, en toute sincerite, au representant
du Royaume-Uni -, lasecurite meme de l'Inde et
son integrite, ainsi que les conditions d'existence de
son peuple, presentent la plus haute importance pour
les deux pays. Aussi ne peut-on aborder I'etude de ces

165. It will be our submission that it is only fair to
the Government of India that the background of this
toil - and, what is more, we say this in all seriousness
to the United Kingdom - the security of India and
its integrity, and the condition of its people, are of
great consequence to our two countries. Therefore,
when these problems are tackled, it would not merely
be an academic exercise; we would submit all the
41

considerations that go with them, even on the assumption that we are doing this because the suggestion has
been made, not because there is any change in our
position in regard to the augmentation of forces, the
defiance, the cumulation of aggression and augmentation that has gone on since the invasion began. in
defiance of Security Council resolutions.
166. I am sorry that it has taken so long, but there
are some members of the Security Council who have
views different from ours, as is to be exp ¥ced, and
I am here to represent the views of the Government
of India and the Indian people on a case that is getting
somewhat ancient, with the result that facts which
were fresh in people's minds seem easily to be forgotten.
167. That alone can explain my good friend General
Romulo saying that neither Pakistan nor India can
have any sovereignty in this territory. We are weighing
matters which were commonplace, which were not
regarded within the realms of question by the Commission. Now that is forgotten and something new is
brought about. Therefore, when the delegation of India,
whether represented by me or by anyone else, has to
remind the Security Council of things that are established, it is not possible, in a matter of this kind to
proceed if at each sitting we are going to scrap what
has been done by way of gains. Therefore, we have
submitted this to you.

168. We will make the submissions at your convenience, Mr. President, at the next meeting of the
Security Council. It has just been put before me that
the Commander··in-Chief of the Pakistan Army informed
the Commission in 1948 that the purpose of sending
Pakistan troops into the State was to hold the general
line of Uri-Poonch-Naoshera. This line runs north along
Western Kashmir.
169. Therefore, there is no question to us about the
invading army. I also read out the statement of the
Foreign Minister of Pakistan. I would like to conclude
by saying that while some of these facts are unpleasant
and they have the effect which was hinted at, though
in the wrong instance, by my friend, Mr. Walker, the
representative of Australia, it is only when, as in the
case of the Baghdad Pact, we are pushed into so doing,
that we produce them.
170. The PRESIDENT: Would it be possible for the
representative of India to tell us how long it would
take for him to finish his statement?
171. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): I hope I will be
able to finish in another sitting. It is my desire to
finish in another sitting.
172. The PRESIDENT: In that case the next meeting
of the Council will be decided upon, as soon as possible,
in consultation with the members of the Council.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

Printed in France

problemes d'un point de vue purement theorique. Nous
soumettrons tous les faits de la cause, au risque de
donner I'impression que nous le faisons parce qu'on
nous I'a demande, et ce, en depit du fait que notre
position n'a nullement varie touchant I'augmentation
des efIectifs, les provocations et les actes d'agression
qui se sont multiplies depuis le debut de I'invasion,
au mepris des resolutions du Conseil de securite.
166. Je m'excuse de la longueur de mon intervention,
mais certains membres du Conseil de securite, comme
il est naturel, ne partagent pas nos idees, et je suis
ici pour vous faire part des vues du Gouvernement de
l'Inde et du peuple indien au sujet d'une affaire deja
si ancienne que certains faits, jadis bien connus,
semblent etre facilement oublies.
167. C'est la la seule raison qui puisse expliquer que
mon excellent ami, le general Romulo, ait pu dire que
ni le Pakistan ni I'Inde ne pouvaient revendiquer la
souverainete sur le territoire. Nous nous arretons
aujourd'hui sur des problemes qui jadis n'en etaient
pas et au sujet desquels la Commission n'eprouvait
aucun doute. Mais tout cela semble maintenant oublie,
et I'on introduit des elements nouveaux dans I'affaire.
Cependant, quand le Gouvernement de I'lnde, represente par moi ou par toute autre p~rsonne, doit rappeler
au Conseil de securite des faits etablis, il est impossible,
dans une afIaire comme celle qui nous occupe, d'avancer
d'un pas si, sans tenir compte des points acquis, nous
repartons de zero. Tel est le sens de mon intervention
d'aujourd'hui.
168. Nous reprendrons la parole a la prochaine seance
du Conseil de securite, si vous nous y autorisez, Monsieur
le President. On vient de me rappeler que le commandant en chef de l' armee pakistanaise a declare en 1948
a la Commission que les troupes du Pakistan avaient
ete envoyees dans I'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire afin
d'y defendre la ligne Uri-Poonch-Naoshera. Cette ligne
va du Nord au Sud, dans le Cachemire occidental.
169. Il n'y a donc aucun doute pour nous qu'il s'agit
d'une armee d'invasion. D'autre part, je vous ai donne
lecture de la declaration du Ministre des affaires etrangeres du Pakistan. Je voudrais, en terminant, souligner .
que, bien que certains de ces faits soient desagreables I
et qu'ils aient les consequences auxquelles mon ami ,
M. Walker, le representant de I'Australie, a fait allu- I
sion, encore qu'il se soit trompe d'adresse, nous n'en .
faisons etat que lorsqu'on nous y contraint, comme
dans le cas du Pacte de Bagdad.
170. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Le
representant de I'lnde pourrait-il nous dire combien
de temps lui est encore necessaire pour terminer son
intervention?
171. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de l'anglais] :
Je pense qu'une autre seance me suffira. Telle est du
moins mon intention.
172. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Dans
ce cas, la date de la prochaine seance du Conseil sera
fixee aussitot que possible, apres consultation des
membres du Conseil.
La seance est levee cl 18 h. 10.

Price : SU.S. 0.40 ; 3/- stg. ; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

9847- August 1958-1,800
