.

4‘

UNITED NATIONS

SEW
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

RECORDS
YEAR

CONTENTS
PllKC

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1792) ,..,,,,........~~.~1.........~.......

1

Adoption of the agenda ,.,..~,....~,~~..I~~~......,...~...~..~......~~.

1

The situation in Cyprus:
((I) Lcttcr dated 16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council (S/l 1334):
(h) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335):
(c*) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Greece
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1348):
it/) Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting Pcrmancnt Representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations addressed
to the Prcsidcnt of the Security Council (S/11389):
(e) Letter dated 13August 1974from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1444):

v) Letter dated 13 August 1974from the Permanent Representative of Greece
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1445) ~,~.,I..~....~..............~,.,,..,.,..,...~..........~..

I

S/PV, 1792

.

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl , . .) arc normally bublishcd in
quarterly Snpphtont.v
of the O~~citrl Rcwwd~ qf the Srcwrity Corrndt. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which inform
mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, arc published in yearly volumes of Rc.w~lrrtion.~ cmf
Dc~t*i.~/ons q/’ tltc Scc*rrrit,v Cormdl.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January I%S, became fully operative
on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-SECOND

MEETING

Held In New York on Wednesday, 14 August 1974, at 2 a.m.
Pmldent: Mr. Yakov A, MALIK
(Union

of Soviet Socialist

(b) Letter d&d

I6 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to Ihe United Nations
addressed to (he President of the Security Cwncil
(S/l 1335);
Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representntlve of Greece to the Unlted Natbnr
addressed (0 the Prestdent of the Security Council
w1134&:
(4 Letter d&cd 2fi July 1974 from the Actln# Permanent
Representative
of the Union of Sovkt SoclnIkt
Republics to the United Natlonr addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 1389):
(e) Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent
RcpresentatOve of Cyprus to the UnM
N&Ions
addressed to the President of the Security Council
w11444):
v, Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the Permanent
RepresentaWe
of Greece to (he Unlted Natlons
addressed to the Presldennt of the Sscurlty Council
CS/l14r15)

Republics).

Pnsmt: The rc rescntatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austr Pa, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic, China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq,
Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Onat Britain and
Northern Inland, United Republic of Cameroon and
United States of America.
Provklonrl

agenda (S/Agenda/l792)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in CYDNS:
(a) Letter dated l&-July 1974 from the Secretary=
Oencral to the President
of the Security
Council WI 1334):
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/t 1335):
(c’) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council WI 1348):
dated 28 July 1974 fiam the Acting
(10 Letter
Permanent Representative
of Ihe Union of
Soviet Sociafist Republics
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/i 1389):
Letter dated 13 August 1974 from the
Permanent Representative
of Cyprus to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council WI 1444):
Letter dated 13 August
1974 from the
Permanent Representative
of Greece to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council WI 1445)

Adoptlon

1. The PRESIDENT
(trunstuthm
jhm
Russiun):
In accordance with decisions taken by the Council
at pnviqus
meetings
[/77Yl/r-~7Wsr~mc~tingsI, L I
- _
intend, with the consent of the Council, lo invite the
representatives
of Cyprus, Turkey, Greece, Yugoslavia, Romania, India and Mauritius to participate.
without the right to vote, in the Council’s consideration
of the question of the situation in Cyprus.

2. The PRESIDENT
ttrurrslutiun
frunr
Russiun):
In view of the limited number of places available at
-the Council table. I propose lo invite the nprcscntatjvcs of Yugoslavia,
Romania, India and Mauritius
to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber, on the understanding that they
will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when it is their turn to make a statement.

of the agenda

The dtuarbn In Cyprus:
(a) Leuer dated 16 July I974 fbm the SucretrryEgto
the PresMmt of (he Security Council
.
:

3. The PRESIDENT
ttrunstution
/iour Russiun):
As members of the Security Cou&il
have uircady
been informed, this urgent mcctine of the Council
has been convened ut such a iutc hour at the request
I

of the representatives
of Cyprus, Greece and the
United Kingdom in connexion with the recent events
occurring in Cyprus.

itself, and members
seems to be serve.

know

that that

lighting

IO. It will be recalled that resolution 3U (1974)
requested the Secretary-General
to take appropriate
action in the light of his statement to the Council
which, among other things, reported the Declaration
by the Foreign Ministers of Greece, Turkey and
the United Kingdom at the conclusion of the first
Geneva conference [ser g///398].
That Declaration
envisaged a continuing
role for the United Nations
Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYPI,
taking
account of the new situation which had then arisen.
The Declaration was seen by my Government.
and
I think after analysis by the Council as a whole. as
a first step towards the full implementation
of Council
resolution 3S3 (1974). And may I reiterate, if it needs
reiteration,
that the Government
of the United
Kingdom regards resolution 3S3 (1974) as the basis
upon which any lasting scttlcmcnt in Cyptus has to
be seen.

4. I rhould like to draw the attention of the members
to the following documents which have been circulated
today: document S/11444, containing the text of a
letter dated I3 August from the representative
of
Cyprus to the President of the Security Council:
document S/11443, containing
the text of a letter
dated I3 August from the Permanent Representative
of Greece to the President of the Security Council;
document
S/ii446.
containing
the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the United Kingdom. Before
the convening of this meeting, during consultations
with the Council members, a revised version of this
drafi resolution was agreed upon which has been
circulated in document S/I 1446/Rev. I,
5. In view of the need for the prompt adoption
of a draft resolution on this item as a result of the
situation in Cyprus and in connexion with the events
relating to the Cyprus question, I understand that
the members of the Council arc ready to vote on
the English text of the draft resolution, without waiting
for it to be translated into the other official working
languages of the Council.

I I. Since the passage of resolution 355 (19741. the
Secretary-General
has reported developments
to the
Council at regular intervals, and in particular
he
submitted an interim report on IO August [g///433].
The work which was envisaged for UNFICYP
by the
Geneva Declaration under its paragraph 3 (a), namely.
the establishment
of a security zone at the limit of
the areas occupied by the Turkish armed forces, god off
to a slow start. The first task, as we saw it, was to try
to establish a cease-M
line that would be accepted
by all parties, The work was, if I use a neutral
phrase, hampered by alterations in troop dispositions,
even while the process of demarcation was continuing.
However, by 8 August a clc JircW cease-fire line
had been agreed, subject to a number of reservations,
even though it could not be held in every respect to
be the line obtaining at the time of the rignaturc
of the Geneva Declaration on 30 July.

6, In accordance with the aforc-mentioned
understanding I intend, if there is no objection, to put dti
resolution S/i i446/Rev. I to the vote now.

The drqfl rrrolution

will

M*US adopted manlmously,t

7. The PRESIDENT
trrctnskrtion .fnm Russim):
The Security Council will now hear those rcprcsentativcs who have indicated a desire to speak after
the vote.
ii. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
It is almost
exactly two weeks since the Security Council last
met on Cyprus (I78Yth rrrccttng] and adopted
resolution 333 (1974). I make no apology, Mr. Prcsident, for having been one of those instrumental
in
summoning the Security Council to a meeting, even
though it is now 3.35 in the morning.
I did so
because it seemed to my delegation and my Govemment important that there should be a firm, II clear,
an unambiguous and a speedy resolution adopted by
the Council expressing its view upon the events that
have taken place in Cyprus and in Geneva in the
last few days.

12. One difkulty
in securing acceptance of the ccaselire line was the contention that the recommendations
in paragraph 3 of the Geneva Declaration should be
implemented
as a whole and that insuffMnt
progress
was being made on paragraph 3 (h), namely the
evacuation of the Turkish enclaves by Greek or
Greek Cypriot forces.
13. It was against this background
and in this
atmosphere that the Geneva conference resumed on
8 August. As a first step. the Foreign Ministers of
Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom instructed
omcials to report on the problems of the exchange
of prisoners, the demarcation
of the cease-fire line
and the evacuation of Turkish Cypriot villages. The
Secretary-Gcneral’r
representative
was invited trl
participate as an observer at that initial meeting and
in subsequent plenary meetings.

9. 1 do not want tonight to raise the temperature
more than is perhaps necessary, I certainly do not
wish to say anything which would exacerbate a
situation which is already grave. But members of the
Council will know that fighting has restarted in Cyprus

14. There then followed
a wcricn of billttcrcll
consultations,
which included the rcprcscntativcs. of
2

Cyprus. It emerged from these consultations
that
Turkey was pressing for the principle
that there
should bc two autonomous udministrative
regions in
a united Cyprus. The United Kingdom representative
made it clear that he would explain, but would not
advocate, these ideas to Mr. Clcridcs, but only on
the basis that tha Turkish
Government
did not
intend to expand the areas occupied by Turkish
forces, and on the understanding
that there would
have to bc a clear commitment
on the withdrawal
of Turkish
troops. This proposal caused grave
diMcultics
for the Greek Cypriot representatives.
The Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom made
it clear in those exchanges that future constitutional
questions of this nature were essentially for the Cypriot
people themselves to decide.
IS. On the evening of 10 August it was possible
to hold u meeting with the representatives of Cyprus
as well as the three Foreign Ministers. No decisions
were reached, but it was agreed that Mr. C&ides
and Mr. Denktaf would continue the discussions
between themselves.
16. The following day it was announced that the
National Guard would evacuate II number of Turkish
villages which were occupied or surrounded by it.
The Greek Cypriot authorities also agreed to release
a number of Turkish prisoners.
17. During the following
two day?, discussions
continued on possible new constitutibnal
arrangcmen& cithcr of a cantonal nature or based on two
autonomous areas under one unitary State. In the
luttcr stages of the conference, however, the Turkish
rcprcacntativc tabled proposals for a clearly defined
Turkish Cypriot zone covering 34 per cent of the
island, together with a demand for a constructive
reply to these proposals within a short deadline. I
regret to say that attctipts to secure an extension
of this deadline for consideration
of this proposal
and of counter-proposals
submitted by Mr. &rides
met with no success at all. The Greek Cypriot
counter-proposal
conceded administrative
autonomy
and some grouping of Turkish villages but excluded
the possibility of a geographical zone or of population
movcmcnts.
Against that background,
the final
meeting searching for a way out of the deadlock
lasted for seven hours yesterday.
This
was
unsucccssfuL und the conference broke down at
2.15 a.m, Geneva time toduy, 14 August.
18. At the conclusion of the conference Mr. Clcridcs
stressed that he did not rcjcct the Turkish proposals
and was prepared to consider them with an open mind
if he were allowed 48 hours. The Turkish rcprcsentnrives wcrc unable to agree to that rcqucst. The
conference. thcreforc, dispcncd, but the Greek. the
Greek Cypriot und the United Kingdom detcgutions
expressed their wiltingncas
to return tomorrow,
Thursday, and the Turkish Cypriot representative
cxprcssed lrimihlr willingncs$ if the Turkish Govern-

ment atso agreed. It is a matter of profound regret
to my delegation and to my country that a request
for an adjournment
of that nature could not in fact
bc conceded by the Turkish representatives at Geneva
and that hostilities have now been recommenced.
19. In the aforc-mentioned
circumstances WC thought
that it was right to seek an urgent meeting of the
Council and to put on record how the conference
has failed. We wish to stress that diplomatic
means
of resolving this problem have not been exhausted,
and for that reason 1 hope 1 have been studied in
my approach this evening und moderate
in my
language. I also wish to express the hope that
negotiations may bc resumed at a very early date,
if possible on Thursday. As 1 have already indicated,
my Government.
the Greek Government
and the
Greek Cypriot Govcmmcnt*-and,
I understand,
even the Turkish
Cypriot community--would
be
prepared to accept this.
20. With that object in view, my delegation submitted
the draft resolution that has now been adopted by
all the members of the Council.
21, I would appeal to the Government
of Turkey
to stop the fighting in Cyprus. I would appeal to it
to make a reality of resolution 3S3 (1974). which it
has accepted. It is not possible for this Council or
for any set of negotiators to solve the centuriesold enmity between Greece and Turkey and between
Greek and Turk in a matter of days, but what we
had hoped to achieve in Geneva and what we hoped
thd Security Council might help to achieve was that
by i resolving the problems of Cyprus we should find
a way of at least lessening the enmity between
thqsc two nations.
22.

Mr.

MVGGO

Republic of Cameroon)
My delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution that the Council has
just adopted. This support means, first, that my
delegation wishes to confirm the positive vote it cast
at the time of the adoption of resolution 353 (1974).
It means also that my Government
firmly supports
thC principle of rcspcct by all Member States for the
indcpcndcncc, sovcrcignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus. Finally, in voting for the
draR resolution that the Council has just adopted
my delegation expresses the hope that the Geneva
negotiations
on Cyprus will resume very shortly
within the framework laid down by resolution 333
(1974). without overlooking
the provisions of the
present resolution.
~tntc~rprmtion

jiim

(United

Frcndt):

23. The PRESIDENT
f trrrns/trthn
jhm
I call on the rcprcscntntive of Grcccc.

R~rssCtrrr):

2 Suhscqucntly. the United Kin&m
dclrpnrion whmmcd I
mdillcotion
whcrchy the wurdq “lhe Gnck Cypriol Govcmmrnl” would bc rcpluccd hy the word\ “the Orcck Cypriuts”.

.

24. Mr, CARAYANNIS
(Qrccce): As our last
meeting on this item, WC finished, I would not say
on a tone of optimism as I am afraid that **optimism”
is too big a word to apply to Cyprus, but anyway
on a tone of hope. The Geneva Declaration
was
signed. Poor as it was in comparison
with rcsolulion 353 (1974). it nevertheless rtprcscntcd a first
step towards the same goal and as such it was
described around thls table by most of the rcprcscntativcs. The Council had adopted a resolution giving
a new mandate to the Secretary-General,
enabling
him to cope with the new situation and his new
tasks.

spite of the Security Council appeal for an immediate
cease-fire on the first day of the invasion, a ccascfire was arranged after many delays and diflicultics
only on 22 July at I400 hours Greenwich mean time.
The Turkish Government
acccptcd that ccascdrc.
In his letter to the Secretary-General
of 22 July,
the Prime Minister, Mr. Eccvit, wrote “Accordingly,
necessary instru. ‘9ns arc issued to the Turkish troops
to cease fire &cl
‘c as from 1400 hours GMT on
22 July.”
[Src b, //J&5.)
The Turkish
Govcmmcnt dclibcratcly
did not implement
the cease-fire,
and the reason was that it wanted to occupy more
territory.

25. At that meeting I expressed the hope that after
those developments
human lives would bc spat-cd in
both camps. Since then, human liycs have been lost
in both camps, and more human lives arc being lost
at this very moment and will be lost in the days to
come.

32. A second cease-fin was signed in Geneva on
30 July, effective 2200 hours Geneva time. The fighting
went on, as cvcrybody in the world knows and as
I myself informed the Council at its meeting of
31 July with respect to the Turkish attack against
the villages of Lapithos and Karavas. Those villages
have, of couruc, fallen since, and the Turkish forces
arc well west of them.

26. 1 ICC from the report of the Secretary-General
(g//MJIAtM2l]
that among the casualties arc rive
members of the Finnish contingent and four members
of the British contingent, who have been wounded.
I cxprcss the sympathy and gratitude of my Govcmmcnt to the representative
of the United Kingdom
and to the Government of Finland.

33. In any case. the overwhelming
fact is that the
territory held by Turkey at the date and time of the
first cease-tire has tripled. I put that before the
Council for its judgcmcnt.
and I do not even have
to prove it. Maps have been published not only in
this country but all over the world, in all newspapers
and in all magazines-maps
in beautiful colours:
diffcrcnt colours for the first cease-fire. different
colours for the second cease-fire. different colours
for today.

27. The prestige of the United Nations and the
Security Council has suffered and will suffer,
28. I do not have to go into the details of the
continuous Turkish violations and the step-by-step
enlargement of the occupied territory. They arc too
many, and they have been fully reported by the world
press. 1 feel I do not need to convince anybody.
Howcvcr, in spite of the tragedy of the moment,
1 must mention certain dates.

34. The expulsion of the Greek population from the
occupied area went almost parallel with the expansion
of the territory held by Turkey. Again, all this was
fully rcportcd all over the world, and I shall quote
from the Secrctary-Gcncral’a
report of 5 August:

29. The invasion started in the early hours of
20 July, and. in the words of the rcprcscntutivc
of
Turkey. it met with fierce rcsistancc. Who offered
the resistance? The National Guard, which is the
name given to the army of Cyprus. helped by all
Greek Cypriots
who could carry arms and the
650 Greek officers who wcrc there to train the National
Guard. Those officers were incorporated
in the
National Guard. Everybody knew it. They had to
fight alongside the Guard, and they did fight. And.
by the way, I suppose that most of them have been
killed.

“Most
of the male population
of the Greek
Cypriot villages were taken prisoner and escorted
by Turkish
troops into the areas of Boghaz
Gcunycly and Orta Keuy. Some of the women and
children of many villages were eventually told to
leave their villages und to cross the lines into
territory controlled by the National Guard. Others
were transported,
without their possessions. to
Nicosia by bus and set free with instructions to
cross the green line into the Greek Cypriot sector
of the city,” [Sl~~.~S.VArld.IS, pcrrcr. R f b))
lf anybody had any doubt as to the Turkish intentions,
I suppose he now has the proof. But cvcn that proof
is no longer needed. In Geneva. everything
was
said. There arc no longer nny doubts.

30. There was a time when WC had mote troops
in the island. always at the invitation of the Cyprus
Government.
and everybody
will rcmcmbcr
that,
bccausc of the continual
Turkish
threats. those
troops wcrc withdrawn after an arrangement
with
Turkey in 1967.

-3% And so I come to the Geneva conference. My
Government
went to the first Geneva conference
in conformity with resolution 353 tt974). It was the
Security Council which sent my Government
to
Geneva. Its first preoccupation was to atop the fighting.
l

31. The fierce lighting, as my Turkish collcaguc
called it, went on for two and a half days, and in
4

I do not think there is anything unusual in that. It
has always been the practi&, and especially so in the
United Nations, first to stop lighting and then to
start talking. We failed, From the very beginning,
Turkey insisted on having all its demands accepted
before it stopped fighting and occupying more territory.
In any case, the result was the Geneva Declaration
members have before them. Let us ICC what it rays.
In paragraph I, it says that the parties
?ccognizcd
the importance
of rctting in train,
as a matter of urgency, measures to adjust and to
rcgularizc within a reasonable period of time the
situation in the Republic of Cyprus on a lasting
basis, having regard to the international agreements
signed at Nicosia on 16 August 1960 and to
resolution 353 (1974) of the Security Council. They
were, however, agreed on the need to decide
first on certain immediate measures”. (See gl/lJM]
36, That means that the Declaration makes a clear
distinction between measures which arc urgent and
measures which arc immediate.
The immediate
measures on which there is a need to decide first
-those
arc the actual words of the Declaration,
and I cmphasitc
the word %rst”-&c:
first, the
ccasc=flrc; secondly, a security zone, the evacuation
of Turkish enclaves, policing by UNFICYP
of mixed
villages and the exchange of prisoners and civilians.
Then the Declaration deals with the urgent problem
of finding a lusting solution acceptable to all parties.
37. What happened after the Declaration was signed
is known by everybody. but I have some numbers
members probably do not know. Thirty-five
quart
kilometres inhabited by 1I.000 people-mainly
Greek
Cypriots-were
added to the territory occupied by
the Turkish army on 30 July at 2200 hours.
38. I received a few hours ago an order of the
Commander-in-Chief
of the Turkish Army in Cyprus,
dated 30 July, the day of the signing of the Declaration.
This order had fallen into the hands of the Greek
Cypriot army, and I shall read it out:
“28th Infantry
Operation Order.

Division

Partisan

Siklik.

3 July.

“1, Situation.
Enemy position
as discussed
during briefing and indicated on the map.
“2. Mission:
the 28th Division,
having the
objective of extending and ensuring the security
of the area occupied. will attack on 30 July and
occupy a line running from Hill 1023 west of
Lapithos, Bassi, Sisklipos village.”
39. It is a very long order and I am not going to
read it all out. It says, “Necessary preparations will
have to be made”. All this was an order given to the
Turkish aoldicrs on 30 July, the day the Geneva
Declaration was signed.

40. My Government went to the second phase of the
Gcncvaconfcrcnce
utterly shocked by such behaviour
and only because it was determined
not to leave
unexplored the slightest hope of peace, no matter
how small and doubtful it might be. The argument
was advanced by the Turkish Government
at the
second Geneva conference that the package of the
immediate measures to be taken must be implemented
as a whole, and therefore the Turkish Army had to
continue lighting and occupying territory because the
National
Guard of Cyprus had not evacuated the
Turkish enclaves. The Cypriot Government had made
it clear from the very beginning that it was ready
to evacuate the enclaves and hand over the rcsponsibility in an orderly way to UNFICYP.
It was not
expanding its holdings nor killing people, But you
have to admit, Mr. President, that one has to stop
doing something in order to start doing something
else. The righting had never stopped. When it did stop,
at *he beginning of the second Geneva conference,
ant’ a cease-fire line was finally drawn after intcrminablc efforts by the Greek and United Kingdom
the evacuation
of the enclaves
delegations,
immediately
started.
41, I read from paragraph
General’s report of 12 August:

3 of the

Sccrctary-

“In
the evening of II August,
UNFICYP
headquarters was informed by the National Guard
that they were prepared to begin withdrawal from
Turkish enclaves which had been occupied by
‘Greek or Greek Cypriot forces’. The following
Turkish Cypriot villages were evacuated Sunday
evening: Alckhtora.
Evdhimou,
Ayios Thomas,
and Plataniskia,
all in Limassol
district,
and
Mandria
and Kouklia
in Paphos district,
On
I2 August, the National
Guard evacuated the
Turkish
sectors of Lamaca/Scala
and Paphosl
Ktima. In accordance with the role of UNFICYP
pursuant to Security Council resolution 353 (1974)
UNFICYP
has assumed responsibility
for the
protection of those areas.” (S//M&M/.20.]
And all this before any arrangements were made on
the security zone, cvcn before any decisions wcrc
taken on how the supervision of this buffer zone
would operate-the
arrangements
and decisions
envisaged in subparagraph
3 b) of the Geneva
Declaration us immediate measures.
42. Another reason which made by Foreign Minister
decide to attend the second Geneva conference in
spite of the Turkish bad faith was his belief that
it was urgent to take measures for the exchange 01
prisoners. military and civilian, and of the numerous
Greek Cypriots in the Turkish occupation zone. It
is astonishing,
and characteristic
of the Turkish
methods and intentions,
that, after imposing
all
possible measures of protection
for the Turks in
the non-occupied
parts of the island, including the
keeping of order by Turkish Cypriot police. Turkey

.

.

rtill

r&sea

to allow any activity

other than nlicf

I may call it that-mentality,
I think it rhould bc
obvious that the right of invusion is granted in order
to bring things buck to constitutionul
lcgulity. If the
intention
is to chungc the Constitution
and divide
the island and move masses of the population,
then I would humbly submit that the Turkish Army
ir not legally on the island, not cvcn on the busis.
of the Turkish
interpretation
of the Treaty of
Guarantee. It is occupying the territory of a Stutc
Mcmbcr of the United Nations illegally, cvcn by
Turkish standards, bccausc by our standards the
action is illegal anyway.

to the UNFICYP troops in the occupied territory.

43. Allow me to rcfcr to the interim report of the
Sccrctarybencral
of 10 Augurt.
It deals almost
cxclusivcly with rho UNFICYP activiticr in the nonoccupied part of the island; there is only one
paragraph for the Turkish-controlled
area, namely,
paragraph If, which reads as follows:
“Within
the Turkish-controlled
area, UNFICYP
activities am csntrcd on humanitarian
and relief
mcasurcs in Kyrcnia
and - certain surrounding
villages,
cspccially
Bcllapais.
These activities
include the delivery of food to a considcrablc
number of 8mall isolated groupa.:’ [S///433. J

47. In spite &f al1 this, the Geneva confcrcncc
started ycstcrdcly examining constitutional
proposals
under the Turkish threat that if the Turkish conception
of geographical partition was not accepted military
operations would rcsumc in the island. This is the
precise reason why the buffer zone has not been
rcccptcd until this moment in spite of the fact that.
in accordance with the Geneva Declaration,
it was
one of the immediate
.mcasurcs to bc taken, right
aficr the ccasc-fire, hccuusc the road to further
advance should remain open to the Turkish Army.

44, This situation
is unbelievable,
and it is
unacceptable
to my Oovcmmcnt.
The Turkish
authorities have even refused to allow 500 women.
children and old men to rctum to their homes in
the occupied zone.
43. I now come to the search for a lasting scttlcmcnt
in the island. This is the most Intcrcsting, the most
unbelievable
and the most ?hocking part of the
confcrcnce. It started when the three participants
became tive with the addition of rcprcscntativcs
of
the Cypriot Government and of the Turkish Cypriots.
The Turkish Foreign Minister proposed the division
of the island into separate geographical
zones and
demanded that a decision bc taken for any constitu=
tional negotiations
to bc based on this principle.
The Acting Prcsidcnt of Cyprus and the Greek
For&n
Minister
remarked
that Cyprus was an
independent
and sovereign country, a Member of
the United Nations, and that it was not up to the
Geneva conference to dictate its constitution
to
Cypnrs. The United
Kingdom
Foreign Minister
declared that the United Kingdom did not feel that
it had any right to interfere in the constitutional
problem of Cyprus. WC tried to suggest that if Turkey
invaded Cyp~s to protect its Constitution,
as the
Turkish Oovcmmcnt
contends, it did, it would then
bc only reasonable to take the Constitution
as it is,
the Constitution
based on the I960 Treaty
of
0uarantcc5 rcfcrrcd to in the Geneva Declaration,
cvcntually accept whatever modifications
had been
accepted up to this time by both ‘parties, and try to
agree on other modifications
that would make it moth
practical under the present circumstances. That was
flatly rcjectcd.

48. Let us have a look at the ditY’ercnt proposal%.
I quote from the Turkish Cypriot proposal:
“The Republic of Cypnrs shall he tin independent
binational State. The Republic shall be composed
of two fcdcratcd States with full control and
autonomy
within their respective
geographical
boundaries. The area of the Turkish Cypriot State
shall cover 34 per cent of the territory of the
Republic falling north of the pncral line starting
from Lcfka and going through Nicoriu to Famagusta.”
This was, of course. rcjcctcd.
49. You may usk why 34 per cent of the territory?
The Turks arc only 18 per cent of the popukttion.
I have the answer. Flccausc the Turkish army is thcrc.
SO. Mr. Cleridcs was drafting his counter-proposal
when the Turkish Foreign Minister came out with a
proposal of his own, not from Cyprus but from the
mother country. This is the Turkish propasul:
“The Republic shall comprise two autonomous
zones, one Turkish und the other Greek. The
Greek Cypriot zone shall be composed of two
districts. The arca of the autonomous
Turkish
Cypriot zone will hc cquivalcnt to approximately
34 per cent of the territory of the Rcpublio.”
-The
word “ctpproximatcly”
in hcrc--“The
Administration
of each of the autonomous zones
shall have complctc control over itu geographical
Uml.“’
*
.
This was on the basis of take it or lcavc it. until
midnight.
Some more time was finally. and with
-

46. Now I would like to make I point hcrc. WC have
never accepted that the Trcuty of Guarantee gives
Turkey the right to invade Cyprucr for whutevcr
reason, and t do not think that thcrc urc many in
the United Nations who rcccpt this prcdominunce
of a treaty over the Charter. But if WC wcrc to
accept for a moment this un-United
Nations-if
-se
6

much dilllculty, arranged and the latest proposals
came out. I am quoting from C&rides’ proposal:

positions of the two respective Governments. I quote
from the declaration of the Greek Government of
6 August:

“The constitutional order of Cyprus shall rctaln
its bi-communal character based on the coexistence
of the Greek and Turkish communities within the
framework of a sovereign, independent and integral
republic, The cocxirtcncc of the two communities
shall bc achieved in the context of institutional
arrangements regarding an apced allocation of
powers and lunctions between the central government having competence over State affairs and the
respective autonomous communal administrations
exercising their powers on all other matters within
arcas to bc established as in paragraph S hcreinbelow. The Greek and Turkish communal
administrations shall exercise their powers and
functions in arcas consistin respectively of the
purely Greek and Turkish vf llagcs and munlcipalitics. For the purpose of communal administration,
such villages and munfcipalitics may be grouped
together by the respective communal authorities.
For the same purpose, mixed villages shall come
under the communal authority of the community
to which the mdority of their inhabitants belong.
Legislative uuthority over the nspcctivc communal
administrations shall bc exercised by the Orcck
and Turkish members of the House of Rcprescntativcs constituted in separate councils for this
pulposc.”

“Grcccc is in favour of the maintenance of the
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Cyp~s. The above-mentioned elements
would allow the Cyprus State to continue its nonaligned policies. Furthermore, the Greek Govcmmcnt is in favour of the dcmilitarlxation of the
Republic of Cyprus inasmuch as the concentration
and accumulation of armed forces in the island will
result in the annihilation of the international entity
of Cypnrs. Greece feels that the lint urgent step to
bc taken to this effect is the withdrawal of the
Turkish forces which invaded Cy NS. This will
enable Greece to withdraw all 8 nccc ofllcen
and other military personnel presently in the island
in conformity with Security Council resolution 353
(1974). It is Greece’s position that resolution 353
(lpfl) must bc implemented in all its provisions
and as soon as possible.”
And I repeat, that WC are ready to take out of
Cyprus the Greek officers and any other military
personnel in the island any time. together with the
Turkish army.
54. 1 now quote from The Wushlngron
I I August. It is a telegram from Ankara:
“In

It will up to the Council to decide which of the
three projects is closets to resolution 353 (1974).
It may possibly rind even Mr. Clerides’ proJect far
away from it.

Post

of

Ankara a high Government

that Turkey

is determined

official said
to press for acceptance

of its plan for a Cyprus solution even at the
cost of renewed fighting on the island. ‘There will
not bc a third round of Geneva talks’, said the
official. ‘WC will get peace, either in Geneva
talking, or in Cyprus fighting’ ‘*.

The Government of Cyprus was not able to
accept the Turkish constitutional proposals in Geneva.
The Government of Greece takes the attitude that
no sovereign, independent State could accept such
proposals at gun point from an outside country.
It will bc up to each Member of the United Nations
to take a position on this issue. The situation is
extremely serious. For Cyprus itself it is dramatic.
For the United Nations it calls for a reappraisal of
its lundamcntal purposes.
Sl.

55. WC all know a bit of history, and WC all know
what is meant by gunpoint diplomacy.
Those of us
who arc old enough can remember Hitler and

Munich. We had hoped they were past experiences.
I will not go into the final hours of the Geneva
conference,
as I think they wcry very plainly
explained by the representative of the United
Kingdom, As a matter of fact, what Mr. Clerldes
said was: “Give me time to consider your proposal”.
But it was not possible; time was not given; and

52. The Group of Non-Aligned Count&s at the
United Nations issued a declaration the other day.
1 quote from that declaration:

fighting

“The tragic situation of Cyprus is a grave warning
to all non-aligned countries and calls for their
united action. The threat to the independence
and security of one non~aligned country is a
threat to the security of ull of them.”

is going on.

56. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (intwpretrrtion
/n,m
Frcndt):
The failure,
which we hope is only
temporary, of the negotiations in Geneva has led the
dclegationaof Greece. Cyprus and the United Kingdom
torequest the urgent meeting of the Council.

I. for my part, would agree.

57. Even before we had enough time to meet. the
Turkish
Air Force had bombed certain targets,
particularly
Nicosia, caust-r many casualties and
wounding nine soldiers of the United Nations Force,
This was reported to us two hours ago in a report of

53. As Greece and Turkey arc the two countries
moqt cla(rely connected with Cyprus I should like to
clobc by referring to clear written indications of the
7

..

s

new steps to end the violence on the itland of
Cyprus. We regret this all the more because thir
return of violence was so unnecessary. Promising
negotiations
had ken
going forward in Geneva
pursuant to resolution 353 (1974) and in keeping with
the Charter of the United Nations and the Treaty of
Guarantee establishing
the State of Cyprus. But.
unhappily,
in the abrence of a conciliatory
spirit
at the conference table, those negotiationr have ken
interrupted and the guns of war are speaking again.

the Secretary-Ocncral,
which cmphasizcd once again,
If that were necessary, the seriousness of the situation
which is threatening peace and security in the castem
Mediterranean.

S8. By this time tomorrow-now,
even at this very
moment-the
war could spread over Cyprus and once
again affect populations
which have already been
seriously harmed, Aware of the dramatic nature of
this situation, the nine countries of the European
Economic Community
met yesterday evening while
, negotiations
were still continuing:
they decided to
make a new and pressing approach the Governments
of Ankara and Athens.

64. The United States is convinced that only through
such negotiations can a settlement emerge which will
restore constitutional government to Cyprus and peace
and stability in the eastern Mediterranean.

39. As I speak, I do not know whether that approach
was made in both capitals. It was essentially a
solemn appeal to the two parties to pursue the course
of negotiation,
to the exclusion of any other means.
The nine countries, the text adds, feel that they must
give both parties a most rolemn warning of the
responsibilities
that would k incurred in the eyes
of the European Community
by the one that resorted
to military action at the risk of starting a conflict,
with incalculable consequences.

65. As the Council is aware, the United States has
lent its total support to this process. My Oovemment did this because of its close relations with its
allies, Onece and Turkey, because of its commitment
to the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus.
because of its concern for the welfare of the Cypriot
people of both communities
and, also, but not least,
because of its overriding concern for peace in the
area.
66. WC have given our full support to the valiant
and tireless efforts of the United Kingdom, a guarantor
Power under the London-Zurich
agreements,
to
bring about a measure of common understanding at
Geneva which would point the way towards a new
constitutional
arrangement in Cyprus which takes into
account the new realities. In this role we have ken
in constant touch with all of the parties io as to do
whatever we could to encourage the negotiating

60. Speaking now on behalf of my Oovemment,
i would say that WC sincerely deplore the cxcessivc
haste with which the Turkish Government interrupted
last evening’s
negotiations,
and particularly
the
military action which the Turkish forces have just
kgun,
War is not the way to solve the diMcult
problems separating the two communities
on Cyprus.
On the contrary, it can only complicate and delay
a solution,
without any of the parties concerned
finally king able to gain the least benefit.

process.

67. The United States has taken heart from the
restoration of constitutional
government
in Orcece,
so ably kd by Prime Minister Caramanlis. The areek
Oovemment
has pursued with diligence the search
for arrangements to restore constitutional
government
in Cyprus. As a guarantor
Power, Greece has
legitimate interests which must k fully ncognited.

61. Here I must recall the rule that as lbng as
negotiations arc acceptable to one of the partners-and
the request for a X-hour postponement
was not a
refusal to negotiate-the
other should abstain from
making it impossible to carry on the negotiations.
Also I must concur with the urgent appeal which
our colleague from the United Kingdom addressed a
few moments ago to the Turkish Government.

6% We also pay a tribute to the people of Cyprus.
of both communities,
who have endured many
hardships in the past month.

62. However for the time king, the Council, which
has the major
responsibility
for peace.
the
maintenance
of world had to act.- I had at least to
require full implementation
of resolutions 353 (I9741
and 354 t 1974) and, particularly,
respect of the ceasefire throughout the island-in
other words, an end to
the fighting which is how going on. It had also
urgently to appeal to the parties to resume negotiations
without delay: and. in conclusion,
it had to state
that it would remain seized of the situation. This
has been done. and I hope its appeal will be heeded.

l

69. The Acting President of Cyprus. Mr. Clcrides.
and the Turkish Vice-President,
Mr. Denktag, have
both made major contributions
in this complicated
process of negotiation.
70. Turkey also has legitimate interests which must k
fully rccognized.
My Qovemmcnt
made clear
yesterday in a public statement its view that the
position of the Turkish community on Cyprus requires
considerable improvement
and protection, as well as
a greater degree of autonomy.

63. Mr. SCALl (United States of America): My
delegation deeply regrets that almost a month after
the adoption of resolution 353 (1974) we have found
it necessary to meet once again in thir hall to consider

71. My Government considers that it is the duty of
the Council to do everything in keeping with rcsolu8

tion 353 f 1974) to aid in bringing the parties back
to the negotiating table. It is only at that table that a
consensus can emerge leading to a sctticmcnt which
will bc satisfactory to all the parties and which will
bring peace and stability once again to that area,

77. The situation in Cyprus today is a symbol.
However small Cyprus is, it is the symbol of. the
breakdown of whatever international
legal order and
security exist. Otherwise, it could not have been
accepted that this country could be pounded from the
air in a war that has now lasted for over two weeks.

72. The duty of the Council is simply this: we must
call for an immediate end to the fighting and WC must
call for the earliest resumption of negotiations.
My
C3ovcmmcnt pledges that it will continue its own
efforts towards the end that the voice of reason will
again be heard and the voice of the cannons will
once more be stilled.
73. The PRESIDENT
(trmdrrtttm
from
I call on the representative of Cyprus.

78. Every cruel means of war has been used,
including napalm bombs. Turkey has been in command
of the air. There has been no other Power disputing
Turkey’s domination
of the air and the seas. Cyprus
has no fleet, no air force, and no anti-aircraft guns.
Would ,anyone have thought it possible that the
international
community
would atand and watch this
crime being committed,
without turning a hair? That
would have seemed unimaginable,
particularly in the
present age, the age of the United Nations, the age
of the Charter. It is true that the League of Nations
had a Covenant, but that Covenant contained no
principles: it was merely an arrangement for keeping
the peace. At that time war had not been prohibited;
war was still considered a normal process. The Charter
brought the change that war was to be treated as
a crime and that force was not to bc used by one
country against another except in the exercise of
selfdefence. Therefore, under the Charter Turkey is
committing
a crime, because it is Rot acting in
self-defence but in naked aggression.

Rttsslun):

74. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus):
The situation
in
Cyprus-and
it is Cyprus which is really the suffering
party-is
very criticat. It is a situation that goes
beyond mere words. The salient fact-apart
from all
the other aspects-is
that WC have in Cyprus at the
present moment a Power with a military force of some
40.000 men, a Power which by reason of its mcmbcrship of a strong military alliance possesses the means
to attack a small, undefended, unassisted country,
a country that is independent,
a country that is a
Member of the United Nations, a country that is
entitled to all the rights of independence,
freedom
and territorial integrity. a country that has the right
of protection under the Charter, which rovides that
force shall not be used by one d tate against
another.

79. WC have been striving for so many years to find
a definition
of aggression. Well, hcrc it is: this is
the picture of aggression, Could this be described as
anything else but direct aggression?
80. Under paragraph S of resolution 353 (IW4), a
conference was to be held, and indeed it wus held.
But there are four paragraphs that precede paragraph 5
of that resolution. namely the paragraph that called
on Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom to enter
into negotiations for the restoration of peace in the
area and constitutional
government in Cyprus. What
did those four other paragraphs provide for? First,
there is the paragraph calling upon all States to respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus. Turkey is supposedly one of the countries
which is to cntc. rnto negotiations for the restoration
of peace in the area and was one of the guamntors-the
irony of the situation--of
the independence. territorial
integrity and security of Cyprus. Now that country is
called upon, as is every other State, to respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus.

75. If we examine all the circumstances.
we see that
the situation in Cyprus today is not merely comparable
but almost identical to the situation before the Second
World War of a rmall country that was attacked on
exactly the same grounds: the protection of a minority.
Everyone knows that those grounds were merely a
pretext for destroying that country and its indcpcndence. Any encyclopcdia-again
I must turn to an
cncyclopedia-will
ahow the real purposes that
Hitleritc
Germany had in mind when it purported
to be protecting the rights of the German minority
in Czechoslovakia.
At that time the big Powers found
it more convenient
not to oppose the aggnssordespite the fact that under the Covenant of the
League of Nations it was their obligation to protect
that small country. But they preferred to trifle with
the rights of a small country in order to appease
the aggressor. For many reasons they found it more
convenient to side with the aggressor than with the
victim.

81. We do not have to go very far to ret what
the, degree of respect Turkey has for the independence
and territorial
integrity of Cyprus-no
further than
what is happening tonight. even if we forget cvcrything
clmc.

76. But there is in the very structure of the cosmos a
power that is called the moral power: crime and
retribution.
In the case of the abandonment
of the
small country to which I have just referred, the
retribution
did come-but
it fell on all mankind,
through the Second World War.

82. What is happening tonight? I have hen before me
H cable that reached me just a littlc white a80 from
9

the Acting President
which rtatcs:

of Cyprus,

Glafcos

cvcntually annexing it, That is the programme
has existed and exists.

Cieridcs,

“Since 4.45 this morning, I4 August, Cyprus, of
half a million population,
is suffering without any
provocation
on its part, without
any notice
whatsocvcr, the cowardly attack by Turkey, a
country of 36 million, by air, by sea and by land.
You arc requested to communicate
to other
Ambassadors and Governments
and the United
Nations and express the indignation of all the people
and Government
of Cyprus at this situation and
ask for the assistance ofall pcacc-loving countries.”

that

86, What WC see today. thcrcforc, is nothing less
and nothing mote than the continuation
of that policy
now having run amuck. As 1 aaid before, this is really
bankruptcy
with regard to the whole world-the
bankruptcy of international
legal order and security,
but in this particular case it is also the bankruptcy
of the so-called Treaty of Guarantee, bccausc it is
exposed by its reality, the bankruptcy of any idea
that a guarantor is anything other than, as in the
case of Turkey,.an
aggressor under the guise of a
guarantor.

83, What is the situation that unfolds bcforc the
Security Council out of this picture? Where arc WC?
Arc WC in the days bcforc the ScCond World War?
Is there no Charter? What is the meaning of signing
the Charter? What is the meaning of having a
Charter? What is the meaning of having the United
Nations and the Security Council if we have no respect
for the principles of the Charter and if WC have no
human feeling when such a crime is committed
in
cold blood? I have no doubt that our very affable
and smiling colleague, the representative
of Turkey,
will find many ~XCU~C~ for it. Surely he will have many
~XCUSCS and many unproven stories. I can assurc
members that the Turkish Cypriots in Cyprus have
had more rights than the Greek Cypriots have had.
They have had freedom of movement all over the
island when the Greek Cypriots were prevented by
force by the Turkish Cypriots in the cxcrcisc of that
right on over 100 public roads. including
main
communication
roads. It is a strange thing that the
18 per cent minority has had such force as to prevent
the majority from moving in the island, yet that is a
fact, It has been commented
on rcpeatcdly.by
the
Secretary-General
in a number of his reports that the
Turkish
Cypriots could move everywhere-and
I
could easily quote the documents. Yet, in order not
to create trouble and in order not to USC force,
there was no effort by the Government
to free those
public roads.

87. What is the Treaty of Guarantee? What dots it
say and how can this Treaty of Guarantee remain
valid, with Turkey as a member when Turkey behaves
in this way? The two other members may nmain
guarantors, but not Turkey. The Treaty of Guarantee
clearly provides for the independence,
territorial
integrity and security of the Republic of Cyprus: it
also provides that there should bc no annexation or
union with either Greece or Turkey or any other
country, and no partition.
88. In the event of a breach of the provisions of
that Treaty. the three guarantor countries undertake
to consult together with respect to the representations
or measures necessary to ensure observance of those
provisions.
WC have not heard any invitation
by
Turkey to Greece and the United Kingdom to consider
serious representations
or measures
to cnsurc
observance of those provisions.
Article IV of the
Treaty says:
“In so far as common or concerted action may
not prove possible. each of the three guaranteeing
Powers reserves the right to take action, with
the sole aim of m-establishing
the state of affairs
created by the present Treaty.”
It speaks here of concerted action, and concerted
action is explained in the same article as **measures
&ccssary to ensure observance”.
If that concerted
action may not prove possible-which
means peaceful
representation
measures-theli
separate action is
possible, but not violation of the Charter and such
violtrtions and aggression as would create the present
situation.
Therefore
I submit that this Treaty of
Guarantee has been tom to pieces by Turkey. Now,
whether the other guarantors would like to take that
tom Treaty of Guarantee and put the pieces together
is another question, but Turkey has been not only the
aggretPor uguinst Cyprus but also the aggressor against
the Treaty of Guarantee. If the Treaty of Guarantee
had been respected. we should not have reen the
situation existing today-if
it had ken interpreted
in its real sense of representations
or other peaceful
measures for reestablishing
the situation, and not by
the use of force and aggression in violation of the
Charter.

84. Wcrc the Germans in Czechoslovakia
sufferhut?
L.ct us see what the encyclopaedia
says about that:
“They were by no means an oppressed minority,
but Hitler, conforming to Naxi grand strategy, through
Hcnlcin. insisted they were”. He actually and ofticially
naked for autonomy for the Sudetens. It is the same
thing. In Cyprus the Turkish Cypriot leadership is
prompted by Turkey in the same way as Henlein
wus prompted by Hitler, seeking under the guise of
autonomy to destroy the independence
of Czechoslovakia. In this case it is for the destruction of
the independence of Cyprus and for no other reason.
US. Turkey is not concerned with the welfare of the
Turkish Cypriots. I can assure members it is not. It is
only concerned with grabbing a part of Cyprus. That
is the clear situation that WC have to face. And it
wants to grab it how? By partitioning
it, and then
IO

89. At the present moment we have the resolution

to meet at such a late hour. It was with great
reluctance that the representative
of Turkey. fslt it
necessary to half the meetings in Geneva-and
I use
that word deliberately-talks
not negotiations.

which was adopted today. The resolution, fortunately,
in this case, provides what should huvc been provided
in the previous cease-fire. In this resolution
the
Security Council not only reafllrms resolution 3S3
(1974) in all its provisions and demands that the
par&s to the present fighting cease afl firing and
military action forthwith, but also decides to remain
s&cd of the situation and on instant call to meet
as necessary to consider what more effective measures
may be required if the cease-fire is not respected.
That is what presents a hopeful shuation. By that
pro&ton something practical must be done to enforce
the cease&c, because if it is not enforced the situation
will bc fbrthcr aggravated-and
will be perilous not
only for Cyprus but for the whole world, for I am
perfectly certain that in a world which accepts this
situation there is very slender hope for peace or
survivcrl.

94. From the very beginning of the second stage
it became apparent that the substantive probicma
which seemed to have been defined when the
Declaration was adopted were interpreted in a way
which was totally different by the signatories and
later by those who had been invited to join in the
negotiations.
The autonomy which seemed to have
been accepted cvcn at that time-according
to the
description
of the representative
of the United
Kingdom of his views of what occurred last weekapparently
was not as clearly accepted as it had
seemed from a perusal of the document
which
had been signed in Geneva. Who to believe and
what to believe?

90. I want to say only a few words with regard to
resolution 353 (1974). which is rcafftrmed. Apart from
the call for respect for the sovcrcignty of Cyprus, it
calls for a cease-fire-a
call which has not been
respected-it
demands an immediate
end to foreign
military intervention
and it requests the withdrawal
without delay of foreign military
forces in Cyprus.
Those four conditions should have been implemented
whollydr
in part at least with regard to withdrawalbefore the negotiations started. The parties should have
gone to the negotiations
with a cease-fire operating
and with immediate cessation of intervchtion and then
discussed the situation. But what happened? This is
the other salient point in this situation. WC have an
enormous country destroying open cities in violation
of all international
legal order and The Hague
Convention of 1907-bombing
open towns and civilian
populations. Not only that but we have had the other
characteristic.
again regrettably
reminding
us of
Hitler and his tactics, of ncgotating at gunpoint. It
demands at gunpoint that its terms be accepted. What
are the terms? To make a State within a State in
Cyprus: something wholly unworkable and unacccptable; that State. the Turkish State, is to be 34 per cent
of the total area, whereas the Turkish population
is
only 18 per cent. So that is another characteristic
of the arrogant attitude of Turkey. It has insisted on
both occasions to have negotiations
at gunpoint.
saying: “I will continue and intensify my aggression
against Cyprus unless you accept my terms within
so many hours”-24
or 36.

93. Reference has been made to the fact that all
the diplomatic
resources had not been exhausted.
It seems that when one is at the end of a table
where one is supposed to be sitting as a judge and
one can resort to the subterfuge of last-minute delays
it is easy to say that all diploma&
resources have
not been exhausted. It is not the same when thcsc
negotiations
have been going on, these diplomatic
means being used for over a decade while the
international
community
turned a deaf car to the
appeals of the community
which was driven to
despair in Cyprus-and
I am speaking of the Turkish
Cypriot community,
no matter what was said by
Mr. Rossides. who seems to have a much more
optimistic
view of the conditions
in which that
community was attempting to live.
96. One of the things that was already revealing
in Geneva, and which remains so today, is the fact
that. for example, the representative
of the United
Kingdom spoke-and
I shall quote his words in his
own laqguagc--of the “Greek Cypriot Government”
and the “Turkish
Cypriot community’*.
If that is
not a lapsus, it would seem to indicate a mentality
thut would explain. at least partially, the failure of
the meetings’ in Geneva. And the fact that that
was deliberately
repeated by the representative
of
Greece confirms any doubts I might still have on
that point.
97. The representative
of Greece spoke of the
Cypriot
army. I should like to ask him some
qucutions, but let me ray 1 am not expecting on
answer ut this very late hour. What is the Cypriot
army? On what basis was it established? In the breach
of what ugrcemcnts
solemnly
agreed to? In the
vic~lution of what Constitution
that had already twxn
cast to the ground und trampled upon? Was ‘it the
aumc Cypriot army of a country which is supposedly
non-tlligncd
of which u new Greek gcncml from
Athens hna just been uppointcd
commander
by
Jccrcc? I #am saying ull this to ahow you that the

91. That is the situation that the Security Council
has to meet effcctivcly in the event that Turkey apnin
does not comply.
92. The PRESIDl2NT
ttrtrrrslutio~r
$wrr
I cnll on the reptcscntcltivc of ‘I urkcy.
93.

Hwsxbtr~:

Mr.

GLCAY
(Turkey)
(irrtrrl,r[lttrtiort
jhwr
I do not wi(rh to deny the seriousness trf
the circumcltances which hilvc Icd the Security Council

Frr*rrc*h):

II

.
problems of Cyprus were not discussed in Ocncva.
The problems of Cyprus arc 60 deep! They aometimcr
rtcm from a phiiorophical approach to problem
solving, and sometimes from a lack of political
realism, but, also unfortunately, only too often, from
a l6ck of good faith. I ahall quote lomc examples.

rhould not bc in rho tituation in which wo find
ounclvc6 today.
102. For IO yoan, tho Turkirh rcpre8ontativct kn
tried to revive a system an rimilar aa possible to
that of MO. Having failed on rovcral occasions, and
having rcachod the point of no mtum wvorat timec,
those 6amc mpm6cntativos km and in Cyprus misod
tho quortion of a federal State, a State which would
enable Cyprus to remain what the Turks always
wanted it to remain. namely, a ,truly independent
State, as opposed to a temporary solution pending
udon with tho tnothor country or some voilcd form of
enosis-in other words, a rocond Amok State giving
Omcco two votes in the United Nations or enabling
it to play the dual role of a State which is part of an
alliance when it is a question of Omccc or part of
the non-aligned world When it was a question of the
Cypriot Republic, but, in any ca6c, receiving
instructions, or inspiration if tha word “inStNCtiOn6”
is not appropriate, from the 6amo 6ourcc--namely,
from Athens.
’

!#I. The representative of Orcccc spoke of Orcck
villages in the Turkish occupied tone. The rcprcscntaI/VC of Onccc spoke of an occupied zone, of Turkish
occupation, which, he raid. had grown by leaps
and bounds. I should like to ask him, whether the
Turkish villages that wore rubjugatcd, dortroyed and
made uninhabitable do not take up any apace in the
Cypriot territory? Is the occupation of those villager
not occupation because it ia a Orcck island at leant
in the eyes of the Orccks in Athens and in Cyprur?
How many times, has the’tcrritory rubjugatcd by tho
Orccks been expanded? Does geomctrys apply only
when it is a question of Greeks and not when it is a
question of Turks in Cyprus?
99. All this may explain why the Turkish negotiators
in Geneva did not consider that all the ahilly
shnllying and refusals to comply with the demands
qtipulatcd in the text accepted in Ocnovcwhich
I think all came from Orccco of the Grcckr in
Cyprus-were unimportant and could bc disregarded.
They did not consider that the essence was the
ccasc-fire, with which Turkey should comply-while
the rest. of course, could wait. However that might
bc. the 6amc Geneva Declaration rcferrcd-and this
is what I havo been leading up to-to the basic
problem, which should be paramount because it is
only on the basis of rccurity that the 6cttlcmcnt of
the substantive issues might convince the Turks that
it would realty be possible to build a lasting peace
in Cyprus and also to apply all the other provisions
of the Gcricva Declaration,

103. I would have prcfcrrcd my Omck colleague to
make no mention of the Onok mtugccs in an island
where tho Turks, in the world.6 eyes, wcrc living
as rcfttgces but did not attract much attention at a
timo when the situation on rho island was no thmat
to world peace and tranquillity, AB far as the pcacc
and tmnquility of the Turks was concerned, them
was always some way to settle the problem. It was
only when they decided that the Turks 6hould no
longer live as mfugccs in their own country that the
problem reached it6 present state of acuteness.

100. And now to return to what occutrcd In Geneva
last week, this time 1 think the game was, on the one
hand, non-application of the Geneva Declaration as
a whole, and. on the other, r&sal to discuss the
aubstuncc. Mr.’ Clcrides began by refusing to hold
talks with the guarantor Powers as ouch, because
his personal interpretation of the Declaration
cnablcd him to adopt this deviant. approach. And yet
if Mr. Clcrides was then, it was at the invitation
of those Powers, it seems to mo.
101. Mr. Clcridcs-unless it was the reprcscntativc
of Greece-requested a return to the 1960 agreement,
which by the way implies that he had violated that
ugrccment. But the Constitution can take it; whenever
the violators of tho Constitution find it to their
advantage to do so, they revive it and it ccascs to
be a dead letter. However, in 1960 the Constitution
included a number of provisions which, had they
been applied-and I am only too willing to bclicvc
Mr. Rossidcs when he 6ays the intention was to
npply them in good faith-Gould have meant WC
12

104, The mpnscntativc ofC3mccc hen raid that the
Turks were overreaching themselves in claiming
34 per cent of the territory as the basis for establishing
an autonomous administration to be set up as the
basis of a viable constitution for Cyprus. 1 believe
1 can explain this figure. which may seem strange to
those who am unfamiliar with the Cypriot problem
-and CM knows then arc many who do not
undcntand the problem of Cypnrs in general or in
detail. Before they wem dispossessed of their land
in Cyprus during the last 10 yean, and before they
were forced to take refuge in the enclaves, the Turks
owned 34 per cent, at least 34 per cent, of the land
and of the villages when they made a living by
practising agriculture. The land rcgistrics of the
municipalities, if they have not been changed or
falsified in recent years, arc evidence of this. But this
certainly is not the mason for the failure of the
negotiations. The failum was due to the basic
philosophical concept, the mfusal to mcognizc that
the Turkish Cypriots have been and should remain
masters of their island to the 6amc degree as the
.
Circcks.
105, I will not go into the details of the nc~tiations,
because I do not feel that we arc competent to.do
so. I must, however, emphasitc that if during

JO days in Ocncva WC have only begun to consider
a constitution for Cyp~s, this is hardly an accident.
The rcprcrcntativc in C&nova of the Orcck community
of Cyprus played a double role which is quite ,famfffar
to us. Whenever attempts wcrc made to reach a
solution to the problem of Cyprus, WC wcrc faced
with a strange situation, Whenever the Orccks from
Qrcccc seemed to bc entertaining the idea of a
constitution that l ppcarcd suitable to us, they would
rtatc that unfortunately, the Greek Cypriots rcfbscd
to heed the advice given them by the 0rccks from
Qrccccwho
arc represented by 650 offlccn in
Cyprus: 8omctimcs there arc more, but at the present
time there arc bs0 of them, and 5omctfmcs they have
the nerve to go in for coups d’Otat. At other times
when there was hope for some y3rccmcnt bctwccn
the rcprcscntatfvc8 of the Oreok Cypriots and the
Turkish Cypriots, Athens would find that the Turks
wcrc going too far and what was bcfng asked
of the Greek Cypriots was not acceptable,
and they would rgtec. This scorns to be the kind of
earns that was being played in &nova, It went on
for 10 days. Proposals were made, and the Greek
rcprc8entativcs raid they wanted 36 hour8 to study
them bcforc rubmftting a rc ly, and my Clovcrnmcnt
r&sod, and so the ncBotPations wcrc suspended.
Do you know what happened their? Wolf, what
happened was that the Clreck Fore&n Minister made
a atatemcnt to the press immediately afterwards,
raying that the Turkish proposal was inadmissible
because it was contrary to the 8pirft and the letter
of the 1960 agreements. 1 wonder whether he had to
waft 36 hours to issue that reply. which was
fmmcdiatciy forthcoming from the Oreek reprcscntativc a8 8oon a8 the nc~tfationr wcrc 8uspcnded.
This ir of course just an indication, an indication
WCthink important for the fLturc of the negotiations,
which WChope will continue.

indcpcndcncc, the oovcrcignty and the tcrrftorial
integrity of Cyprus, as well as to its freely-chosen
status, the 8tatus of a non-aligned country. The
Turkish prcscnce-and I have repeated this many
timer hem-has been and rcmafns today the only
guarantee of that status, or of any other status
-why not a neutral ttatus on the Austrian model?
Anything is possible in Cyprus-anything-but
with
one proviso: that the Turkish Cypriots must participate
in any status under conditions of equality and oecurfty.
Only such conditions can ensure them, aficr IS years
of expcrfcnce-rathcr regrettable experience-a truly
federal system.
108. In reply to Mr. Rossidcs I must tell him once
again that, personally, I do not ncognizc his right
to speak on behalf of the Turkish community. That
rayf;;;ity
has never been represented in the United
*
109. This is ail that I would have to say if he
had not made certain comments which require a very
brief reply. I can make this reply in five minutes.
110. Fint of all, I rhould like to; mention his
insistence-contrary to ail logic and to all hfstorfcrli
and political reality--on speaking of a “minority”
while refer&# to the profound nature of a conflict
and the diff~cuitfes we Turks arc having in finding
a solution. I rhould have been very pleased to
discover so late in history and so early this
morning that Mr. Rossfdcs and his administration
finally bciievc that the principle of pum
sum
scn*unrkr fr ucrosanct, because they rtatcd that we
had violated certain arranaemcnts or certain treaties,
certain constitutional provisions, which apparently had
been unilaterally denounced and considered as so
many rcraps of paper-following
Hitler’s cxempie,
which he has rcferrcd to so ofien today-by
Archbishop Makarios.

106. Much has been made of the non-alignment of
Cyprus, to which my areek collcaguc seems very
much attached, That non-alignment is hardly
compatible with two basic sftions taken by the
Oreeks from Cfrcccc and t I?c Clrccks in Cyprus,
Filrt of all, in order for the Orcck Cypriot8 and
Cyprus as a whole arc to become a truly non-aligned
State. the army of that island should no longer be
under the command of a Power which is, juridically
speaking, foreiOn to that island. As re~rds the
withdrawal of forces, the representative of Greece
used the word5 “together with the Turkish army.
ARer a presence of 13 years, I thank the rcprcsentative of Greece for his @enerosfty. However, I notice
incidentally that nothing is said about the tremendous
flghtfng potential that has been created in Cyptus
by Oreece, by all the Greeks, in violation of all
kgaiity.

I Il. In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that if the
appeals contained in paragraph 3 of the resolution
just adopted by the Council are really considered
by Cfrcccc and by the representative of the Greek
community in Cypnrs with all the seriousness called
for by negotiation84 emphasfzc the word “negotfatfons”-rather
than as delaying tactics or a refusal
to deal with the basic problems-then my Government
will be very happy to comply with this resolution.
112. The PRESIDENT mmskutknr ,frorrr Rmsim):
Since thcrc arc no further names on the fist of
speakers, I should like to speak in my capacity as
representative of the UNION
OF SOVlET
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
113. The Council has met urgently at this late hour
in order to consider egafn the very dangerous situation
which has arisen in Cyprus. The Geneva negotiations
have failed. Military operations have resumed on
the island, and they have claimed further vicrfm(r

107. As regards thz fbture status of Cyptus, despite
the fact that certain circumstances have compelled
us (0. place troops on the island, I once wafn
solemnly state my country’8 firm attachment 10 the
13

and caused further aufforing to the Cypriot people
and Turthcr destruction of property, Tho extremely
dangerous development
of cvcnts both for the fate
of the Cypriot people and for the cause of peace
has demonstrated
the complete failure of the efforts
of those who havo striven to demobilize
the Council
and to condemn it to inactivity
on the pretext
that on Cyprus all is peaceful, the situation
is
normal, the cease-fire is generally being observed
and even that progress has been made towards the
cstablishmont of peace.

Security
Council
10 huh the intervention
and
immediately
withdraw their forces and all military
personnct from the territory of Cyp~s, but, on the
contrary, are conrinuing to expand the intervention
with the ctcor aim of keoptng their forces on the
island for an indefinite period. Steps are being taken
to partition the Republic of Cyprus on the pretext
of establishing a so-called security zone and setting
up two administrations
in Cyprus, AII this is being
done with the knowledge of the principal NATO
countries. Whereas in the formal meetings of the
Council they make a show of speaking against and
voting against ‘aggression
and in favour of the
indcpendcnco
of Cyprus and the restoration
of
constitutionalgovernment,
outside the formal meetings
of tho Council they object to proposals for the
Council to take truly effective measures to defend the
independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
of Cypnrs. This places a serious international
responsibility
upon them towards Ihe United Nations
and the entire world.
.

114. Despite the threo resolutions adopted by the
Council on Cyprus, the situation in Cyprus has in
no way improved,
but, rather, has becomo even
more complex. As the Soviet delc#ation has already
pointed out at previous meetings of the Security
Council, the Council, as a result of the actions of
certain circles, has not only been unable thus far to
ensure implementation
of resolution
353 (19741,
adopted 24 days ago. but is now facing a situation
which requires the adoption of more resolute, more
urgent and more effcctivo measures for the immediate
implementation
of all tho provisions of that resolution,
which Is the basis both for putting an end to foreign
military
intcrvenlion
in Cyprus and for a political
settlement. Not a singlo one of the basic provisions
of that resolution is being imptomcnted;
the fighting
has not only not ceased, it has resumed on an even
broader scale. Foreign military intervention
against
a sovereign State. tho Republic of Cypnrs, which is
a Member of the United Nations and a non-aligned
country, is continuing and expanding, Not only have
foreign forces not been withdrawn from the island,
but their numbers
are increasing.
The military
occupation of the territory of Cyprus is expanding.
.
11% The lawfit Government
of the Republic of
Cypnts. headed by President Makarios,
and all its
institutions
continue to be unable to function or to
exercise full authority throughout the island. As has
already been observed, the burning question continues
to be whether or not tho Republic of Cyprus, tr
Member of the United Nations, is an independent
sovereign Stare,

118. As it once ugain considers the Cyprus question
as an urgent matter rind under conditions in which
hostilities have been resumed. tho Council must also
take into account tho demands of the non-aligned
States Mcmbcrn of the United Nations. They constitute
the overwhelming
mdority of the membership of the
Organizalion.
In the declaration
adopted by those
countries on 6 August, they appealed for the immediate
and full implementation
of resolution
353 (1974)
und emphasized that
“delay in the withdrawal from the Republic of
Cyprus of all foreign military personnel poses a
direct threat to international
peace and security
and to the sttkbility of the eastern Mediterranean
region”.
119. Consequentfy, the withdrawal of foreign forces
and military
personnel from the territory of the
Republic of Cyprus is the key to the solution of the
problem
bccuusc
the implementation
of this
requirement can ensure peace, security and territorial
integrity
for Cyprus. This alone will ensure the
maintenance of that coumry’y sovereignty, and the
countries of the eastern Mediterranean
region and atl
those who cherish the cause of Cyprus and the cause
of peace will then be able to live in peace without
anxiety over the possibility of the outbreak of a new
military conflict, the emergence of a new hotbed of war
which might easily spread fur beyond the borders of
that smut) island.

I 16. Events confirm the correctness of the evaluation
made in the statcmeht of the Soviet Government
to the effect that certain NATO circles are trying
to put nn end to tho existence of an independent
Cyprus by means of direct military
intervention.
Thcsc circles arc making the independent statehood
and territoriat integrity of Cyprus an object of cynicat
bargaining for the purpose of strengthening
their
military
and strategic
positions
in the eastern
Mediterranean.
Events have shown that they are trying
to present the world with a fait accompli in the
purtitioning of Cyprus.

120. The Security Council must urgently put an end
lo all outside intcrfercnce in the internal affuirs of
Cyprus and ensure tho immediate
withdrawal of ntl
foreign forces from the islund.

117, The States which are perpetrating
military
intervention against the sovereign Republic of Cyprus
have not only litiled to hecil the rppcnl~ of the

121. To&y
in the Security Council WC arc ell
witnesses to the fuilurc of the two Geneva confcrenccs
concerning Cyprus. No mutter how many uttcmpts ure
14

which the Soviet Union proposed for adoption in the
Council. We rinctrcly hope thart the rcprcsentollivcs
of the non-permanent
members of the Council will
fight more actively for implementation
of the provlsions of the declaration
adopted by the group of
non-aligned COUntriCS.

made to convince us by those who declaimed at
this tablo about the inactivity of the Council and its
rcfliral to take effective measures to implement
resolution 353 (1974) on the pretext that success had
bean achieved in Ciencva, we again emphasire the
argument advanced by the Soviet Oovcmment
on
28 July on the subject of the Cleneva negotiations.
The statement of the Soviet Clovcmmcnt noted:

12% In supporting the independence,
sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Cyprus and the status of the
Republic as A non-aligned State, the Soviet Union is
guided by considerations
of principle. These derive
from the very essence of Soviet foreign policy-a
policy of repulsing aggression and protecting
the
lawful rights of all pcopies, both great and small, a
policy of peace and international
detente. Those who
are striving to maintain an independent Cyprus and to
guarantee peace and security in that region can count
on the understanding and co-operation of the Soviet
Union.

“Any decision which was not in conformity
with
the Interests of the Cypriot people could only ICAd
to further aggravation of the situation and to fresh
conflicts.” [g///JW.l
122, I do not think that anyone here today would
dare to dispute this statement. The collapse of the
Clcnava negotiations is the direct result of attempts
to solve the Cyprus question within the narrow circle
of NATO, That approach proved to bc completely
Ill-founded.
It is contrary to the interests of the
independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
of cypnls.

126. The proposal by the Soviet Union-contained,
you will recall. in its draft resolution iS///.tY/i-is
still before the members of the Council. As proposed
by the delegation of the Soviet Union, the Council
should again consider the adoption
of effective
measures to guarantee the independence
of Cyprus
And the immediate
withdrawal of all foreign forces
And military personnel present in Cyprus in ViOiatiOn
independence
And territorial
of its sovereignty,
integrity.

AS

123. The second reason for the falIurc of the Geneva
negotiations is the disregard for the demands of all
peace-loving
States that all measures be taken
immediately
for the implementation
of resolution 3S3
(1974) in its entirety.
Now we have to observe
once again that, not only has time been lost, but it
has also become necessary to enlist the assistance
of the Security Council,
which should actively
intervene in the prevailing
situation
and attempt
finally to achieve immediate
implementation
of
resolution 353 (1974).

127. Although it voted for the resolution just adopted
by the Council, because of the obvious need for its
speedy adoption, the Soviet delegation wishes to state
that it would have preferred a stronger resolution
providing for more effective measures. The Soviet
delegation said this also at today’s informal meeting
of members of the Council. The Soviet Union firmly
advocates Complete implementation
of resolution 353
(1974): it favours immediate and complete impiementation of ell parts And provisions of that rcaolution.
As has ‘already been stated and agreed. we rcscrvc
the right to submit proposals along these lines at a
later stage.

124. We note with gnat satisfaction that today’s
~!iOlUtiOn. while not sufflCiCntly strong, WAS adopted
by all IS members of the Council. This calls for A
greater tale for the Council in settling the Cyprus
question. The Council should take the settlement of
this question into its own hands. Attcmpts.to deal with
this matter within the narrow circle of NATOcountries
have been a complete failure. In this conncxion, among
other mcasurcs, it is urgently necessary and advisable
to dispatch to Cyprus a mission composed of members
of the Council: the Soviet Union continues to insist on
this. More effective action on the part of the Council
is also being demanded by the overwhelming
majority
of States Members
of the United
Nations--the
powcrRt1 group of non=aligned
countries.
The
declaration
of those countries,
to which I have
already rcferrcd. states:

128. And now, AS PRESIDENT,
representative of Cyprus.

I call

on the

129. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): I shall try not to
take up too much of the Council’s time, but I must
reply to certain statements made by the rcprcscntativc
of Turkey.

“The tragic situation of Cyprus is A grave warning
to all non-aligned
COUntfiCs and catis for their
united action. The thrcnt to the independence And
security of one non.nligncd country is u thrcut to
the security of all of them.”

130. When Turkey invaded Cyprus on 20 July, its
Prime Minister issued a statement to the effect th:rt
Its pUrFOsC WAS COmplctCly pcACCfUl. thut cvcryonu
should keep quite calm because ifs only aim was to
rc-catnblish the constitutionality
of C‘ppru~. Of conr%C,
1 am not suying that WP bclicvcd thut rrultcment for
a moment. But Ict us (rce whlrt wus the Jcg~cr of
good faith of our neighbour Turkey in i\$uing that
statement.
It insisted that its conGcI.g+ UI*S ubovc

This is absolutely true, However, this could huvc been
avoided through the timely adoption of the mcasurcs
proposed by those countries. including the mcusurct
IS

.
”

all rhc rctum of constitutionality,
in respect of the
coup and Archbishop
Makarios,
liut that it was
acting also out of its concern that the situation that
had caused the withdrawal of the Turklsh Cypriots
from the Government
and the Council of Ministers
should bc returned to normal.

as a whole. WC coma here to seek protection. No
other protection has come to Cyprus durlnjg these
two weeks, because Cyprus does not belong to any
military
alliance. That is the proof of its non=
alignment. The non-aligned countries do not have an
army, nor do they have military pacts that would
enable them to come to the rescue of Cyprus by
force. Is that why Cyprus is being torn to pieces
and, at the same time, being told that it is not
non-aligned? That is adding insult to injury.

131. Yet, at the meeting of 10 August in Geneva,
when the Greek Cypriots proposed that there should
be a blcommunal
Council of Ministers with proportionate rcprcscntation
for the Turkish minority,
the
Turkish aide rcjcctcd that proposal. They rejected
the proposal because they wanted a geographical
division of the territory as a means towards partition,
with nil the disastrous consequences that that would
entail for the people of Cyprus. That shows the
remarkably
bad faith of Turkey. lit fact, it did not
accept a return to constitutionality.
In fact, it did not
invade Cyprus with peaceful aims. On the contrary,
its aim was the destruction of the independence of
Cyprus, the destruction of the Treaty of Guarantee,
the dcstmction of every treaty and every agrcemcnt
cntcrcd into by Turkey
in respect of Cyprus, It
rcfuscd to comply with the first cease-fire and the
second cease-fire. both of which it had accepted.
Instead of beginning
to withdraw
its forces, it
brought in even larger forces, until it now has
about 40.000 men on. that little island: and it is
constantly bringing in arms, tanks, and so on, for the
purpose of carrying on a war against the people of
Cyprus. And when I say “the people of Cyptus”,
I mean all the people of Cyprus. for the Turkish
Cypriots arc also suffering from this war.

135, Cyptus has followed a policy consistent with its
principles, which arc the principles of the Charter.
It has %llowed a policy which has always been
constructive
towards peace, towards world understanding and towards the progress of humanity in the
right dircctlon, which is not war and which is not
the use of force, but the very opposite of that-in
other words, everything
that is entailed
in the
concept of non-alignment.
136. The PRESIDENT
~trrrnslrtbn jhrnt
I call on the nprcsentative
of Greece.

Rttssiun):

137. Mr. CARAYANNJS
(Greece): I am not going to
take much of the Council’s time at this late hour.
My Turkish colleague made several refercnccs to my 1
statement. I do not really think there is any need to
answer him. His statements differ from mine because
he has different policies from mine, and his position
is well known to all members of the Council, just as
my position is well known,
138. 1 shall confine myself to replying to what he
said about the Geneva conference by quoting the
following from a dispatch of Agcncc France Pressc
dated today:

132. The real purpose of the war is the aggrandizcment of Turkey through a colonialist,
imperialist
policy in respect of Cyprus. That is the reality.
133, The ~rcprcsentativc of Turkey, in saying that
Cyprus is not non-aligned. is entirely wrong. It is not
for him to decide whethcror not Cyprus is non-aligned.
It is non-aligned
in its policy and it has been so
all along in the United Nations. It is not the few
oficcrs
from Grcccc in the National
Guard that
dctcrminc anything bccausc the National Guard does
not formulate the policy of Cyprus.

“In Geneva it looked as though Turkey had decided
to USC military methods in the diplomatic field”.‘
139. I should like to refer to only one point in the
statement of the representative
of Turkey.
In my
statement I referred only incidentally to the 34 percent
of the territory of Cyprus which Turkey is demanding
for the autonomous
part of Cyprus. In thinking of
Cyprus, WC do not think in lcrms of percentages.
Turkey of course does. Rut t did not quite understand
the point he was making when he said that he is
intercstcd in the Turkish populatlon of the i3land. Is
he interested in terms of humon beings or in terms
of real estate?

134. 1 believe we have had a discussion of the whole
problem here. whcrcas what is nebdcd is to stop the
fighting in Cyprus so that thcrc can bc cool discussion.
It seems to mc that cool and cffcctive discussion
is not possible in the Geneva confwcncc of the
guarantors
for obvious reasons wbch have been
demonstrated hcrc and in Cyprus. Thcrcforc. we wish
to have the United Nations more involved in this
problem and in its solution. Conncqucntly,
we would
gladly set a mission from the United Nutions go
to Cyprus. examine the situation and take a grcatcr
intcrcst in the solution of the problem.
Indeed,
Cyprus is a Mcmbcr of the United Nations and
ltr guamntce and protection is the United Nations
it(rctf--the Security Council and the United Nations

140. The PRESIDENT
(trctttslrtth
frortt Rtrssktrtj:
I call on the rcprcscntutive of Turkey.
141, Mr. OLCAY (Turkey):
I shall bc very brief.
In answer to the question put by my coflcaguc from
Grcccc. I would say: both.
142. in answer to Mr. Rosnldcs, I would again request
him to refrain. if possible. from speaking on behalf
I6

of the Turkish Cypriots, Secondly. I would say that
past history, as well as the history of the last month,
has been distorted by him this morning. I would
therefore invite ull members to check his statements
against more tritstworlhy sources.
143. The PRESIDENT
~trmsltrrlttn
,/htttr Rttssitrn):
I call on the representative of Cyprus.
144. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): With respect to the
statement made by the representative of Turkey that
he does not permit me to speak on behalf of the Turkish
Cypriots. I think he is not entitled to dictate who
rcprcscnts the Turkish Cypriots, unless he claims that
he rcprcscnts them. The Turkish Cypriots arc part of
the island of Cyprus und I can speak on behalf of the
bulk of the Turkish Cypriots but not on behalf of the
agents of Turkey. I know that the bulk of the Turkish
Cypriots have also suffered from these actions of
Turkey. though obviously not to the same extent.
145. I should like to point out also that the rcprcscntativc of Turkey seems to dispute the accuracy of
my statement.
Does he dispute the bad faith of
Turkey in speaking about constitutionality.
pretending
to support constitutionality.
but rejecting anything that

is constitutional,
bringing catastrophe and upheaval
and havoc to the island? Does he dispute the Gad hlth
of Turkey in agreeing to the cease-fire and then refusing
to comply with the ccasc=firc in spite of an express
agreement? Dots hc deny the bad faith of Turkey in
accepting the cease-fire of the United Nations and in
violating it at the same time? Dots he deny the fact that
Turkey was trying to negotiate under the threat and
use of military forcc-uprcccdcntcd
conduct since the
time of Hitler? Does he deny these facts? Dots he
deny that Turkey brought about the breakdown of the
negotiations by that threat of the USC of force, and
precisely by that threat-”
Unless you give me a reply
within so many hours I am going to attack the island
with my superior force”? Does he deny the inhumanity
of this conduct? Does he deny the violation of the
Charter in its every aspect by that conduct? If he denies
these things. then of course WC know where Turkey
stands.
146. The PRESIDENT
~trrrtr.drrlttn
jhtr
I call on the representative of Turkey.
147.

Mr. OLCAY

(Turkey):

Tlw tttcvtitt~

..

I do.

R~SC crt 6 a.m.

Rttssirtr):
