General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

18

35/43.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

35/112.

Peaceful use of nuclear energy for economic and
social development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implernentation of the
Declaration,
Recal/ing its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 3161 (XXVIII) of 14 Decernber 1973, 3291 (XXIX)
of 13 Decernber 1974, 31 /4 of 21 October 1976, 32/7 of
1 November 1977 and 34/69 of 6 December 1979, in
which it, inter afia, affirmed the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Reca//ing, in particular, its resolution 3385 (XXX) of
12 November 1975, on the admission ofthe Comoros to
membership in the United Nations, in which it reaffirmed the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago, composed
of the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte
and Mohéli,
Taking note of the talks opened between the Government of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros
and the Government of the French Republic,
Convinced that a just and lasting solution of the question of Mayotte is to be found in respect for the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoro Archipelago,
Bearing in mind the decisions of the Organization of
African Unity, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of the lslamic Conference
concerning this question,
l. Reaffirms the sovereignty of the Islamic Federal
Republic of the Comoros over the island of Mayotte:
2. Invites the Governments of the Comoros and
France to continue the talks, with a view to rapidly finding for the question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
a just solution in conformity with the relcvant resolutions of the United Nations:
3. Welcomes the initiative taken at Freetown by the
Organization of African Unity 16 to convene at Moroni
befare the thirty-seventh ordinary session of the Council
of Ministers its Committee of Seven charged with the
question, with a view to discussing with the Comorian
Government appropriate rneasures likely to speed up
the settlernent of the question of Mayotte:
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to follow developments concerning this question,
in conjunction with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, and to report thereon to
thc General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the ítem -:ntitled "Question of thc
Comorian island of Mayotte ...

74th plenary meeting
28 November /980
"'~"e A/35/463 and Cnrr. ]_ anne,
(XXX Vi.

l. rc,olution CM/Res.no

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the I nternational
Atornic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the
year 1979, 17
Reaffirming thc principies and provisions of its resolution 32/50 of 8 December 1977 on the p~aceful use of
nuclear energy for economic and social development,
Recalling the relevant paragraphs of the Final Docurnent of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assern bly, 18 the first special session devoted to disarrnament,
Recalling a/so its decision. as contained in its resolution 34/63 of 29 November 1979, to convene an international conference for thc prornotion of international
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in
principie by 1983,
Recal/ing the role of the lnternational Atornic Energy
Agency set out in resolution 34/63,
Welcoming the establishment, by the Board of Governors of the lnternational Atornic Energy Agency, ofthe
Cornrnittee on Assurances of Supply,
Expressing the conviction that progress in the work of
the Cornmittee on Assurances of Supply will greatly
contribute to the success of the aforernentioned conference,
Recognizing the need for the tirnely initiation of preparations for the conference,
l. Decides to convene in 1983 the United Nations
Conference for the Prornotion of International Cooperation in thc Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy;
2. Decides in this regard to take account of the results of the work of the Committee on Assurances of
Supply:
3. Further decides to establish a Preparatory Cornrnittee for the United Nations Conference for the Prornotion of lnternational Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy, cornposed of seventy Member
States and, on an equal footing, other Member States
which may express their interest in participating in the
work of the Comrnittee, and requests the President of the
General Assernbly to appoint the rnernbers of the Comrnittee, in accordance with the principie of equitable
geographical representation, not latcr than I July
1981:
4. Requests the Prcparatory Cornrnittee to hold, at
Vienna, an organizational session not exceeding one
week in length during the second half of 1981, primarily
for the purpose of preparing its programrne of work,
and to subrnit its report thereon to the General Assernbly at its thirty-sixth session;
5. Invites the I nternational A tornic Energy Agency
to fulfil its appropriate role within the scope of its responsibilities at all stages of preparation of the Conference. and during the Conference itself, by contributing to the discussion of relevant issues, by providing
technical data and docurnentation as needed, particularly in relation to the progress of the work of the
"lnternational 1\tomic Energy Agency, The Annual Reportfor /979
(Austria. J uly 1980); transmitted to the members of the General
Assembly by a note of thc Sccrctary-General (A /J5 / _H,5).
"Resclution S-10 1 2.
