III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

35

(XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3471 (XXX) of
11 December 1975, in which it called upon all States
to consider and respect the continent of Africa, including the continental African States, Madagascar and
other islands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weaponfree zone,
Recognizing that implementation of the Declaration
on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity in 196423 would contribute to the security of all the African States and to
the goals of general and complete disarmament,
Bearing in mind that the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity
at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at Port Louis
from 2 to 6 July 1976, expressed grave con~ern over
the continuing collaboration between cert~m ~t~tes
Members of the United Nations and the racist regime
of South Africa, particularly in the military and nuclear
fields, thereby enabling it to acquire nuclear-weapon
capability,
Concerned that further development of South Africa's
military and nuclear-weapon potential would _frustr~te
efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones m Afnca
and elsewhere as an effective means for preventing the
proliferation, both horizontal and ver~ic~l, ?f nuclear
weapons and for contributing to the ehmmatlon of the
danger of a nuclear holocaust,
l. Reaffirms its call upon all States to respect and
abide by the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa;
2. Further reaffirms its call upon all States to consider and respect the continent of Africa, including ~e
continental African States, Madagascar and other ISlands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free
zone;
3. Appeals to all States not to deliver to South
Africa or place at its disposal any e9uipment or fissio!lable material or technology that will enable the racist
regime of South Africa to acquire nuclear-weapon capability;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render all necessary assistance to the Organization of African Unity
towards the realization of its solemn Declaration on
the Denuclearization of Africa, in which the African
Heads of State and Government announced their readiness to undertake, in an international treaty to be concluded under the auspices of the United Nations, not
to manufacture or acquire control of nuclear weapons;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa".
96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976

prchensive study of the question of nuclear-weaponfree zones in all its aspects,

31/70.

6. Conveys the comprehensive study and the report of the Secretary-General to the Governments concerned, to interested international organizations and to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament for
the further consideration and measures that they may

Comprehensive study of the question of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3261 F (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, by which it decided to undertake a corn2s Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, docwnent A/5975.

Recalling further its resolution 34 72 (XXX) of 11
December 1975, by which it, inter alia, commended the
special report containing the comprehensive study24 to
the attention of all Governments, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and other relevant international
organizations and invited them to transmit to the
Secretary-General before 30 June 1976 such views,
observations and suggestions on the special report as
they might deem appropriate,
Having considered the special report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament containing
the comprehensive study of the question of nuclearweapon-free zones in all its aspects prepared by the
Ad Hoe Group of Qualified Governmental Experts for
the Study of the Question of Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zones,:! 4
Having noted the comments made by States members
of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
concerning the study, 25
Considering that the question of nuclear-weapon-free
zones is included in the provisional agenda of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament as adopted
on 15 August 1968,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
containing the views, observations and suggestions on
the special report by Governments, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America;26

2. Expresses once more its appreciation to the Ad
Hoe Group of Qualified Governmental Experts for the
Study of the Question of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
for the preparation of the study and conveys its thanks
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and other relevant international organizations
for the assistance they have given for the preparation
of the study;
3. Reiterates its conviction that the establishment
of nuclear-weapon-free zones can contribute to the
security of members of such zones, to the prevention
of proliferation of nuclear weapons and to the goals
of general and complete disarmament;
4. Draws the attention of Governments to the comprehensive study and the views, observations and suggestions on that study contained in the report of the
Secretary-General;
5. Expresses the hope that the comprehensive study
and the views, observations and suggestions on that
study will enhance further efforts of Governments concerning nuclear-weapon-free zones and will be of assistance to States interested in the establishment of such
zones;

24 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27A (A/10027 /
Add.I). annex I.
25 Ibid., annex II.
26 A/3 l /189 and Add.1 and '.!.

Geom-al Assembly-Thirty-first Session

36

deem appropriate within their respective fields of competence.
96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976
31/71. Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it overwhelmingly commended the
idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also its resolution 3474 (XXX) of 11
December 1975 in which it recognized that the establishment of a n~clear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East enjoys wide support in the region,
Mindful of the prevailing political situation in the
region and the potential danger emanating therefrom
that would be further aggravated by the introduction of
nuclear weapons in the area,
Concerned that the lack of any appreciable progress
in the direction of the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone, in the present atmosphere in the
region, will further complicate the situation,
Convinced that progress towards the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East will
greatly enhance the cause of peace both in the region
and in the world,
Conscious of the particular nature of the problems
involved and the complexities inherent in the situation
in the Middle East, and the urgency of keeping the
region free from involvement in a ruinous nuclear-arms
race,
1. Expresses the need for further action to generate
momentum towards realization of the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East;
2. Urges all parties directly concerned to adhere
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 27 as a means of promoting this objective;
3. Reiterates its recommendation that the Member
States referred to in paragraph 2 above, pending the
establishment of the nuclear-weapon-free zone under
an effective system of safeguards, should:
(a) Proclaim solemnly and immediately their intention to refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing, acquiring or in any other way possessing nuclear
weapons and nuclear explosive devices and from permitting the stationing of nuclear weapons in their territory or the territory under their control by any third
party;
( b) Refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from any other
action that would facilitate the acquisition, testing or
use of such weapons, or would be in any other way
detrimental to the objective of the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region under an effective system of safeguards;
( c) Agree to place all their nuclear activities under
the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
4. Reaffirms the recommendations to the nuclearweapon States to refrain from any action contrary to
27 Resolution 23 73

( XXII) , annex.

the purpose of the present resolution and the objective
of establishing, in the region of the Middle East, a
nuclear-weapon-free zone under an effective system of
safeguards and to extend their co-operation to the
States of the region in their efforts to promote this
objective;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to explore the possibilities of making progress towards the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the area of the Middle
East;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of
the Middle East".
96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976
31/72.

Convention on the Prohibition of Military
or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3264 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3475 (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
Recalling its resolution 1722 (XVI) of 20 December
1961, in which it recognized that all States have a deep
interest in disarmament and arms control negotiations,
Determined to avert the potential dangers of military
or any other hostile use of environmental modification
techniques,
Convinced that broad adherence to a convention on
the prohibition of such action would contribute to the
cause of strengthening peace and averting the threat
of war,
Noting with satisfaction that the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament has completed and transmitted to the General Assembly, in the report on its
work in 1976,28 the text of a draft Convention on the
Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of
Environmental Modification Techniques, 29
Noting further that the Convention is intended to
prohibit effectively military or any other hostile use
of environmental modification techniques in order to
eliminate the dangers to mankind from such use,
Bearing in mind that draft agreements on disarmament and arms control measures submitted to the
General Assembly by the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament should be the result of a process of
effective negotiations, and that such instruments should
duly take into account the views and interests of all
States so that they can be adhered to by the widest
possible number of countries,
Bearing in mind that article VIII of the Convention
makes provision for a conference to review the operation of the Convention five years after its entry into
force, with a view to ensuring that its purposes and
provisions are being realized,
A !so bearing in mind all relevant documents and
negotiating records of the Conference of the Committee
28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27).
29 Ibid., Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27), vol. I, annex I.
