S/PV.7211

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7211th meeting

Wednesday, 25 June 2014, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pankin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Poroli
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Sana
Mr. Tatham
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

14-44389 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1444389*

S/PV.7211

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing by
Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Permanent Representative
of Australia, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance with paragraph
18 (h) of that resolution. The present report covers the
period from 20 March to 24 June, during which time
the Conunittee held one informal meeting and two
informal informal meetings, and conducted additional
work using the no-objection procedure envisaged in
paragraph 15 of the guidelines for the conduct of the
Committee’s work.
I would like to start with the final report on the
Panel of Experts’ current mandate. The Council
received the report on 9 June and it is now available in
all United Nations languages in document S/2014/394.
As always, the report includes observations that
Member States may find useful for guidance in
implementing the measures in resolutions 1737 (2006),
1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010), and I would
like remind everyone of the importance of conveying
the report to the relevant sanctions implementation
authorities back home. The Committee itself had the
opportunity to discuss the report with the Panel on
2 June, as required in paragraph 2 of resolution 2105
(2013), and will consider whether any follow-up action
by the Committee is necessary, taking into account the
report’s conclusions.
In its report, the Panel again notes that some States
have indicated a degree of uncertainty as to whether

2/11

25/06/2014

Council resolutions concerning Iran remain fully in
force, as negotiations between Iran and the permanent
five members of the Security Council and Germany
enter a critical stage. I would like to emphasize once
again that only the Security Council itself can alter the
sanctions measures it has applied. Until there is a new
resolution of the Council on the issue, the measures in
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010) remain in full effect. The Committee stands
ready to provide guidance to Member States on the
application of the Council’s measures to any transaction
and urges them to report any transaction they believe
contravenes the measures to the Committee.
In that regard, I would like to advise the Council
that the Committee received a report from a Member
State during the current reporting period, on 31 March,
of the interdiction in the Red Sea by its naval forces
of a cargo of conventional arms, including rockets,
mortars and ammunition, which were allegedly loaded
onto a vessel in the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas. The
Panel of Experts, at the Committee’s direction, carried
out inspections of the seized arms on 28 and 29 April,
and on 16 June submitted its report to the Committee.
The Committee met this week, on 23 June, to discuss
this report with the Panel and is now considering its
response. Similarly, the Committee wrote to Iran on
27 March in relation to a carbon-fibre interdiction that
I referred to in my two previous reports, seeking Iran’s
comments. Regrettably, Iran has not yet provided a
response.
On a happier note, cooperation between relevant
Security Council’s sanctions committees, such as that
of the 1737 Committee with the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF), has continued. The Council will recall
that on 18 November of last year, the Chairs of six
Committees and the President of the FATF held a joint
open briefing for States Members of the United Nations.
On 30 April, the FATF President informed me that he
had organized a meeting for 22 June between the FATF
and financial experts from the sanctions expert groups,
including the Iran Panel of Experts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), under the chairship of Ambassador Gary

14-44389

25/06/2014

Non-proliferation

Quinlan, as well as its Panel of Experts, for their
continued work in supporting the Security Council’s
resolutions on Iran.
The E3+3 and Iran have reached a critical point
in the negotiations on a comprehensive agreement on
Iran’s nuclear programme. With less than a month to
go before the interim deal is due to expire, on 20 July,
it is crucial that Iran understand that it must address
the concerns of the international community if a deal
is to be possible and if sanctions imposed as a result of
Iran’s nuclear programme are to be lifted. The E3+3 is
strongly committed to agreement on a comprehensive
solution before 20 July. Several rounds of talks on the
comprehensive agreement have been held in Vienna,
the latest just last week. We have now entered the
drafting and negotiating phase. While discussions have
been frank and the atmosphere positive, gaps between
the two sides remain.
In parallel to these negotiations on the
comprehensive agreement, the United States and the
European Union have been delivering the sanctions
relief set out in the Geneva interim agreement. We
welcome the latest report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency of 23 May, which notes that Iran has
continued to implement the nuclear measures agreed on
under the Joint Plan of Action. The E3+3 recognizes
the importance of working with the United Nations
once a deal is agreed on, in order to ensure that the
appropriate Security Council framework is in place to
support implementation of the agreement.
However, echoing the point just made by the Chair
of the 1737 Committee, while negotiations continue the
bulk of the sanctions must remain in place, including
all United Nations sanctions. States should be in no
doubt that all of the Security Council resolutions
on Iran remain fully in force. We should continue to
implement and enforce those sanctions robustly. The
economic pressure that sanctions create is a peaceful
incentive and supports the diplomatic efforts to reach a
comprehensive solution.
Turning to the work of the Committee, we are
concerned about breaches and possible breaches by
Iran of its international obligations. The interdicton of a
vessel carrying a cargo of conventional arms in the Red
Sea is deeply worrying. The arms, including rockets,
mortars and ammunition, were allegeldy loaded onto the
vessel in the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas. The Panel of
Experts, after a thorough investigation, concluded that
the shipment was a violation of Iran’s obligations under

S/PV.7211

resolution 1747 (2007). That is yet another example of
an illicit arms transfer in the region involving Iran. We
look forward to the Committee discussing that serious
matter further and to its firm action in response.
The 90-day report also highlights the fact that the
Islamic Republic of Iran has failed to respond to requests
for information relating to a carbon fibre interdiction.
That follows Iran’s failure to respond to requests for
information on ballistic missile launches last year
and on an intercepted arms shipment to Yemen. Iran’s
ongoing failure to respond is regrettable. We call on
Iran to engage in earnest with the Committee on such
incidents.
The United Kingdom is committed to finding a
peaceful, negotiated resolution of the nuclear issue. The
ongoing discussions on the comprehensive agreement
are the best opportunity in recent years for a resolution
of the nuclear issue. We will continue to make every
effort to find a comprehensive settlement, and we look
to Iran to do the same.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) for his valuable
briefing and for his leadership of its work. We would
also like to thank the Panel of Experts for their highquality reports.
Jordan welcomes the efforts of the Committee
to assist international organizations and States in
implementing the relevant resolutions on sanctions
against Iran by responding to the requests of States on
technical issues concerning their prompt implementation
and by affirming that the Security Council resolutions
on Iran still have the same legal authority despite
the negotiations currently under way on the Iranian
nuclear issue. We encourage the Committee to continue
its investigations of violations by Iran. We call on it
to contact the Iranian Government as the first step in
settling the pending issues with regard to the violations,
in particular those related to the arms shipment seized
from a ship in the Red Sea, which constitutes a clear
violation by Iran of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747
(2007), as well as the incident of carbon fibre seized in
Singapore en route to Iran.
Jordan calls on the Committee to continue to
cooperate with the other sanctions committees in order
to benefit from their expertise. Jordan welcomes the
efforts to reach a comprehensive agreement between
Iran, on the one hand, and the permanent members of

14-443893/11

S/PV.7211

Non-proliferation

the Security Council and Germany, on the other. At the
same time, we encourage the Committee to continue to
fully carry out its work.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing
and commend him for his great efforts in promoting
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006).
China has always attached great importance to the
work of the Committee and will continue to cooperate
with its Chair and the relevant parties so that its work is
steadily carried out in a balanced and orderly way. China
has always believed that all parties are duty-bound to
implement the resolutions on sanctions against Iran
resolutely, accurately and comprehensively. However,
the sanctions are not an end in themselves. Both the
Committee and the Security Council should work
towards finding a diplomatic solution. We hope that,
in accordance with its mandate and the principles of
objectivity, fairness and pragmatism on the basis of clear
facts, concrete evidence and extensive consultations,
the Committee will continue to deal appropriately
with cases of alleged sanctions non-compliance. China
will continue to act on the basis of such principles
and actively participate in the Committee’s work in a
responsible manner.
China commends the positive trend demonstrated
by the recent diplomatic efforts to resolve the issue
of Iran’s nuclear programme. We appreciate the fact
that the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has maintained consultations with Iran to clarify
outstanding nuclear issues so as to reach agreement
on relevant steps. Currently, the negotiations on a
comprehensive agreement have reached a critical stage.
At the recently concluded fifth round of talks, the six
countries and Iran conducted intensive negotiations on
the draft text of a final agreement and achieved clear
progress. An agreed draft text has been proposed on the
basis of the parties’ various texts.
Although the parties still have many differences
regarding the draft text, the negotiations seek to narrow
those differences. China hopes that all parties will
cooperate on the basis of equality and mutual respect
and take into account each other’s concerns so as to
move forward the negotiation process. The parties
should remain flexible and pragmatic in order to find
a solution.

4/11

25/06/2014

The early and complete resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue and the maintenance of the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and peace and
stability in the Middle East are in the interest of the
entire international community. As always, China
stands ready to cooperate with all parties in actively
working towards a comprehensive agreement that
is fair, balanced, mutually beneficial and a win-win
result so as to play a constructive role in finding a
comprehensive, long-term and appropriate solution to
the Iranian issue.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too, thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for presenting the quarterly
report on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and for all the work
he has done with his team as its Chair.
The rapid development of the Iranian nuclear
programme has been a matter of grave concern to the
international community for more than a decade. The
uncertainties over the exclusively peaceful purposes of
that programme and Iran’s refusal to negotiate have led
the Council to establish a sanctions regime. However,
we have always kept the door for dialogue open.
The adoption of the Joint Plan of Action of
24 November 2013, which got Iran to suspend the most
sensitive activities of its nuclear programme for six
months, opened a new page in the discussions between
the P5+1 and Tehran. Those discussions will resume on
2 July in Vienna and should continue until the deadline
provided for by the joint plan of action, that is to say,
20 July.
To date, the negotiations have been difficult. The
positions of the P5+1 and Iran remain apart on several
key aspects of the discussion. With our partners of
the E3+3, we are committed to reaching a long-term
solution that makes it possible to establish and to ensure
over time the exclusively peaceful purposes of the
Iranian nuclear programme. However, to that end, Iran
must commit to taking the technical steps to assure the
international community that it will not seek to acquire
a nuclear weapon in the future.
Moreover, it remains essential that Iran engage with
the International Atomic Energy (IAEA) in a fruitful
dialogue on the possible military dimension, past and
present, of its nuclear programme. The slight progress
at this stage on that aspect must be followed by specific
actions on the part of the Iranians. The resolution of
all outstanding issues with the IAEA is crucial to

14-44389

25/06/2014

Non-proliferation

achieving a long-term solution. I also wish to recall that
the Security Council resolutions on Iran remain fully
in force pending a comprehensive settlement of the
proliferation crisis. The Joint Plan of Action explicitly
states that.
It is therefore with concern that we learned the
conclusions of the investigation conducted by the
Committee’s Panel of Experts on the interception of
the ship Klos C by the Israeli authorities. The report
affirms that the transfer of missiles, possibly Syrian,
and of ammunition are a clear violation of the arms
embargo provided for under resolution 1747 (2007).
That incident is worrying on several respects. Not
only does it confirm that weapons coming from Iran
continue to be spread throughout the Middle East and
feed the spiral of violence in the region, but it could
also call into question Iran’s good faith in its express
willingness to respond to the concerns of the Security
Council.
It is now up to the 1737 Committee to take
appropriate measures to respond to the incident. A first
useful response would be to transmit to the Member
States the lessons that the Committee might learn from
the violation.
We welcome the publication of the final report
of the Panel of Experts (S/2014/394, annex). That
document is a precious source of information related to
Iran’s illicit programme and the means used by Tehran
to circumvent the sanctions. It also makes simple
operational recommendations that the Committee
should implement. We hope that all States Members of
the United Nations will take note of the final report and
use it to improve as much as possible the implementation
of resolutions of the Security Council on Iran.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, we would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan
for presenting the quarterly report of the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We appreciate the work that he has done as the
Chair of the Committee.
Between 2 and 4 April, the Panel of Experts of
the 1737 Committee visited the cities of Valparaiso
and Santiago in Chile, where it was able to directly
observe how my country applies and complies with
the 1737 regime and other United Nations sanctions
regimes. During the visit of the Panel of Experts, on
more than one occasion we received queries on the
status of multilateral sanctions system. As the Final

S/PV.7211

Report of the Panel of Experts published on 11 June
sets forth (S/2014/394, annex), the consultations took
place through various interviews and meetings. The
report makes clear that high expectations — as well as
a confusion of ideas — on a possible broad agreement
among the P5+1 and Iran on the nuclear programme of
that country were generated both in the private sector
and among the public.
That is a new context for the work of the Committee
that we think should be addressed. We hope that the
members of the Committee will make a serious attempt
to reach consensus and move forward, at least with
respect to the first recommendation in the Final Report
of the Panel of Experts referring to guidance on the
status of Security Council sanctions against Iran.
Chile supports the diplomatic efforts to promote
dialogue and the peaceful resolution of disputes. As we
have said on other occasions, our country is following
with great interest the ongoing negotiations, even if
we do so with some caution. Our attitude stems from
such cases as that of the vessel Klos C, currently under
consideration by the Committee, which, according to
information collected, would seem to be a violation of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his quarterly briefing on
the work of the Security Council Committee on Iran.
I would also wish to commend the Committee and its
Panel of Experts for their important work.
Lithuania strongly believes in the need for a
comprehensive, negotiated and long-term solution that
would build international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme, in full
compliance with its international obligations. Lithuania
welcomes the progress achieved in the implementation
of the Joint Plan of Action by the E3+3 and Iran of
24 November 2013. It is encouraging that the talks have
now moved into the drafting phase. We encourage Iran
to engage constructively with the E3+3 in resolving
all outstanding issues, including those related to the
possible undisclosed military dimension of the nuclear
programme.
We also welcome the continuing cooperation of Iran
and the International Atomic Energy Agency under the
Framework for Cooperation. It is encouraging that the
Agency could confirm the implementation by Iran of six
initial and seven subsequent practical measures, as well
as the agreement on a further five practical measures.

14-443895/11

S/PV.7211

Non-proliferation

The provision of design and other relevant information,
as well as access to various facilities, is an essential
element in helping the Agency to build a clearer picture
of Iran’s nuclear programme. Pending a comprehensive
solution, all Security Council sanctions imposed on
Iran remain in effect. Both Iran and Member States,
as well as their nationals and entities, are obliged to
fully implement relevant Security Council measures.
Therefore, the work of both the Committee and the
Panel of Experts in verifying compliance should remain
unaffected.
We welcome the final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2014/394, annex) and its swift public release. We
are particularly pleased with the Panel’s in-depth
analysis of methods used for the evasion of sanctions
and the financing of prohibited activities. The report
also contains sensible recommendations that should
be addressed by the Committee without delay. It
is important to note that the majority of incidents
investigated by the Panel of Experts were related to
items that fall below established control thresholds.
That underscores the need for guidance to Member
States on the implementation of the catch-all clause.
We see merit in adopting the implementation assistance
notice in that regard, as recommended by the Panel of
Experts last year.
We remain concerned, however, about the
disturbing pattern of conventional arms embargo
violations with persistent reports of arms transfers to
Syria and elsewhere. The Panel’s final report rightly
points out that Iran’s actions on conventional arms stand
in clear contrast to apparent restraint in areas related
to the nuclear programme. The latest case discussed
at the Committee, which involves attempted transfer
from Iran of containers with concealed rockets, mortars
and related material on the vessel Klos C, was another
clear violation of Iran’s obligations to comply with the
arms embargo. It merits an appropriate response by the
Committee.
Finally, let me reaffirm Lithuania’s support for all
efforts aimed at finding a comprehensive solution to the
Iran’s nuclear issue that would be the basis for building
international confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme. We reiterate our hope
that Iran’s engagement in the E3+3 talks would also
translate into cooperation with the Committee.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): We would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing and
his leadership of the Committee. We appreciate his
6/11

25/06/2014

efforts and those of the Committee to ensure that the
Committee remains active in carrying out its important
mandate.
The Council meets at a time when P5+1 talks on
Iran’s nuclear programme are taking place. I would
like to touch briefly on those talks and discuss the
importance of sanctions implementation in the recent
seizure of arms aboard the vessel Klos C. The P5+1
countries remain united in their determination to
resolve the concerns of the international community
with regard to the Iranian nuclear programme and to
bring Iran into compliance with Security Council
resolutions. The P5+1 is now in an active and intense
diplomatic phase in its efforts to reach a settlement
with Iran. Such an outcome must achieve our goals of
preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon and
ensuring that Iran’s nuclear programme is entirely
peaceful.
But for now in the absence of such an agreement,
all sanctions imposed by the Security Council remain
fully in effect. The mandates of the Security Council’s
Iran Sanctions Committee and the Panel of Experts
remain unchanged. During this period of negotiations,
the work of the Committee and the Panel has played
and will continue to play a role supporting international
diplomatic efforts. We therefore urge the Committee
to continue carrying out its important functions. The
Committee should be continuously taking steps to
improve enforcement of United Nations sanctions and
respond effectively to violations.
In that vein, the United States welcomes the
2014 final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2014/394,
annex). We encourage all States Members of the United
Nations to carefully review the final report, which has
just been posted on the Committee’s website. We urge
the Committee to take prompt action to implement
the Panel’s recommendations to improve sanctions
implementation. Implementing those recommendations
could help States better understand and carry out their
obligations to enforce those sanctions. The United
States has long encouraged the Committee to improve
its response to wilful violations of the sanctions.
That leads me to my last point, on the most
egregious sanctions violation uncovered this year: the
seizure of arms aboard the Klos C vessel in March.
After an exhaustive investigation, the Panel of Experts
documented the discovery, on board the vessel, of 40
M-302 rockets, 181 mortar shells and approximately
400,000 pieces of ammunition. Based on information
14-44389

25/06/2014

Non-proliferation

from the Panel, we know that the shipment originated
in Iran, and therefore constituted a clear violation of
resolution 1747 (2006). The Klos C incident is another
example of Iranian attempts to smuggle arms to
extremists. Those repeated and intentional violations of
resolution 1747 (2004) are extremely troubling, as they
undermine both regional security and the credibility of
the Council. We look forward to working with other
Committee members to respond to the incident and to
work continuously to improve the enforcement of the
Council resolutions.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his briefing on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We greatly
appreciate his able leadership and the robust activities
of the Panel of Experts, including the submission of this
year’s final report (S/2014/394, annex).
Let me begin by reiterating my Government’s
support for the ongoing efforts between the P5+1
and Iran as well as the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and Iran to resolve the Iranian nuclear
issue once and for all. In that regard, we welcome the
progress on the implementation of the agreed measures
and look forward to the conclusion of a comprehensive
plan of action soon. We also underline that Iran should
faithfully cooperate with the P5+1, the IAEA and the
broader international community to resolve current
and past issues, including all aspects of the possible
military dimensions of its nuclear programme.
Nonetheless, as emphasized once again by the Chair
of the 1737 Committee, we would like to stress that
the measures and obligations on the relevant Security
Council resolutions remain in effect until the Council
adopts a new, superseding resolution on this issue.
In that regard, the final report submitted by the
Panel of Experts deserves particular attention. It
provides a clear rationale for us to remain vigilant
against continued activities prohibited under the
relevant resolutions. All Member States should heed
the recommendations of the report, such as being alert
against risks involved with the diversion of dual-use
goods and proliferation financing.
The recent interdiction in the Red Sea of a large
load of conventional arms, including rockets, and the
subsequent findings in the Panel’s inspection report
on 16 June demonstrate the need for such continued
vigilance. It is crucial for the 1737 Committee to

S/PV.7211

actively follow up on the reports and take timely and
effective actions in response to the violation.
We also appreciate the 1737 Committee’s ongoing
cooperation with the Financial Action Task Force and
expect further synergy between the Committee, other
relevant committees and international and regional
organizations.
Finally, I would like to join others in urging Iran
to fully cooperate with the 1737 Committee and to
respond in a satisfactory manner to the Committee’s
inquiries, including on the carbon fibre case and other
pending issues. Such cooperation is indeed crucial to
move us all forward.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his statement and
for the commitment he has shown with his team as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). The Committee’s
work is highly important.
Luxembourg expresses its appreciation to the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) for the valuable support they provide to
the work of the 1737 Committee. We thank them for
the excellent final report (S/2014/394, annex), which
is well documented and methodologically rigorous
and which it has just submitted to us. The publication
of that document will be of great benefit to Member
States, who will find in it a wealth of information on the
various types of attempts to circumvent the sanctions
regime. Luxembourg supports the recommendations
contained in the final report of the Panel of Experts and
calls for their effective implementation.
With the adoption of the joint action plan on
24 November 2013 in Geneva and the start of its
implementation on 20 January 2014, a dual milestone
was reached. First, the dual approach, which combines
openness to dialogue and restrictive measures,
was shown to bear fruit when applied consistently.
Secondly, the fact that even the most complex cases are
not set in stone forever and that no level of suspicion
is insurmountable for those who agree to negotiate in
good faith was confirmed.
The joint action plan agreed in Geneva, despite its
importance, is only an intermediate step on the path
that must lead to a comprehensive, negotiated and
sustainable solution to the Iranian nuclear dossier. We
wish, in that regard, to acknowledge the efforts of the
E3 +3 countries, led by the High Representative of

14-443897/11

S/PV.7211

Non-proliferation

the European Union, Catherine Ashton, to negotiate
a comprehensive agreement with Iran that establishes
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
We should recall that the issue here is not to decide
on Iran’s right to the civilian use of nuclear energy.
That right is not in question. The issue is to ensure
that the exercise of that right happens transparently, in
close cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and in full respect of all obligations
arising from Iran’s international commitments.
Pending a final agreement, as others have pointed
out before me, the sanctions regime established by
the Security Council continues to apply fully.In other
words, Member States must continue to exercise the
same vigilance as before. We are reminded of that by the
Klos C incident, in which a ship intercepted in the Red
Sea in March was found to be carrying a cargo of loaded
weapons from the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas. That
incident, which the Panel found to be a violation of the
sanctions regime, shows that Iran continues to violate
its international obligations even while it is engaged in
negotiations to restore the international community’s
confidence in it. We deplore that new violation of the
sanctions regime, which is not consistent with Iran’s
stated intention to reassure its international partners as
to the peaceful nature of its intentions.
However, we are encouraged that the most recent
report of the Director of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, issued on 23 May, confirms that Iran
has begun a substantive dialogue with the Agency
intended to clarify outstanding issues concerning the
possible military dimensions of its nuclear programme.
We are also encouraged by the fact that the IAEA report
confirms that Iran is pursuing the implementation of
agreed measures on its nuclear programme with the E3
+ 3 group within the framework of the joint action plan.
By way of conclusion, let me reiterate Luxembourg’s
full support for the diplomatic efforts currently under
way in Vienna. We hope that those negotiations will
lead to the desired result within the time frame set out
by the joint action plan. We also express the hope that
success on the Iran dossier could, in time, positively
influence the evolution of other dossiers related to
issues of non-proliferation.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Gary

8/11

25/06/2014

Quinlan of Australia, for his very detailed quarterly
report on the activities of the Committee for the period
of 20 March to 24 June of 2014.
Chad takes note of the report of the Panel of
Experts (S/2014/394, annex), created under resolution
1929 (2010) and which supports the work of the 1737
Committee, and the recommendations contained in the
report. We encourage the members of the Committee to
continue their discussions on those recommendations.
We also take note of the efforts aimed at a rapprochement
between Iran and the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We welcome the bilateral discussions between
Iran and certain countries, as well as the holding of two
rounds of high-level negotiations on nuclear issues, from
14 to 16 May and from 16 to 20 June in Vienna, in the
framework of the joint plan of action adopted in Geneva
on 24 November 2013 between Iran and its partners and
the P5+1 aimed at reaching a final agreement on the
Tehran nuclear programme before 20 July 2014.
Nevertheless, there have been constant violations
on the part of Iran, which Chad deplores. Iran and its
partners are at a crucial phase in their negotiations and
we hope that they will reach a negotiated settlement on
their differences for the good of international peace and
security.
In conclusion, we need to recognize that sanctions
need to evolve to reflect the situation on the ground.
That is why we think that there should be an alleviation
of sanctions to bring the Iranians to the negotiating
table.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) for his presentation of the 90-day report of
the Committee. I also commend him for his astute
leadership of the Committee and the Panel of Experts
for their hard work.
We have carefully read the report of the Panel
of Experts (S/2014/394, annex) and take note of their
assessment that a comprehensive solution to the
negotiations between Iran and the E3+3 is within reach.
The observation of the International Atomic Energy
Agency that Iran has fulfilled its voluntary measures
agreed to under the joint plan of action is significant.
We also note from the report of the Panel of
Experts that there is a degree of uncertainty on the part
of States concerning the status of obligations regarding
procurement related to uranium enrichment by Iran.
There is also the challenge of identifying dual-use
14-44389

25/06/2014

Non-proliferation

items that fall below established control thresholds.
The report indicates that it is increasingly difficult for
States to identify links between below-threshold items
and prohibited end users or end uses in Iran. The report
attributes this to more sophisticated procurement
strategies on the part of Iran, which allows it to conceal
procurement. That situation calls for more clarity on
below-threshold items, and we urge the Committee
to look into that with a view to providing guidance to
States.
On a positive note, we welcome the assessment
by several States that there has been a decrease in
the number of detected attempts by Iran to procure
items for prohibited programmes since mid-2013. The
Panel of Experts believes that this may reflect the new
political environment in Iran, as well as progress in
the negotiations with the E3+3. We shall continue to
monitor the situation as we look forward to a successful
conclusion of the negotiations within the agreed
deadline of 20 July set by the joint plan of action.
Mr. Sana (Rwanda): I too thank the Chair for
his briefing and able leadership at the helm of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
Rwanda continues to support the ongoing
negotiation talks between Iran and the P5+1. We take
note of the start of negotiations on the final nuclear deal.
It is unfortunate that there were reports of excessive
demands in the round of talks that ended on 20 June,
which slowed the process. We hope that negotiators will
use the break to rally the camps and come back on 2 July
with realistic demands that will lead to a common text
by 20 July as scheduled.
The role of the 1737 Committee in support of the
P5+1 process is vital to its success. We agree with the
Chair that only the Security Council itself can alter
the sanctions measures applied by the Council. We
acknowledge the opportunity presented by the P5+1
talks towards achieving the objective of the Committee.
That is why we should not hesitate to take action that
would facilitate the success of the ongoing talk.
The reported arms embargo violation by Iran on
31 March concerning the ship Klos C is unfortunate. We
urge Iran to desist from any activity that might violate
the decision of the Council.
Recalling the last briefing (see S/PV.7146) and
today’s briefing by the Chair, it was mentioned that the
Committee had on several occasions continued to seek

S/PV.7211

Iran’s comment regarding the carbon fibre prohibition,
and to date it has yet to receive a response. We strongly
encourage Iran to cooperate and engage with the
Committee on that or any future queries. Similarly, we
take note of Iran’s compliance with the regulation of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
commend the transparency measures undertaken in
that matter as part of the IAEA report of 23 May.
Iran continues to implement its commitment under
the November 2013 Joint Plan of Action. In the same
line, the cooperation provides positive momentum as
Iran and the P5+1 attempt to reach a comprehensive
agreement. Taken together, we remain hopeful that
Iran’s action on the Joint Plan of Action and the
11 November agreement with the IAEA are encouraging
signs of the willingness of Iran to be more transparent
about its nuclear activities in the areas of proliferation
concerned.
Finally, Rwanda always believes that a diplomatic
solution is the only way to resolve the bottleneck over
Iran’s nuclear programme.
Ms. Poroli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, through you, Mr. President, I would like to
begin by thanking Ambassador Quinlan for presenting
the quarterly report on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and, as
we always do, for his dedicated work at the head of that
subsidiary body.
As noted by Ambassador Quinlan in his report and
in the previous report in March, the sanctions imposed
by the Security Council on Iran remain in force and
must be applied by member States. In that regard, on
behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank the Panel
of Experts for its final report (S/2014/394, annex). We
hope that the Committee will continue to consider the
recommendations made by
​​ the Panel of Experts and
will be able to reach an agreement in that regard.
As we do each time the Security Council considers
the quarterly report on the work of the Committee, we
have received the most recent report of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on the implementation of the safeguards
agreement under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in Iran.
In this case, we believe it is pertinent to note that the
report recognizes that Iran has implemented the seven
measures agreed with the Agency in February with
regard to the cooperation framework with the IAEA,

14-443899/11

S/PV.7211

Non-proliferation

which is currently analyzing the information it has
received. We also find it encouraging that the Agency
and Iran have agreed on the five follow-on measures, to
be implemented before 25 August. In addition, we also
think it encouraging that the report acknowledges that
Iran has complied with the measures of the joint action
plan agreed with the P5 + 1. Like the other members
of the international community, we follow very closely
the development of the negotiations. Therefore, while
we are encouraged by the willingness shown by all
the parties, we hope a final agreement can be reached
within the time frame that has been set.
As we said here in the Council in March (see
S/PV.7146) and in other forums, we are pleased that
the IAEA continues carrying out activities related
to monitoring and verification of nuclear energy in
relation to the implementation of the joint action plan.
We remain convinced of the importance of the Agency
being able to count on the facilities and resources
necessary to carry out its work effectively.
As we said, we welcome the progress in the
negotiations and we note the conclusion in the report
of the IAEA Director General that Iran’s cooperation is
helping the Agency to better understand the country’s
nuclear programme. In that regard, we continue to
believe that it is essential that Iran cooperate actively
with the Agency on all outstanding issues and that it
meets its obligations, including under the Council’s
resolutions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the represenatative of the
Russian Federation.
We are grateful to Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his briefing on the work of the Committee he leads.
During the reporting period, the experts submitted a
final report (S/2014/394, annex) and three reports of
incidents. We would should like to share our preliminary
impressions thereon.
With regard to the incident reports, the Russian
delegation has already expressed its position at the
Committee’s meetings. With regard to our position
on the conclusions and the proposal to develop an
implementation note with regard to the incident
concerning the interdiction in the Red Sea of the vessel
Klos C, we will make those views known later following
a thorough review of the documents. For now, I should
like to say that any external activity by the Committee
at this extremely sensitive stage of the negotiation

10/11

25/06/2014

process on the Iranian nuclear programme seems to us
not to be very timely, especially given that this involves
such a difficult matter as arms smuggling, where the
accusations against the Iranian side are based largely
on circumstantial evidence.
With regard to the final report, we would once
again note that the experts should be very careful in
their conclusions and assessments. Any information
not supported by concrete facts with regard to possible
violations of the sanctions regime could have a negative
impact on the conduct of the negotiations between the
group of six and Iran and the latter’s cooperation with
the International Atomic Energy Agency, and should
not be included in the report.
We also have some questions about the
recommendations of the Group of Experts, in particular
about more active cooperation with the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) when it comes to the implementation
of the Iran sanctions regime. The Security Council
should not impose on countries the establishment of
this mechanism or determine the modalities of its work.
The provision by States of additional information not
mandated by the Council’s resolutions, whether to the
Committee, the Panel of Experts or other international
organizations or mechanisms or on a bilateral basis, can
be done only on a voluntary basis. All accountability
requirements are set out in the resolutions of the
Security Council. We have repeatedly drawn attention
to the fact that the practice of clarifications to seek to
interpret is unacceptable.
I would also like to touch on the issue of
certain initiatives put forward in furtherance of the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts in the final
report. First, we would like to emphasize that it is
unacceptable to use the conclusions until they have
been substantively discussed in the Committee. That
applies first and foremost to contacts between members
of the Panel and other bodies referred to in the report,
such as the FATF.
Secondly, we do not support considering the
possibility of joint meetings between the Committees
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions
1737 (2006) and 1718 (2006). While it is very important
to have an exchange of experiences among the Council’s
subsidiary bodies, we believe that the Council’s
sanctions regimes on Iran and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea differ both in nature and political
background.

14-44389

25/06/2014

Non-proliferation

As to the considerations of the experts on the
future of the sanctions regime once a comprehensive
settlement of the situation concerning the Iranian
nuclear programme has been reached, this is an
issue beyond the Panel’s mandate. The Panel should
not interfere in this extremely sensitive process. In
particular, it is unacceptable to prejudge its outcome.
For many years, Russian diplomacy has actively
worked in the interests of achieving a just settlement on
Iran’s nuclear programme on the basis of the principles
of reciprocity and a step-by-step approach set out by
Russian Russia’s Foreign Minister, Sergey Lavrov. In
that regard, we welcome the holding in Vienna from
16 to 20 June of another full round of negotiations
between the group of six and Iran. The talks were very
useful and confirmed the overall readiness to continue

S/PV.7211

cooperating in a constructive vein and to hold detailed
discussions. The sides began to work work directly on
the text of the future agreement, which will continue
during the the next round of negotiations in Vienna
from 2 to 15 July.
We will continue to do everything we can to achieve
a final comprehensive resolution of all issues related to
the Iranian nuclear programme and for the lifting of the
sanctions against Tehran put in place by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

14-4438911/11
