Resolutions adopted on the reportl!I of the Fourth Committee

Gravely concerned at the iact that eight years have
elapsed since the adoption of resolution 2065 (XX)
without any substantial progress having been made in
the negotiations,
Mindful that resolution 2065 (XX) indicates that
the way to put an end to this colonial situation is the
peaceful solution of the conflict of sovereignty between
the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom
with regard to the aforementioned islands,
Expressing its gratitude for the continuous efforts
made by the Government of Argentina, in accordance
with the relevant decisions of the General Assembly,
to facilitate the process of decolonization and to promote the well-being of the population of the islands,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) 60 and, in particular,
the resolution adopted by the Special Committee on
21 August 1973 concerning the Territory;61
2. Declares the need to accelerate the negotiations
between the Governments of Argentina and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland called
for in General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX) in
order to arrive at a peaceful solution of the conflict of
sovereignty between them concerning the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas);
3. Urges the Governments of Argentina and the
United Kingdom, therefore, to proceed without delay
with the negotiations, in accordance with the provisions
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, in
order to put an end to the colonial situation;
4. Requests both Governments to report to the
Secretary-General and to the General Assembly as soon
as possible, and not later than at its twenty-ninth
session, on the results of the recommended negotiations.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3161 (XXVIll). Question of the Comoro
Archipelago

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Comoro Archipelago,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power,62
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of the Mouvement de liberation nationale des Comores,61
Taking note of the Joint Declaration on the Accession to Independence of the Comoro Archipelago,
containing the text of an agreement reached on 15' June
1973 between the Minister for Overseas Departments
and Territories of the Government of France and the
President of the Government Council of the Comoro
Archipelago,64
60 Ibid., chaps. ID and XXVIl.
61 Ibid., chap. XXVII, para. 12.
112 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session,

Fourth Committee, 2064th

109

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Coloni::., Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Convinced of the vital importance of sending a
visiting mission to the Territory as a means of securing
adequate and first-hand information in regard to the
political, economic and social conditions therein,
Noting with regret the failure of the administering
Power to participate in the related work of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of the Comoro Archipelago in their efforts freely to decide their own future,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Comoro Archipelago to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the question;611
3. Takes note with interest of the statement by the
representative of France that the French Government
has affirmed "the readiness of the Comoro Archipelago
for independence" and "its intention to 1 ~ ,pond faithfully to the aspirations" of the Comorian people, and
has stated that the Comorian Government can request
independence for the Territory at any time; 66
4. Affirms the unity and territorial integrity of the
Comoro Archipelago;
5. Requests the Government of France, as the administering Power, to ensure that the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago are preserved;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
necessary measures to ensure the full and speedy attainment of freedom and independence by the people of
the Territory, on the basis of their freely expressed
wishes, in accordance with the objectives of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Requests the administering Power to extend its
co-operation to the Special Committee in the discharge
of the tasks entrusted to it by the General Assembly
with respect to the Territory, in conformity with the
relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular by
enabling the Special Committee to send a visiting mission for the purpose of securing adequate and first-hand
information on the situation obtaining in the Territory,
as well as on the wishes and aspirations of its people
as regards their future status;
8. Invites all States to render all the necessary help
to the people of the Territory in their efforts to achieve
the objective_s of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;

meeting.

88 Jbid., 206Sth meeting.

114 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/

Rev.I), chap. XI, annex, appendix n.

011 Ibid., chap. XI.
1111 Ibid.,

Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 2064th

meeting, paras. 22 and 27.

no

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

9. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation in the Territory under continuous review and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

applied within a framework that will guarantee the
inhabitants of the Sahara under Spanish domination
free and authentic expression of their wishes, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions on
the subject;
4. Repeats its invitation to the administering Power
to determine, in consultation with the Governments of
Mauritania and Morocco and any other interested party,
the procedures for the holding of a referendum under
United Nations auspices to enable the indigenous
population of the Sahara to exercise freely its right
to self-determination and independence and, to this
end, invites the Government of Spain:
(a) To create a favourable political climate for the
referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic and impartial ba~is by permitting, inter alia, the
return of political exiles to the Territory;
( b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous inhabitants exercise their right to
self-determination and independence, with a view to the
decolonization of the Territory;
( c) To receive a United Nations mission and provide
it with all the necessary facilities so that it can participate actively in the implementation of measures
making it possible to put an end to the colonial
situation in the Territory;
5. Invites all States to comply with the resolutions of
the General Assembly on the activities of foreign
economic and financial interests and to refrain from
helping to perpetuate the colonial situation in the
Territory by means of investments;

3162 (XXVIII). Question of Spanish Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of the Sahara under Spanish domination,67
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration,
Taking into consideration the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its tenth
ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 27 to
29 May 1973, and by the Fourth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973,68
Having regard to the decisions of the two summit
conferences of Heads of State of the countries concerned relating to the Sahara under Spanish administration,
Noting the statement by the representative of Spain
in the Fourth Committee, 69 in which he renewed the
commitment of his Government to respect the right of
the people of the Sahara to self-determination,
Deploring, however, the fact that the special mission
provided for in earlier resolutions on the so-called
Spanish Sahara has not yet been able to visit the Territory in order to carry out the task entrusted to it,
Further reaffirming its previous resolutions on the
so-called Spanish Sahara,
1. Declares that the continued existence of the
colonial situation in the Territory is endangering stability
and harmony in north-west Africa;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial
peoples and expresses its full solidarity with the people
of the Sahara under Spanish administration;
3. Reaffirms its attachment to the principle of selfdetermination and its concern to see that principle

6. Reaffirms the responsibility of the United Nations
in all consultations intended to lead to the free expression of the wishes of the people;

7. Urges the administering Power to respect and to
implement scrupulously, under the auspices and guarantee_ of the United Nations, the provisions of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly relating to
the decolonization of the so-called Spanish Sahara;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, to appoint the special
mission provided for in paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and
to expedite its dispatch to the Sahara in order to
recommend practical steps for the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions and, in particular., to confirm United Nations participation in the preparation
and supervision of the referendum and to submit a
report to the Secretary-General for transmission to the
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
9. Calls upon the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentyninth sessfon.
2202nd plenary meeting
I 4 December 1973

67 Ibid.,

Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/
Rev. I), chaps. IV and XII.
68 A/9330 and Corr.I, p. 44.
0 9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Fourth Committee, 2066th meeting.

*

*

*
