II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committ,,,,

plete eradication of colonialism in all its forms and manifestations,
including racism and apartheid. through the exercise of the right to selfdetermination. In particular, States shall endeavour to create satisfactory conditions for activities by national and international nongovernmental organizations in support of the peoples under colonial
domination.
14. All States shall co-operate fully with the United Nations
Council for Namibia, the legal Administering Authority of the Territory until independence, in discharging the mandate entrusted to it under the terms of General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May
1967 and subsequent resolutions of the Assembly.
15. All States shall also co-operate fully with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples in the performance of its mandate.

2J

hie moral and material assistance to the peoples of the colonial Territories and to their national liberation movements.

20. Those non-governmental organizations with a special interest
in the field of decolonization and actively opposed to colonialism in all
its forms and manifestations are requested to intensify their activities
in co-operation with the Secretary-General and the relevant organs nf
the United Nations.

35/119.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

18. The United Nations shall intensify its efforts in disseminating
information by all available means, including publications, radio and
television, on the struggle of peoples for self-determination, independence and equal rights and against colonial domination, 011 the
activities of the United Nations in the field of decoloni1.ation and on
the role of the national liberation movements.

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,"
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 34/94 of 13 December 1979, as well as the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council,
Condemning the continued colonialist and racist repression of millions of Africans, particularly in
Namibia, by the Government of South Africa through
its persistent, illegal occupation of the international Territory and its intransigent attitude towards all efforts being made to bring about an internationally acceptable
solution to the situation obtaining in the Territory,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need to take all necessary measures to eliminate forthwith the remaining
vestiges of colonialism, particularly in respect of
Namibia where desperate attempts by South Africa to
perpetuate its illegal occupation have brought untold
suffering and bloodshed to the people,
Strongly deprecating the policies of those States
which, in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, have continued to collaborate with the
Government of South Africa in its domination of the
people of Namibia,
Conscious that the su,cess of the national liberation
struggle and the resultant international situation have
provided the international community with a unique
opportunity to make a decisive contribution towards the
total elimination of colonialism in all its forms and
manifestations in Africa.
Welcoming warmly the achievement of independence
by the people of Zimbabwe and Vanuatu and mindful of
the imperative need to assist the Governments of the
two countries in their respective efforts to achieve
national reconstruction and economic development.
Noting with satisfaction the work accomplished by the
Special Committee with a view to securing the effective
and complete implementation of the Declaration and
the other relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Noting also with satisfaction the co-operation and active participation of the administering Powers concerned in the relevant work of the Special Committee, as
well as the continued readiness of the Governments con-

19. The specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nation~ system shall render, or cont111uc to render. all poss,-

"Official Records of the General Assemhly, "/hirt_1•)ifih Ses.,ion ,·,,,-,
plemenr Vo. 23 (A/.15/2:1/Rev I).

16. The General Assembly draws the attention of the Security
Council to the need to continue to give special attention to those situations where the denial of the right of peoples to self-determination, as
defined in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), poses a threat to
international peace and security and, in particular, the need:
(a) To consider imposing mandatory economic sanctions against
South Africa, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
including in particular a mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum and petroleum products to South Africa;
(b) To reinforce the arms embargo against South Africa by adopting comprehensive mandatory measures to end all military and nuclear collaboration with the apartheid regime of South Africa.

17. The Special Committee shall continue to examine the full compliance of all States with the Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on the question of decolonization. Questions of territorial
size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way
delay the implementation of the Declaration. Where General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) has not been fully implemented with regard
to a given Territory, the Assembly shall continue to bear responsibility for that Territory until all powers are transferred to the people of
the Territory without any conditions or reservations and the people
concerned have had an opportunity to exercise freely their right to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with the Declaration.
The Special Committee is hereby directed:
(a) To continue to seek the most suitable ways for the speedy and
total application of the Declaration to all Territories which have not
yet attained independence and to propose to the General Assembly
specific measures for the complete implementation of the Declaration;
(b) To undertake a thorough review of the list of Trust and NonSelf-Governing and other Territories which have not yet attained independence to which the Declaration applies and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:

(c) To continue to send visiting missions to the colonial Territories at periodic intervals in order to enable the Special Committee to
obtain first-hand information on conditions in those Territories;
(d) To continue to examine the views expressed, orally or in writ;ng, by the peoples of the colonial Territories as well as by representatives of non-governmental organizations and individuals with knowledge of conditions in those Territories. Particular consideration shall
be given to oral petitions and written communications regarding the
Territories on which information is not being transmitted as provided
for by Article 73e of the Charter or to which the Special Committee is
denied access;
(e) To assist the General Assembly in making arrangements, in cooperation with the administering Powers. to secure a United Nations
presence in the colonial Territories to enable it to participate in the
elaboration of the procedural arrangements for the implementation of
the Declaration and to observe or supervise the final stages of the process of decolonization in those Territories.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

24

cerned to receive United Nations visiting missions in the
Territories under their administration,
Reiterating its conviction that the total eradication of
racial discrimination, apartheid and violations of the
basic human rights of the peoples of colonial Territories will be achieved most expeditiously by the faithful and complete implementation of the Declaration,
particularly in Namibia, and by the speediest possible
complete elimination of the presence of the illegal occupying regimes therefrom,
I. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621
(XXV) and all other resolutions on decolonization and
calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with
those resolutions, to take all the necessary steps to enable the dependent peoples of the Territories concerned
to exercise fully and without further delay their inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
2. Affirms once again that the continuation of
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations-including racism, apartheid, the exploitation by foreign
and other interests of economic and human resources,
and the waging of colonial wars to suppress national
liberation movements-is incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
poses a serious threat to international peace and security;
3. Reaffirms its determination to take all necessary
steps with a view to the complete and speedy eradication of colonialism and to the faithful and strict observance by all States of the relevant provisions of the
Charter, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
guiding principles of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights;
4. Affirms once again its recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle of the peoples under colonial
and alien domination to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence by all the necessary
means at their disposal;
5. Approves the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during
1980, including the programme of work envisaged for
1981; 34
6. Calls upon all States, in particular the administering Powers, and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to give effect
to the recommendations contained in the report of the
Special Committee for the speedy implementation of the
Declaration and the other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations;
7. Condemns the continuing activities of foreign
economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration with regard to the
colonial Territories, particularly Namibia;
8. Strongly condemns all collaboration, particularly
in the nuclear and military fields, with the Government
of South Africa and calls upon the States concerned to
cease forthwith all such collaboration:
9. Requests all States, directly and through their action in the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system, to withhold assistance of
any kind from the Government of South Africa until the
'/hid., chap. I. paras. 164-176.

inalienable right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination and independence has been restored, and
to refrain from taking any action which might imply recognition of the legitimacy of the illegal occupation of
Namibia by that regime;
10. Calls upon the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditionally their military bases and
installations from colonial Territories and to refrain
from establishing new ones;
11. Urges all States, directly and through their action in the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system, to provide all moral and
material assistance to the oppressed people of Namibia
and, in respect of the other Territories, requests the administering Powers, in consultation with the Governments of the Territories under their administration, to
take steps to enlist and make effective use of all possible
assistance, on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis, in
the strengthening of the economies of those Territories;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) in
all Territories which have not yet attained independence and, in particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals for the elimination of the remaining manifestations of colonialism and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session;
(b)
To make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security Council in considering appropriate
measures under the Charter with regard to developments in colonial Territories that are likely to threaten
international peace and security;
(c) To continue to examine the compliance of Member States with the Declaration and with other relevant
resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to Namibia:
(d)
To continue to pay particular attention to the
small Territories, including the sending of visiting missions thereto, as appropriate, and to recommend to the
General Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to
enable the populations of those Territories to exercise
their right to self-determination, freedom and independence;
(e) To take all necessary steps to enlist world-wide
support among Governments, as well as national and
international organizations having a special interest in
decolonization, in the achievement of the objectives of
the Declaration and in the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly as
concerns the oppressed people of Namibia:

13. Calls upon the administering Powers to continue to co-operate with the Special Commitke in the
discharge of its mandate and, in particular, to permit the
access of visiting missions to the Territories to secure
first-hand information and ascertain the wishes and aspirations of their inhabitants:
14. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the facilities and services required for the implementation of the present resolution,
as well as of the various resolutions and decisions on decolonization adopted by the General Assembly and the
Special Committee.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980
