S/2022/747

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 October 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 8 October 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In its resolution 2645 (2022), the Security Council requested me to consult with
the Government of Haiti, relevant countries and regional organizations regarding
possible options for enhanced security support for efforts of the Haitian National
Police to combat high levels of gang violence, and to report to the Council regarding
these consultations.
During the months of August and September 2022, the Secretariat of the United
Nations, supported by the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH),
undertook consultations with Haitian authorities and other national stakeholders,
including the Prime Minister of Haiti, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister
of Interior, the Director General of the Police, the Dir ector General of the Ministry of
Justice and the Office of Citizen Protection, as well as civil society representatives,
including women leaders. Consultations also included Security Council members,
Member States from the region and those that have shown an interest in South-South
cooperation, the Caribbean Community and the Organization of American States with
a view to identifying key challenges, current capacities and options in Haiti that can
receive broad political, technical and financial support.
Current security context
In recent weeks, a dramatic deterioration in security has paralyzed the country.
Criminal gangs have taken control of vital strategic installations, such as the
international port of Port-au-Prince and the country’s main fuel terminal, in Varreux.
The blockage of the terminal has brought critical services, such as water distribution
and sanitation, garbage collection, electricity and health centres, to a virtual standstill.
In this context, there has been a recent resurgence of cholera, and the current
situation has created the perfect conditions for an exponential increase in the disease
across Haiti. Last week, the country’s National Directorate of Potable Water and
Sanitation informed the United Nations that it had only a few days of fuel stocks
remaining; in addition, the country’s main water supplier announced that it was
ceasing operations because the fuel stocks had been completely exhausted.
Movement along the main roads in and out of Port-au-Prince has been prevented
by criminal gangs, who also exercise control of large neighbourhoods. In many of
these areas, gang violence against the population, in particular women and girls, is
rampant, with widespread reports of rape and other forms of sexual violence used as
a tool to instil fear and humiliate, control and displace populations. Gangs have
increasingly turned to kidnapping for ransom.

22-23027 (E)

141022

*2223027*

S/2022/747

The extreme violence and insecurity further imperil the economy, hinder
freedom of movement and the enjoyment of other human rights, and obstruct the
provision of basic services and the distribution of humanitarian assistance. They also
have a severe impact on development efforts. The resurgence of cholera has only
exacerbated the population’s vulnerability and needs.
Political and economic actors allegedly sponsor the gangs, using them to
influence electoral processes and the country’s politics generally. The absence or
weak presence of State institutions in many areas has allowed these criminal
organizations to flourish and go on to exercise effective control over key parts of
metropolitan Port-au-Prince and, to a lesser but increasing extent, other parts of the
country.
Since mid-September, fuel shortages, the lifting of government fuel subsidies
and customs reforms have led to large demonstrations and instances of violence across
the country, some of it supported by political and economic elements opposed to the
reforms. Grievances relating to extreme violence and insecurity and the dire
socioeconomic situation, as well as concerns regarding the Government’s response to
these challenges, have further exacerbated public anger, leading to attacks and
looting, including of the premises of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
affecting their ability to assist the most vulnerable.
Many interlocutors have stressed the nexus between security, the political
context, the lack of accountability and justice, underdevelopment and pressing
humanitarian needs. In particular, an urgent need for police action to neutralize gangs
was cited during the consultations. A solution to the political crisis – including setting
the path towards elections and reforms – was viewed as a condition necessary for
sustainable security in the country, including longer-term solutions to the gang
phenomenon. Restoring security will also enable an emergency humanitarian
response to the cholera outbreak, as well as the delivery of life -saving assistance to
people affected by gang violence and the 2021 earthquake.
The easy access of the gangs to weapons and ammunition is a widespread
concern, with several interlocutors underscoring the need to support the Ministries of
Finance, Justice and Interior, as well as judges and prosecutors, in combating illicit
trafficking in and diversion of weapons. Supporting the customs service is especially
important to counter trafficking, a task in which the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime is currently engaged. Widespread corruption, as well as the inability of
State institutions to exercise effective control over borders and ports, contributes to
making Haiti a key location along illegal trafficking routes. Strong controls and
oversight by countries in which the arms originate or pass through were described as
a matter of utmost urgency.
Haitian National Police
Government officials and some civil society representatives noted that the
Haitian National Police had recently made some strides in countering gangs,
recording modest successes in operations in Croix-des-Bouquets. Notably, from
1 January to 31 August 2022, authorities registered 877 abductions, including of 182
women, 13 girls and 15 boys. Although the number of abductions remained high, it
declined, from 198 in May alone to 72 registered in August.
Nonetheless, the Haitian National Police is spread thinly. The force counts
nearly 14,161 officers, including 1,567 women. Some 13,000 officers are reportedly
assigned to law enforcement activities, with the ratio of police officers to the
population standing at 1.06 police officers per 1,000 inhabitants. T his is well below
the United Nations-suggested international ratio of 2.2 per 1,000. Of all the police
officers involved in law enforcement, only a third are believed to be operational and
2/8

22-23027

S/2022/747

undertaking public security functions at any given time. Several ga ng-controlled
areas, including Martissant and Cité Soleil, do not have operational police stations,
which contributes to an environment in which gang leaders exercise unfettered power.
Several national interlocutors noted improvements in Haitian National Police
leadership, including with respect to boosting force morale, for example through
incentives provided to officers involved in dangerous operations. Notably, the number
of officers killed since the upsurge in gang activities has increased, with 21 of ficers
killed in 2021 and 13 killed before August 2022. Some 28 police stations were
vandalized or destroyed from January to August 2022, reducing, and in some cases
eliminating, police and State authority in vast neighbourhoods and leaving them under
the control of gangs. Worryingly, the national police workforce has decreased by
1,343 since October 2019, a reduction blamed mainly on the challenging work
environment that police officers face. There is an urgent need to dramatically increase
the size of the national police force and to put in place the conditions necessary to
ensure that most of its members are dedicated to active -duty policing functions.
There are concerns regarding existing safeguards to prevent human rights
violations and to investigate and act when they occur. The concerns include questions
about the adequacy and effectiveness of internal and external Haitian National Police
oversight mechanisms and the general weakness of Haitian judicial institutions. In
addition, there are serious concerns regarding instances of police collusion and
complicity with gangs, which, among other things, illustrate the risk of police
weapons and ammunition falling into the hands of gangs. A stringent vetting
mechanism, as well as adequate internal oversight and control mechanisms, must be
put in place, with the support of the international community.
The national authorities cited a lack of adequate individual protection gear,
weaponry, ammunition and other tactical equipment, as well as of the capacity to u se
them effectively, as a key obstacle to progress in anti-gang efforts. The Haitian
National Police is faced with criminal gangs in possession of higher-calibre weapons
and better equipment than its own. For example, the national police has a very limited
amount of operational tactical armoured vehicles, which significantly limits its ability
to undertake operations against gangs. Furthermore, the overall capacity of the
national police to undertake intelligence-led operations is seriously hampered by a
lack of appropriate and coordinated intelligence-gathering and sharing capabilities.
Some interlocutors have voiced concern about corruption within the police ranks and
collusion with gangs, as well as the associated risk of new equipment and materiel
provided to the national police ending up in the hands of criminal groups. National
authorities stressed the need for further training and capacity -building to enable the
national police to develop and conduct anti-gang operations successfully.
There is a lack of effective coordination among relevant Haitian National Police
units dealing with investigation of sexual violence crimes, namely the Unit against
Sexual Crimes, the Brigade for the Protection of Minors and the Anti -Kidnapping
Cell, all of which face significant operational logistical and resource shortfalls.
The situation is compounded by the precarious state of the justice system, which
has been further weakened by gang violence. Gangs attacked the Courts of First
Instance of Port-au-Prince and Croix-des-Bouquets in July 2022, bringing judicial
proceedings to a halt. Any improvement in the ability of the Haitian National Police
to address gang violence must be accompanied by a similar effort to strengthen the
ability of the criminal justice system to process arrested gang members expeditiously
and to ensure that charges are brought against them, with full respect for due process
and fair trial guarantees. Similarly, efforts to improve the penitentiary system must
also be made, considering the alarmingly overcrowded prison system, which,
according to information provided by the Ministry of Justice, includes in its large
22-23027

3/8

S/2022/747

majority (83 per cent) pretrial detainees, many of whom may have served longer
detention periods than their alleged offences could have warranted. Justice Ministry
officials indicated that detainees count on only 0.34 square metres of space in
detention facilities, where there are many instances of severe malnutrition, leading to
over 180 deaths since January 2022.
While the general weakness of Haitian rule of law institutions should be noted,
the most urgent need now is to bolster the ability of the Haitian National Police to
counter and contain gangs. In this effort, the Haitian authorities underscored that
solutions need to be Haitian-led and that the national police should be in the lead,
supported by international partners to improve its ability to provide security. The
challenge remains bolstering the ability of the national police to deliver as a robust
and effective law enforcement agency that can tackle the current gang threats
effectively, contributing to security in communities. The national police must regain
the trust of the population, given that broad engagement in and support of policing
will be crucial to long-term success.
Recommended approach and actions
Considering the extremely grave situation, international efforts to enhance
support for the Haitian National Police must be aimed at reducing the ability of armed
gangs to block access to and carry out attacks on strategic infrastructure and threaten
the livelihood of communities. To achieve this goal, the following are considered key
priority objectives: restoring freedom of movement for Haitians throughout Port -auPrince and across the country, including, crucially, ensuring their access to essential
supplies and basic services; providing security for vital installations such as ports,
airports and oil terminals, as well as key roadways, to allow for the normal
functioning of the State and daily life; and deterring gang activities, including
homicides, sexual violence and kidnappings, to reduce violence against the
population. Addressing these objectives is imperative to halt the country’s spiralling
instability.
The Haitian authorities emphasized the need for specialized hands-on support
to the Haitian National Police in the design, planning and oversight of anti -gang
operations through the deployment of internationally provided advisers (unarmed or
armed police and experts) embedded in relevant national police sp ecialized units over
an extended period. In past consultations, the Haitian authorities indicated a
preference for support options that fell short of action under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. International advisers, including those with experience
in anti-gang operations and dedicated expertise in areas such as sexual and gender based violence, would work side by side with the national police command,
contributing to the return of State control over vital installations and roadways.
Following unsuccessful efforts to regain control of the oil terminal in Varreux,
the Prime Minister of Haiti had indicated to the Secretariat that the deployment of a
multinational special force for a short period to temporarily reinforce the Haitian
National Police could be contemplated in view of the deteriorating security
environment. Subsequently, on 6 October, the Council of Ministers authorized the
Prime Minister to request the immediate deployment of an international specialized
armed force to address the insecurity resulting from criminal action by armed gangs.
In these circumstances, an immediate response is required, followed by more
medium- to long-term interventions.
In the short term, the steps outlined below are proposed.

4/8

22-23027

S/2022/747

Rapid action force
One or several Member States, acting bilaterally at the invitation of and in
cooperation with the Government of Haiti, could deploy, as a matter of urgency, a
rapid action force to support the Haitian National Police. Such a force would, in
particular, support the national police primarily in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan
area in securing the free movement of water, fuel, food and medical supplies from
main ports and airports to communities and health-care facilities. To this end, the
force would support efforts of the national police to remove the threat posed by armed
gangs and provide immediate protection to critical infrastructure and services. The
force would bring the national police much-needed respite through complementary
operational capacity and would enable it to reassess needs and assign overstretched
resources to normal public security priorities.
The Security Council could welcome the force in response to the request made
by the Government of Haiti on 6 October.
The force would be composed of special armed forces personnel provided by
one or several Member States, with one Member State providing leadership to the
effort, including in terms of the planning, start-up, command and direction of
operations. Member States not contributing armed personnel could provide financial
and materiel support to the force.
The Secretary-General may deploy additional United Nations capacities to
support a ceasefire or humanitarian arrangements and ensure coordination of the
efforts with the international force.
The deployment of the force would be phased out gradually as the Haitian
National Police regained State control of critical infrastructure targeted by gangs and
began to restore general security and freedom of movement. At that point, two options
could be considered to enhance support to the national police in the longer term.
In the medium term, the two follow-on options in relation to the rapid action
force could be envisaged, as detailed below.
Option 1: multinational police task force
Member States, acting bilaterally at the invitation of and in cooperation with the
Government of Haiti, could establish an international police task force to enhance the
tactical and operational capabilities of the Haitian National Police to comb at gang
violence. The national police would remain the only force on the front line of
operational policing and anti-gang operations. The international police task force
would undertake the following activities: advising on the design and conduct of
operations against armed gangs; advising on and observing law enforcement activities
and procedures; vetting police personnel who receive tactical training; advising on
systems and practices, as well as on the effective use, maintenance and control of
equipment, including weapons and ammunition; training national police personnel on
anti-gang strategies and on community-oriented policing to regain the trust of the
population in gang-affected neighbourhoods; and assessing the threats to national
security and public order posed by criminal gangs and advising on the capability of
the national police to deal with such threats in full respect of human rights. The task
force would offer a guarantee and confidence to Member States willing to provide
equipment and technology to enhance security support for the national police. The
Security Council could welcome a request for such assistance from the Government
of Haiti and encourage Member States to respond by contributing to the task force.
Such a task force would be composed of police advisers from a small group of
Member States with relevant expertise in anti-gang operations and community-

22-23027

5/8

S/2022/747

oriented policing. Together with the advisers, the task force would deploy equipment,
materiel and technology provided by Member States, including those not deploying
advisers, required for the Haitian National Police to undertake anti -gang operations
(for example, advanced technology to intercept gang communications and drones).
Member States not contributing advisers or equipment to the task force would be
invited to contribute funds to support its deployment and operations. Members of the
task force would not be involved in front-line operations themselves.
This option would allow operational agreements to be concluded more
expeditiously and would facilitate the provision to the Haitian National Police of
critically needed equipment and support that cannot be provided by the United
Nations.
The leadership and command of the international police task force would be
exercised by one of the contributing Member States. A tripartite board, composed of
the head of the task force, the Director General of the Haitian National Police and the
United Nations Police Commissioner, would provide coordination and ensure the
compliance of the support provided with the relevant human rights norms and
standards. To this end, BINUH could be provided with the mandate to participate in
the tripartite board.
Option 2: multinational special force
A group of Member States, acting bilaterally at the invitation of the Government
of Haiti, could establish a special force to support the Haitian National Police in
tackling gangs, including through joint strike, isolation and containment operations
across the country. The Security Council could welcome such a special force, the
viability of which would be strengthened by the existence of broad political and social
support for its deployment and a meaningful agreement between the Government and
the opposition on a political way forward for Haiti. The special for ce would be
composed of well-equipped special police units provided by a group of Member
States, with one of them serving as the lead country in terms of the command and
direction of operations. BINUH would monitor and report on the compliance of the
support provided with the relevant human rights norms and standards.
Under this option, support could be provided to the Haitian National Police at
land border crossing points and in efforts to extend State authority, including the
reopening of police stations and a police presence at official border crossing points
to help to provide a climate for improved revenue collection. Should Member States
not step forward with bilateral support and financing for this option, contributions
under a United Nations operation may provide an alternative. However, as indicated,
a return to United Nations peacekeeping was not the preferred option of the
authorities.
Successive United Nations peacekeeping operations deployed since 2005 have
made significant progress in containing the control of gangs over communities and in
restoring State authority in areas affected by gang violence over decades. However,
the transition from peacekeeping was predicated on the assumption that the
institutional capacities of the Haitian National Police would continue to be
strengthened and to operate within an environment of relative political stability to be
able to maintain the security gains achieved throughout the years. The same
assumption stands for the current situation: any action to conta in the gangs will have
only a temporary effect unless framed within the context of parallel, sincere Haitian
and international efforts to address the root causes of the gang phenomenon, which
are poor fiscal governance and corruption abetted by political a nd economic interests
that have little interest in building a well-managed State where the rule of law
prevails.
6/8

22-23027

S/2022/747

In parallel with the proposed rapid action force and follow -on options, the
Security Council could decide on the additional courses of action described below.
Further strengthening the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti police
component by increasing its authorized ceiling
Any support provided to the Haitian National Police to enhance its ability to
combat gangs effectively must be complemented by strengthened training efforts by
BINUH and international partners to expand the overall capacities of the national
police beyond security operations. This includes expanding the number of national
police officers, continued vetting, enhancing community-oriented policing skills,
strengthening capacity to prevent and respond to sexual violence, and restoring police
stations that have been destroyed in gang-controlled areas. Successful operations to
dislodge gangs must be complemented by ensuring the ability to establish and
maintain the presence of public security forces and relevant State institutions to
prevent the return of criminal groups, as well as securing the ability to deliver needed
basic services and assistance. Such an approach is indispensable for the required
bonds of trust between the security forces and the population, as well as to strengthen
the social contract.
Bilateral training and equipment support to the Haitian National Police
The Security Council could call upon Member States to urgently provide
equipment, training and materiel to the Haitian National Police, thus improving its
ability to contain criminal groups currently in control of key locations, with a focus
on areas in Port-au-Prince, in particular access to ports and roads that are key to the
transport of essential goods and the free movement of people within the country.
The Haitian authorities indicated that the Haitian National Police was already
poised to receive several shipments of armoured tactical vehicles, which were
scheduled to arrive by the end of the year. The authorities also noted that they were
expecting the prompt shipment of weapons and ammunition required to conduct
operations. The leadership of the national police has expressed some confidence in
its ability to build on recent modest successes and gradually regain control of key
areas of the capital through this equipment and additional materiel support. Important
efforts by two Member States are already under way to develop special weapons and
tactics capacity, expected to be completed by the end of 2023. In the meantime, the
national police is seeking to bolster a temporary anti-gang unit. I strongly encourage
Member States to enhance their provision of security assistance to Haiti, notably of
the wherewithal for the national police to conduct operations, in complement to
current efforts to strengthen the police through the basket fund.
In this respect, I also call upon the Haitian authorities to put in place adequate,
effective and transparent mechanisms and safeguards to ensure the management and
control of armouries and the upkeep of equipment. BINUH stands ready, through its
police component, to support the development of guarantees regarding the storage
and supervision of equipment, firearms and ammunition provided to the Haitian
National Police. Such safeguards should help to overcome the misgivings expressed
by some Member States during the consultations regarding possible misuse or
misappropriation of equipment. The national police must also have in place effective
and transparent accountability mechanisms to investigate and act when alleged human
rights violations occur.
Thwarting the flow of funding and illicit arms to gangs
As indicated by the Security Council in paragraph 4 of resolution 2645 (2022),
further efforts must be made by Member States to prohibit the transfer of small arms,
22-23027

7/8

S/2022/747

light weapons and ammunition to non-State actors engaged in or supporting gang
violence, criminal activities or human rights abuses in Haiti. During the consultations,
multiple interlocutors, including the national authorities, spoke about the importance
of effective controls to prevent arms and equipment from reaching gangs. Some
emphasized the importance of giving due consideration to sanctions in accordance
with paragraph 5 of resolution 2645 (2022), also including the possibility of measures
adopted on a bilateral basis to limit arms transfers and financial support to gangs.
Technical assistance support to the justice sector
Haiti must take steps to address holistically the links between policing and the
rule of law chain to ensure the ability to conduct successful investigations and
prosecutions, trials, sentencing and imprisonment. Given the long -standing weakness
of the judicial system, special measures are likely to prove necessary to address the
situation of detained gang members. Successful operations will place additional
strains on overburdened justice and corrections systems, which will need to deal wi th
a growing number of detainees and legal proceedings. The creation of specialized
judicial units to ensure accountability for the crimes committed by gangs, including
those involving sexual violence, could help to speed up the processing of cases as
arrests increase. The United Nations is supporting such an effort.
In all scenarios, BINUH would continue to provide assistance to the Haitian
National Police in line with its mandate, bearing in mind the need to monitor
compliance with human rights norms and standards, as well as the necessary
application of the United Nations Due Diligence Policy on Human Rights with respect
to any United Nations support provided to non-United Nations security forces.
Enhancing not only the support and coordination functions of BINUH but also the
Office’s ability to monitor and make relevant recommendations to the Haitian
authorities will be of crucial importance for a stepped-up effort to assist the police.
Lastly, in addition to the above-mentioned options, Haiti and the international
community must continue to deploy sustained efforts to ensure that the human rights
of the population, including in the areas of education and health, are promoted and
protected throughout the country, including through the effective delivery of basic
services. Unless real and sustainable development opportunities are afforded to the
population, gangs will continue to exploit systemic weaknesses. A return to a more
robust United Nations engagement in the form of peacekeeping remains a last reso rt
if no decisive action is urgently taken by the international community, in line with the
options outlined, and if the national law enforcement capacity proves unable to
reverse the deteriorating security situation.
To conclude, I reiterate that urgent progress towards a nationally led solution to
the long-standing political impasse is fundamental to restore security sustainably and
durably.
(Signed) António Guterres

8/8

22-23027
