Reeolutiom adopted on the reportl of the Tbird Committee

mendations for action by Governmen1s, the . Un_ited
Nations sys,tem and non-governmental orgaruzations
and which would explain the relevance of the implementation of the Plan to the daily lives of men and
women throughout the world;
20. Decides to convene in 19 80, at the mid-term of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, a world conference of _all _States
to review and evaluate the progress made m 1mplementing the objectives of the Intemational Women's
Year as recommended by the World Conference of the
Intemational Women's Year and, where necessary, to
readjust existing programmes in the light of new data
and research available.
.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
1

3521 (XXX). Equality hetween men and women
and elimination of discrimination against
women

T he General Assembly,
W elcoming th.e results of the World Conference of
the Intemational Women's Year, 64 held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations which, inter alia, emphasize the importance of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
ali without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion and for the equality of men and women,
Firmly convinced that discrimination against women
is incompatible with human dignity and prevents social
progress and the achievement of the goals of development,
Mindful that the continuation of armed conflicts,
the arms race, colonialism, foreign occupation, racism,
racial discrimination and apartheid hinders the effective
realization of equal rights for women and prevents the
improvement of the situation of women and their wider
participation in all spheres of life,
Noting conventions and recommendations conceming the rights of women adopted under the aegis and
within the framework of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and the progress achieved in their
implementation,
Noting that ali States are not yet parties to relevant
conventions and other instruments elaborated by the
United Nations, the Intemational Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other United Nations bcxlies,
Expressing concern' in connexion with continuing
discrimination in many countries against women in
m.any fields, in particular in labour relations and general and professional education and training,
Aware that women, enjoying fully the rights provided for in the relevant international instruments,
should play an equal role with men in all spheres of
life, including the ensuring of pe.ace and the strengthening of intemational security, and should fully participate in political life,
Confident that the relaxation of intemational tension
contributes to the development and implementation of
standards in ali :fields of concem to. women,
84 See Report of the World Conference of the lnternational
Women's Year
E.76.IV.1).

(United Nations publication, Sales No.

97

l. Calls upon ali States that have not done so to
ratify the international conventions and other instruments conceming the protection of women's rights and
the elimination of discrimination against women and
to implement effectively the provisions of these conventions and other instruments, including declarations
of •the United Nations and recommendations of the Intemational Labour Organisation and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
2. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to complete, in 1976, the elaboration of the draft Convention on the Elimination of Discri'minatlon again&t
Women;
3. Calls upon all States to promote vigorously
wider participation of women in the strengthening of
intemational peace and in extending the relaxation of
intemational tension, on the basis of full respeot for
the Charter of the United Nations as well as for United
Nations resolutions, in settling the problems of disarmament, in the elimination of colonialism, foreign occupation, racism, racial discrimination and apartheid and
in ali other forms of política! life, contributing in this
way to the creation of the most favourable conditions
for the complete elimination of discrimination against
women.

2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3522 (XXX). Improvement of the economic
status of women for their effective and
speedy participation in the development of
their countries

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that many women in low-income countries are engaged in various economic activities on a
self-reliant basis not normally taken into account when
considering the gross national product,
Convinced that the contribution of such economic
activi-ties by women to the over-all national economic
develo~nt is substantial,
Further convinced that credit facilities are a necessary prerequisite for the improvement of economic
activities of women engaged in self-reliance projects,
Recognizing the continued benefits that can accrue
from access to even modera.te financia! resources, when
such become available,
Concerned that · many lending and financia! institutions continue to practise discrimination against women,
considering them poor credit risks, and that local and
national practices and customs in Dlany parts of the
world bar women from engaging in ~ponsible financia! transactions,
Reafferming resolution 10, entitled "Access of women
to financia! assistance", 6~ adopted by the World Conference of the Intemational Women's Year, held at
Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
l. Urges Govemments and govemmental and nongovemmental organizations to support more vigorously
official and private efforts to extend to women the facilities now being offered only to roen by financia! and
lending institutions;
2. Requests Govemments to encourage ali efforts
by women's organizations, co-operativ~ and lending
611 lbid., chap.

m.
