162

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

(b) To ensure that the necessary financial and
budgetary arrangements are made to continue the organization of the international programme of assistance to Equatorial Guinea and the mobilization of
assistance;
(c) To keep the situation in Equatorial Guinea under constant review, to maintain close contact with
Member States, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, the specialized agencies and the international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981, of the status of the special economic assistance programme for Equatorial Guinea;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Equatorial Guinea and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special economic assistance programme for that country in time for the matter
to be considered by the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/106.

Review of the economic situation of Djibouti,
Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome
and Principe, Seychelles, Tonga and newly independent developing countries with a view to
their inclusion in the list of the least developed
countries 224

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council decision
1980/161 of 24 July 1980, in which the Council decided
to request the Committee for Development Planning to
expedite the review of the economic situation of
Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome
and Principe, Seychelles, Tonga and newly independent
developing countries with a view to their inclusion in the
list of the least developed countries, and to make recommendations concerning those countries to the Council at its first session of 1981,
1. Decides to authorize the Economic and Social
Council to consider, at its first regular session of 1981,
the recommendations of the Committee for Development Planning on the above-mentioned countries and,
accordingly, to add any of these countries to the list of
the least developed countries on the basis of existing
criteria and the most recent data relating to the abovementioned countries;
2. Decides that this exercise should be without prejudice to any future over-all review of the list of the least
developed countries which may be authorized at a later
date by the General Assembly in accordance with established procedures.
84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/107.

Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December
1971, by which it established the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, and its resolution 3243 (XXlX) of 29 November 1974 on the
strengthening of that Office,

Recalling also section II, paragraph 14, of its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, and its resolution 33 /22 of 29 November 1978,
Reaffirming that it is necessary to ensure a continued
sound financial basis for the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, as recognized by
the General Assembly in its resolution 31 / 173 of 21 December 1976,
Bearing in mind that the timely receipt and distribution of information about the responses of donors is essential for the execution of the mandate of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator 21 " and
of the statement made by the Co-ordinator before the
Second Committee on 3 November 1980/ 11
2. Commends the activities of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator which have
contributed to the easing of the consequences of natural
disasters;
3. Calls upon Governments and international organizations to co-operate with the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator by providing timely information on
the nature and extent of their current and intended contributions to disaster-afflicted countries;
4. Decides to maintain for a further two-year period,
as from I January 1982, the trust fund established pursuant to its resolution 3243 (XXIX) of 29 November
1974, modified under its resolutions 3440 (XXX) of
9 December 1975 and 3532 (XXX) of 17 December I975
and its decision 33 /429 of 19 December 1978, in order to
ensure that the financial resources available to the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator
remain adequate to meet the tasks entrusted to that
Office;
5. Urges all Governments to contribute to the trust
fund of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator;
6. Decides to review at its thirty-sixth session the
mandate of the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator.
84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/108.

Transport and Communications Decade in
Africa

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34 / 15 of 9 November 1979 on
the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa.
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 /61 of 3 August 1979 on the Transport and
Communications Decade in Africa,
Recalling further resolution 341 (XIV), adopted on
27 March 1979 by the Conference of Ministers of the
Economic Commission for Africa, 212 in which the Conference urged member States to give high priority to the
development of transport and communications,
Noting resolution CM/Res.738 (XXXIII), adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
'"' A/35/228.
'" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Second Committee, 36th meeting, paras. 6-17.
· ,_. See Official Record, of the Economic and Social Council. 1979.
Supplement No. 15 (f·. 1479/'i0), part two. sect. D.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

African Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session, held at
Monrovia from 6 to 20 July 1979, 211
Further noting the results of the Conference of African
Ministers of Transport, Communications and Planning,
held at Addis Ababa from 9 to 12 May 1979, in particular the adoption of the global strategy for the implementation of the programme for the Transport and
Communications Decade in Africa and the programme
of action for the first phase ( 1980-1983) of the Decade, 2.14

Considering that the programme for the Transport
and Communications Decade in Africa forms a whole
and includes national, regional and subregional projects, which should be fully implemented within the
period envisaged, so as to enable an integrated transport and communications network to be established in
Africa, and that the proposed World Communications
Year could provide further impetus to activities in the
communications sector,
Taking into account the difficult problems faced by the
land-locked African countries and the need to respond
more effectively to their financial requirements in the
field of transport and communications,
Further taking into account the encouraging results of
the United Nations Pledging Conference for the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa, convened
on 20 November 1979 by the Secretary-General, during
which a general consensus emerged among funding agencies on the financing, essentially on a bilateral basis, of
the projects included in the programme for the first
phase of the Decade,
Noting with satisfaction the progress report of the
Secretary-General submitted in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 32/160 of 19 December 1977/"
I. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
having organized the United Nations Pledging Conference for the Transport and Communications Decade in
Africa for the purpose of mobilizing additional resources for the implementation of the programme for
the Decade:
2. Notes with appreciation that the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme, at
its twenty-seventh session, authorized the Administrator of the Programme to approve commitments for technical co-operation projects up to the amount of $20 million in respect of the Decade during the third programming cycle, I 982-1986:2 11 '
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Economic Commission for Africa for the work accomplished since
March 1977 and for the positive and effective cooperation of the Organization of African Unity, the
specialized agencies and African intergovernmental organizations in their collaboration with the Commission
in the preparation of the programme for the first phase
of the Decade;
4. Reiterates its appeal to States members of the
Economic Commission for Africa to giv_e the highest
priority to the transport and communications projects
adopted for and included in the programme for the first
phase of the Decade and therefore to include these projects in their development plans;
'·" See A/34/552, annex I.
"'See E/1979/77, part six. resolution- l'CA/UNTACDA/
Res.79/1 and 3.
'" A/35/334.
''" Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1980.
Supplement No. /2 (E/1980/42/Rev. I). chap. XI. decision 80,130.
para. 13 (a).

163

5. Requests African States to take the initiative of
submitting to the various sources of finance requests for
the financing of the projects adopted for the first phase
and to use the required resources for that purpose;
6. Also requests African States both to allocate from
their own national resources a part of the budget for the
implementation of the programme for the Decade and
to assign a part of the resources derived from outside aid
to the implementation of the specific studies contained
in the programme for the first phase;
7. Notes with satisfaction that the High-level Meeting on the Review of Technical Co-operation among
Developing Countries, held at Geneva from 26 May
to 2 June 1980, considered possibilities of interregional activities in technical co-operation among developing countries in support of the objectives of the
Decade/"
8. Appeals to African States to provide the Economic Commission for Africa, in a manner which it
shall determine, with the necessary information on the
progress made in implementing the projects in the
programme for the· Decade, so that the Commission will
be able to perform effectively the role assigned to it in
the global strategy for the implementation of the programme for the Decade;
9. Also appeals to the funding agencies and the
various financing institutions to consider, with the Economic Commission for Africa, the possible ways of
financing those projects of the Decade which are not
national in character;
I 0. Calls upon the African States, the funding agencies and the various sources of finance for this purpose
to involve, as appropriate. the Economic Commission
for Africa in the different phases of the negotiations on
the financing of the projects;
11. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
international financial institutions and United Nations
agencies that have contributed financial and technical
assistance for the implementation of the programme for
the Decade and invites them to continue to provide such
assistance;
12. Invites all Governments in a position to do so to
provide financial and technical resources for the implementation of the programme for the Decade;
13. Requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa to continue his efforts for the successful implementation of the programme for the first phase of the Decade by ensuring the
necessary co-ordination between funding agencies and
African countries for the programme, particularly for
regional and subregional projects, and national projects
with a regional or subregional impact:
14. A /so requests the Executive Secretary of the
Economic Commission for Africa to organize as quickly
as possible, with groups of donor countries and the
financing institutions and with the participation of
Governments, United Nations institutions and African
intergovernmental organizations. either consultative
technical meetings based on the various types of programmes for the Decade or consultative technical
meetings based on groups of African countries or
African subregions. for the purpose of finding the additional financial resources necessary to implement those
projects for the Decade that are regional and multinational in character and of carrying out urgently the
'' See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Sesiion. Supplement No. 39 I A /35 (\9 and Corr. l ), annex I, decision I /2,
para. 6.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

164

specific studies contained in the programme for the first
phase that must be followed by concrete action not later
than during the second phase:
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Economic Commission for Africa with the financial
means and resources necessary to enable it effectively to
fulfil its role as the lead agency for the Transport and
Communications Decade in Africa and to submit to the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981, a progress report on the implementation of
the programme for the Decade:
16. Requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa to continue to submit
progress reports on the implementation of the programme for the Transport and Communications Decade
in Africa and to participate actively in the proposed
World Communications Year, with a view to providing
special impetus to development in Africa.

114th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/109.

World Communications Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ 160 of 19 December 1977
on the Transport and Communications Decade in
Africa, in which it requested the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the International Telecommunication
Union and other specialized agencies concerned, to propose for consideration, as appropriate, one year during
the Decade as a World Communications Year, in view
of the importance of transport and communications to
other regions of the world,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/69 of 25 July 1980, in which the Council recommended 1983 as an appropriate year for the celebration
of World Communications Year, provided that the arrangements necessary for its financing had been made,
based on the principle of voluntary contributions,
I. Endorses the arrangements made by the Economic and Social Council concerning the programmes,
organization, co-ordination and mobilization of
resources to meet the requirements for a World Communications Year, as outlined in Council resolution 1980 /69:
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
make appropriate proposals to the General Assembly at
its thirty-sixth session, following its evaluation of the report on the state of preparations for the World Communications Year, in particular on the financial resources that will be available and on programmes that
may be of interest to the international comm unity, particularly the developing countries.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/110.

Permanent sovereignty over national resources
in the occupied Arab territories

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 34/ I 36 of 14 December
1979,

Bearing in mind the relevant principles of international law and the provisions of the international con-

ventions and regulations, in particular Convention IV of
The Hague of 1907/'' and the fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949, ,.1 4 concerning the obligations
and responsibilities of the occupying Power,
Recalling its previous resolutions on permanent
sovereignty over natural resources, particularly their
provisions supporting resolutely the efforts of the developing countries and the peoples of territories under
colonial and racial domination and foreign occupation
in their struggle to regain effective control over their
natural and all other resources, wealth and economic activities,
Bearing in mind the pertinent provisions of its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, and 3281 ( XX IX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States,

Recalling further its resolutions 3175 (XXVIII) of
17 December I973, 3336 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
3516 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, 3 l / 186 of 21 December 1976 and 32./ 161 of 19 December 1977 on permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Arab territories,
Referring to the note by the Secretary-General'~" concerning the report on permanent sovereignty over
national resources in the occupied Arab territories requested by the General Assembly in its resolution
34 ! 136,
I. Emphasizes the right of the Arab States and peoples whose territories are under Israeli occupation to full
and effective permanent sovereignty and control over
their natural and all other resources, wealth and economic activities:
1

Reaffirms that all measures undertaken by Israel
to exploit the human, natural and all other resources,
wealth and economic activities in the occupied Arab territories are illegal and calls upon Israel to desist immediately from such measures;
3. Further reaffirms the right of the Arab States and
peoples subjected to Israeli aggression and occupation to
the restitution of. and full compensation for, the exploitation, depletion and loss of and damages to their
natural, human and all other resources, wealth and economic activities, and calls upon Israel to meet their just
claims:
4. Calls upon all States to support and assist the
Arab States and peoples in the exercise of their abovementioned rights;
5. Calls upon all States, international organizations,
specialized agencies, investment corporations and all
other institutions not to recognize, or co-operate with or
assist in any manner in, any measures undertaken by
Israel to exploit the resources of the occupied territories
or to effect any changes in the demographic composition, geographic character or institutional structure of
those territories:
6. Regrets the failure to prepare a report for submission to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session in accordance with Assembly resolution 34/ 136:
., Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. The Hague Conventions and Declarati,ms oj !H99 and /1)()7 (New York, Oxford University Press. 1915), p. 100.
'"• United l\ations /'reat_r Series, vol 75, No. 973, p. 2X7.
't\ ,5 51-+
