S/PV.7608

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7608th meeting

Monday, 25 January 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Diouf
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2015/1027)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-01672 (E)
*1601672*

S/PV.7608

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2015/1027)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/1027, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the most recent developments
in the situation in Darfur, in particular those that
have occurred since the issuance of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/1027), on 24 December last.
The developments centre mainly on the resumption
of armed conflict in the Jebel Marra region as well as
clashes in West and North Darfur. This marks the end
of the brief period of relative calm that was observed
during the reporting period. In North Darfur, where
Zaghawa villages were attacked by Arab militias on
27 November and 3 December, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) came
under fire on two occasions: on 1 January by the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid, as it was attempting to
recover a truck that had been stolen from the World Food
Programme; and, on 7 January, when it was surrounded
by some 60 Arab militia members as it was heading
to Anka to protect the Deputy Special Representative,
who was visiting the area.

2/6

25/01/2016

The first incident, on 1 January, did not result in
any fatalities; it was described by the local commander
of the Abdul Wahid faction as a misunderstanding.
The second attack, however, injured a UNAMID
peacekeeper. Owing to the security situation on the
ground, the Deputy Special Representative had to
turn back, and an inter-organizational mission was
preventing from getting to Anka. That led us to deliver
humanitarian assistance by air.
Two days later, on 9 January, tensions rose in East
Darfur when armed members of the Beni Halba tribe
attacked and looted Massalit villages in the south of
El Geneina, following the discovery of the death of a
member of the tribe. The next day, residents of Mouli
demonstrated against the attacks in El Geneina, forcing
their way into Government buildings. Six people were
killed by security forces in the scuffle. During the burial
of those people on 11 January, the convoy was attacked
by Arab militias, resulting in two more Massalit deaths.
In total, according to Sudanese authorities, 5,000
people — exclusively from West Darfur — have been
displaced by the violence and reached the town of
El Geneina. We are not in a position to confirm that
figure as Sudanese authorities have not granted access
to either UNAMID or humanitarian organizations. It
appears that in recent days the situation in the city of
El Geneina has been stabilized by the deployment of
the military and additional police forces. But it should
be pointed out that crimes continue to be committed by
armed groups in the villages surrounding the city.
As we know, on 1 January President Al-Bashir
announced the extension of the unilateral ceasefire in
the region of Jebel Marra. It must be noted, however,
that incidents have occurred, aerial bombardments
have resumed and clashes between Government forces
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid have
actually intensified during the month of January. In
Central Darfur, after the clashes in Guldo and Golo on
31 December and 1 January, and following the 2 January
attack by members of the Abdul Wahid faction against a
Government convoy near Nertiti, UNAMID witnessed
the dropping of three bombs on 14 January; six bombs
on 19 January in Sortoni in North Darfur; and five
bombs near Nertiti in Central Darfur on 16 January. The
Mission has received reports of four other air raids in
North and Central Darfur on 16, 17, 22 and 23 January.
Since 15 January, clashes between Government forces
and elements of the Abdul Wahid faction in South and
Central Darfur have also been observed.

16-01672

25/01/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

These clashes have caused casualties on both sides.
The United Nations is unable to verify the number
of victims or to conduct a humanitarian assessment
due to the restrictions imposed by the Government
on access to conflict areas. In anticipation of a
potentially large-scale displacement of the population,
humanitarian organizations and the Mission have begun
to develop an emergency plan. To date, 8,400 civilians,
mostly women and children, have taken refuge around
the UNAMID camp in Sortoni in North Darfur. In
the other affected areas, the Mission has fortified its
presence by increasing protection patrols, day and
night, and has pre-positioned equipment and supplies.
(spoke in English)
Against the backdrop of renewed military
confrontation, the political process to resolve the conflict
through dialogue remains fragmented, and progress
thus far has been limited. Major armed movements
and opposition parties continue to boycott the current
national dialogue framework. These groups continued
consultations on the next steps, with the support of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
With respect to the Darfur peace process, the Justice
and Equality Movement and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minnawi held a meeting with the Deputy
Prime Minister of Qatar in Paris on 11 January, and
they pledged to develop a joint position paper on their
concerns with respect to the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, in particular in relation to compensation,
disarmament and land ownership. There was also an
informal meeting between the Government and the
two groups that started on 23 January in Debre Zeit,
Ethiopia, but thus far the parties seem to remain
divided on the role of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur and the High-level Implementation Panel in
future negotiations. It is regrettable that Abdul Wahid
Al-Nour has been absent from these talks. We call upon
him to participate constructively in the efforts to find a
resolution to the conflict.
The Darfur peace process remains inconclusive,
and members will have heard that the Darfur
Referendum Commission announced on 12 January that
the referendum on the administrative status of Darfur
would be conducted between 11 to 13 April 2016, in
accordance with the terms of the Doha Document. Voter
registration will commence on 8 February for those
who have resided in Darfur for three months prior to the
registration. While we welcome the preparations to hold
the referendum, we note that the proposed timeline and

S/PV.7608

eligibility criteria will most likely make it challenging
for a large number of internally displaced persons and
refugees to actually participate in the process.
These security and political developments point to
a stark contrast between the views of the Government
and those of the majority of the armed movements and
their constituencies on the current situation in Darfur.
In a similar vein, the Vice-President of the Sudan has
indicated the closure of internally displaced person
camps by the end of 2017. During his visit to North
Darfur at the end of December 2015, he stated that
Darfur had recovered from the war, but in reaction to
the statement, the situation in the internally displaced
person camp of Kalma actually deteriorated in January.
I regret to inform the Council that the visa situation
remains precarious, with no major improvement in its
overall status. Since the issuance of the previous report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/729), the Government
has rejected another seven visa requests, including four
that involved substantive civilian functions, and one
for the post of Senior Joint Operations Officer. As a
result of visa denials, there is a high vacancy rate in key
substantive sections, which has been noted in previous
briefings and in the report of the Secretary-General.
And I must inform Council members that things have
not really changed. The resultant loss of capacities in
those sections of the Mission directly related to the
strategic priorities of UNAMID, such as the protection
of civilians, is of particular concern in light of the
evolving situation in Jebel Marra and other areas.
With respect to progress relating to customs
clearance, the Ministry of Finance and National
Economy has released 195 containers that had been held
in Port Sudan since 15 April 2015. Currently, UNAMID
is seeking the urgent release of 108 containers of rations
held in Port Sudan, for which the Ministry of Finance
and National Economy needs to issue a tax exemption
certificate for 2016. UNAMID submitted a request for
the yearly renewal of that certificate in November 2015.
We are now almost at the end of January.
In order to resolve these support-related issues, the
United Nations and the Government of the Sudan held
a technical meeting in Khartoum on 13 January. It was
agreed that subcommittees would be established on the
pending issues, such as visas and customs clearance,
and that further technical-level meetings be convened
on a monthly basis to unblock the bottlenecks relating
to these logistical and administrative concerns.

16-016723/6

S/PV.7608

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

With the new leadership of UNAMID on board, we
hope that the Government will indeed extend its full
support and cooperation towards the implementation
of the strategic priorities of UNAMID. As mandated
by the Security Council and by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, we remain committed
to developing the exit strategy for UNAMID on the
basis of concrete and tangible achievements against
the benchmarks. A strategic-level meeting among the
United Nations, the African Union and the Government
of the Sudan is anticipated to take place by the end of
this week in the margins of the forthcoming Summit of
the African Union in Addis Ababa. We look forward
to the full commitment of the Government of the
Sudan to making measurable progress against key
benchmarks — such as the cessation of hostilities,
an inclusive peace process, and unhindered access
and movement of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel — as the starting point for further discussions
on the phased drawdown of UNAMID.
Let me close by reiterating my concern about
the impact of the renewed upsurge in fighting on the
civilian population in Jebel Marra, and express my hope
that the cessation of hostilities negotiations — with
the participation of all the non-signatory movements,
including Abdul Wahid Al-Nour— will come to a
positive conclusion and bring to an end the suffering
of the population caught up in the fighting between
Government and rebel forces.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate the States that were recently
elected as non-permanent members of the Security
Council: the Arab Republic of Egypt, Japan, Senegal,
Ukraine and Uruguay. We are confident that they will
play an effective role in maintaining international peace
and security, pursuant to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Hervé Ladsous for his briefing on the report of
the Secretary-General on Darfur (S/2015/1027).

4/6

25/01/2016

We do not agree with his briefing for three main
reasons — in particular, because of his interpretation
of developments in Jebel Marra and with regard to
cooperation with the Mission on the issuance of visas. I
will return to that point later.
The report of the Secretary-General states that
“[t]he level of fighting between the Government
forces and the armed movements was low during
the reporting period [and that t]he number of
intercommunal clashes over land and livestock also
decreased” (S/2105/1027, para. 2).
It also states that
“security measures adopted by State Governors
(Walis) contributed to the significant reduction in
the number of criminal incidents” (ibid.).
In paragraph 3, the report states that during the
reporting period, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) received no
information on clashes between Government forces
and armed groups, with the exception of desperate
attempts by members of the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid in East Jebel Marra.
The Security Council is well aware of the wellknown position held by the Abdul Wahid faction,
which continues to categorically reject any political
settlement. It has rejected all regional and international
appeals and mediation efforts made by the Joint Special
Envoy of the African Union and the United Nations.
Furthermore, in its resolutions, the Security Council
maintains that a political solution is the only way to end
the conflict. What, then, is the Council doing to stop
the Abdul Wahid faction? The mediators have chided
Abdul Wahid Al-Nour because he categorically refuses
and rejects all appeals made by the Council to reach a
political solution.
The Government of the Sudan has shown great
patience and wisdom by not unilaterally excluding the
Abdul Wahid faction from the ceasefire declaration
that was renewed by His Excellency the President of
the Republic, who has also offeed a series of guarantees
in an effort to convince the leaders of the armed groups
to join the national dialogue currently under way.
How did Abdul Wahid react to the unilateral ceasefire
announcement? Members of his faction launched a series
of attacks on the villages of Tawani and Rokona, east of
Jebel Marra. In addition, after attacking the markets in
those two villages, a group headed by a certain Jaffar

16-01672

25/01/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Toutou proceeded to establish checkpoints to levy taxes
on traders. On 1 January, faction forces cut off the route
between Zalingei and Kourro, north of Jabel Marra.
What can the Government of the Sudan do?
Elements of the faction also carried out attacks on
patrols of the armed forces in the region of Rokoro that
left two soldiers injured. What can the Government’s
armed forces do if the Abdul Wahid faction responds
to the ceasefire declaration by attacking our soldiers?
It is utterly unacceptable. Our armed forces are dutybound and must shoulder their responsibility to protect
civilians by extending State authority and restoring
security in the villages targeted by the Abdul Wahid
faction. The front lines of our armed forces — the
sixteenth infantry division — were able to restore
security and stability to East Jebel Marra.
With regard to the humanitarian situation in Darfur,
the report of the Secretary-General states that “with
the lull in armed confrontations, new displacements
were minimal during the reporting period” (ibid., para.
23). I should have liked Mr. Ladsous to highlight that
instead of putting forth his own reading of the facts.
During the reporting period, there was a very low level
of new displacement. The case reported in the region
of Mouli involved a tribal incident that began with the
discovery of the body of a herdsman on 9 January. The
local authorities responded swiftly on 10 January, but
unfortunately even the Prefect’s entourage was attacked,
leaving a number of people dead and wounded. During
the attack, members of the rebel movement infiltrated
the ranks of the assailants.
As we have stated previously, tribal clashes in
Darfur are as old as Darfur itself. They have been
largely contained thanks to the ongoing efforts of the
Sudanese Government to strengthen the role of local
leadership in reconciliation and settlement. Resources
are at the heart of these clashes, and that has long
been the case in Darfur. The fact is such clashes can
be prevented only through development. Economic
recovery and reconstruction will enable the Sudanese
Government to complete its development projects in
order to promote stability in Darfur. That is why we
call on the international community to support the
Sudanese Government by lifting the coercive economic
sanctions that are hindering the completion of such
plans in Darfur and in building the infrastructure and
implementing the projects that are necessary to meet
the needs of the people of Darfur. The settlement of the
civil conflict in Darfur requires development, which

S/PV.7608

above all requires the lifting of sanctions and debt
forgiveness.
In raising the technical, administrative and
logistical issues concerning UNAMID in his briefing,
Mr. Ladsous overlooked the tripartite mechanism,
which includes representatives of the Sudanese
Government, the African Union and the United Nations
and is responsible for considering those issues. The
mechanism has made many recommendations over the
past four years and, as the subject of visas has been
addressed by those recommendations, we do not feel
the need to address it here. In conjunction with the
African Union, we have proposed that the mechanism
meet on 29 and 30 January. We are still awaiting
a response from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with regard to that meeting. These facts
run counter to Mr. Ladsous’ statement. We will also
make this statement available to all Council members.
However, in spite of the repeated calls of the Sudanese
Government to restart its activities, the mechanism has
stopped functioning.
In response to what the Under-Secretary-General
has just said, I would like to stress that during the most
recent period, the processing of the majority of visa
applications and customs clearances for the containers
has been accelerated. As of the most recent meeting on
that issue, which took place on 14 January, 179 out of a
total of 195 customs clearances had been issued for the
containers in question. As members know, the customs
procedures with regard to the containers in all States
are not the purview of a single ministry, but of several
different ministries and bodies. For our part, we opened
an auxiliary office in Port Sudan mandated with closely
monitoring all applications for customs procedures, but
at the request of UNAMID that office was closed. The
Government continues to call for its re-opening.
With regard to the issuance of visas, as shown in the
chart to be distributed, in October 2015 we received 151
visa applications. Of those, 141 visas were issued and
4 applications are still being considered. Thus, the visa
issuance rate in October was 93 per cent. In November,
we received 281 applications, of which 272 were
approved, which is an issuance rate of 96.79 per cent. In
December, we received 213 applications, of which 206
were approved. That is an issuance rate of 96.71 per cent.
That is the reality with regard to the issuance of visas
during the reporting period. All of this demonstrates
the extent to which UNAMID is benefitting from the
cooperation of the Sudanese Government. We therefore

16-016725/6

S/PV.7608

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

continue to assert that relaunching the joint mechanism
would enable us to resolve those problems together
instead of just continuing this sometimes pointless
debate.
In that connection, in accordance with paragraphs
26 and 27 of resolution 2228 (2015), which renewed
UNAMID’s mandate last year, we reiterate the need for
the Joint Working Group responsible for UNAMID’s
drawdown strategy to resume its meetings with a
view to implementing the provisions of that and other
pertinent resolutions in order to enable the Mission

6/6

25/01/2016

to best discharge the tasks mandated to it. That is
especially important given that UNAMID is an African
Mission and, as an African country, it is very important
to the Sudan that the Mission be able to carry out its
tasks.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

16-01672
