ResolutionR adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee

55

sions to the Trust Territories, taking into account in
particular the advisability of reducing the number of
The General Assembly,
Trust Territories to be visited by a single visiting mis-Recalling that in its resolution 4:J5 (v) of 2 Decetnsion and of extending the duration of visits without
ber 1950 it expressed the opinion that teic careful study
tliminishing their frequency,
of petitions is one of the fundamental responsibilities
1. Notes that in organizing ib Visiting Mission to
of the Trusteeship Council and that it is essential, in
Trust Territories in East Africa in 1951 the Trusteethe interests of the inhabitants of the Trust Territories,
ship Council decided, in its resolution 344 (X) of 5
to improve in every possible way the procedure for the
July 1951, that the Mission should visit three Trust
examination of petitions,
Territories as compared with two visited by the previous Mission to that area in 1948;
Recalling that in the same resolutiou it recommended
that the Trusteeship Council consider- a number of pos2. Notes that, by fixing in the same resolution an
sible means of improving its procedure in respect of
interval of time betwel'n Lhe dispatch of the 1951 Visitthe examination of petitions, arncmg them the constituing Mission and the submission of its report only
tion of the Ad H oc Committee n1, Petitions as a standslightly in excess of the corresponding period of time
ing committee and the desirabilit :r of the Administering
taken by the 1948 Visiting Mission, the Trusteeship
Authorities submitting speci~i ! ,n 1 ,rmation concerning
Council precluded any possibility of the 1951 Visiting
action taken on the recommt, , 'ions of the Council
Mission spending an appreciably longer time in the
in respect of petitions examim,· 1
Trust Territories concerned.,;
Considering that the Truste1 ·. ,· Council, while re3. Notes further that, in its resolution 343 (IX) of
vising to a limitC¥1 extent in tht: ( ;- ,e of its eighth and
6
June
1951, the Trusteeship Council also decided that,
ninth sessions 2 its procedure i,, , '-",pect of the examiin making arrangements for future visiting missions, it
nation of petitions, has not yt-'.'. >, ised a procedure
would take into account the observations and suggeswhich accords fully with the importance of this functions of a committee of the Council which considered,
tion and with the interests of the inhabitants of the
inter alia, that, while two separate missions should be
Trust Territories, and considering that the Council resent, if possible, to the four Trust Territories in the
quested its members to give further study to means of
Pacific area every three years, one mission only was
perfecting a procedure for the examination of petitions,
sufficient to cover the four West African Trust TerriConsidering that the number of petitions received has
tories and one the three East African Trust Territories;
been increasing from year to year,
4. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council again
1. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council:
review its procedures in respect of the organization and
functioning of visiting missions, bearing in mind the
(a) Constitute a standing committee for the examifinancial implications, with a view to:
nation of petitions which shall meet as soon as pos·•
sible whenever necessary between sessions of the Coun(a) Increasing the duration of each visit to each
cil as well as during sessions of the Council;
Trust Territory;
( b) Devise a procedure by which the standing com(b) Reducing the number of Trust Territories to
mittee will examine each petition in a preliminary way,
be visited by a single visiting mission; and
within a prescribed period of time after the receipt of
( c) Achieving these ends without diminishing the
the petition by the Administering Authority concerned,
frequency of visits to the Trust Territories;
and in conjunction with such observations as may be
5. Reaffirms the desirability of each visiting mission
submitted thereon by the Administering Authority on
being constituted as much as possible from among repits own initiative or at the request of the standing comresentatives who sit on the Trusteeship Council;
mittee, or as may be obtained by the standing com6. Recommends, however, that, whenever it is necesmittee from any other official or responsible source
sary for practical reasQns to appoint members other
which it deems· useful, and will prepare, on the basis of
than representatives who sit on the Trusteeship Council,
this preliminary examination, proposals for action to
the Council consider inviting Members of the United
be taken on each petition by the Council;
2. Requests the Administering Authorities to sub- - Nations which are not members of the Trusteeship
Council to nominate suitably qualified persons.
mit to the Trusteeship Council each year special in361st plenary meeting,
formation concerning action taken on the recommenda18 J am~y 1952.
tions of the Council in respect of all petitions examined,
except in those cases where the Council does not deem
it necessary.
554 (VI). Participation of the indigenous inhab361st plenary meeting,
itants of the Trust Territories in the work ef
18 January 1952.
the Trusteeship Council

552 (VI). Examination of petitions

553 (VI). Organization and methods of functibning of visiting missions

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resoiution 434 (V) of 2 December 1950 it recommended that the Trusteeshi{> Council
review the organization and functioning of visiting mis• See Trusteeship Council resolution 347 (IX).

The General Assembly,
Considering that point 9 of the Secretary-General's
"Memorandum 3 of points for consideration in the development of a twenty-year programme for achieving
peace through the United Nations" rdvocates the use
of the United Nations to promote by peaceful means
1
See Official Records of the Gnin-al Assnnbly, Fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 60.
