United Nations

A/RES/70/233

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 March 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 72 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2015
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/70/489/Add.3)]

70/233. Situation of human rights in Myanmar
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 the International Covenants on Human Rights 2 and other relevant
human rights instruments, and recalling its previous resolutions on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar, the most recent of which is resolution 69/248 of
29 December 2014, those of the Commission on Human Rights and those of the
Human Rights Council, the most recent of which are resolutions 28/23 of 27 March
2015 3 and 29/21 of 3 July 2015, 4
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights
in Myanmar 5 and the facilitation by the Government of Myanmar of the visits of his
Special Adviser to the country from 15 to 20 January, from 24 to 26 February, from
17 to 22 March, from 22 May to 6 June, on 6 and 7 August and from 12 to
16 October 2015,
Welcoming also the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on the situation of human rights in Myanmar 6 and the access granted to her
during her visits to Myanmar from 7 to 16 January and from 3 to 7 August 2015,
1.
Welcomes the continued positive developments in Myanmar towards
political and economic reform, democratization and national reconciliation, good
governance and the rule of law and the efforts to promote and protect human rights,
recognizes the scale of the reform effort undertaken to date, and encourages the
Government of Myanmar to take further steps to consolidate the progress made and
address outstanding concerns;
2.
Also welcomes the peaceful and competitive conduct of the elections on
8 November 2015, the participation in voting of large numbers of the people of
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventieth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/70/53),
chap. III, sect. A.
4
Ibid, chap. V, sect. A.
5
A/70/332 and Corr.1.
6
A/70/412.
2

15-16987 (E)

*1516987*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/233

Situation of human rights in Myanmar

Myanmar and the efforts made towards ensuring a credible electoral process,
commends this significant step towards democracy, encourages the authorities to
continue to ensure a transparent approach in subsequent stages of the electoral
process, further welcomes the invitation and access given to domestic and
international observer organizations to monitor the elections by the Gover nment of
Myanmar and the Union Election Commission, and encourages the authorities to
implement the recommendations made by those organizations to further strengthen
Myanmar’s electoral process;
3.
Expresses serious concern over, and encourages action to address,
political disenfranchisement and discriminatory disqualification of candidates,
including with respect to members of the Rohingya community and persons
belonging to religious and ethnic minorities;
4.
Encourages continued efforts by parties to engage in early, constructive
and inclusive dialogue towards a smooth transition to the next government, and calls
upon all stakeholders to cooperate in ensuring that, during the period between the
final election announcement and the formation of the next government, there is an
atmosphere of calm and restraint, with respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as well as the rule of law;
5.
Stresses that the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion or
belief applies equally to all persons, regardless of their religion or belief and
without any discrimination as to their equal protection under the law;
6.
Calls upon all actors to sustain the democratic transition of Myanmar by
bringing all national institutions, including the military, under a democratically
elected, fully representative civilian government;
7.
Welcomes the steps taken to strengthen good governance and the rule of
law, and calls upon the Government of Myanmar to continue such efforts, esp ecially
through continued constitutional, legislative, judicial and institutional reform, and
recalls the importance of ensuring, including through the revision of laws, that
existing and new legislation is fully compatible with democratic principles and
human rights obligations and commitments, including, as part of those obligations,
the right to freedom of religion or belief, the human rights of women and children
and the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
8.
Recalls the handling of certain demonstrations, and encourages the
Government of Myanmar to continue its efforts to fulfil its human rights obligations
and commitments to protect the right to freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly, to create and maintain a safe and enabling environment for civil
society and independent media and to take appropriate steps to ensure the safety and
security of journalists, civil society activists and human rights defenders and their
freedom to pursue their activities;
9.
Welcomes the recent release of some prisoners of conscience, while
urging the Government of Myanmar to resume working with the political prisoner
review committee and to fulfil its commitment to the unconditional release of all
political prisoners, including those recently detained or convicted, and to provide
for the full rehabilitation of former prisoners of conscience;
10. Urges the Government of Myanmar to step up its efforts to end
remaining human rights violations and abuses, including arbitrary arrest and
detention, forced displacement, rape and other forms of sexual violence, torture and
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, arbitrary deprivation of property, including
land, and violations of international humanitarian law in some parts of the country,

2/4

Situation of human rights in Myanmar

A/RES/70/233

and repeats its call upon the Government to take necessary measures to ensure
accountability and end impunity;
11. Welcomes the signing of the nationwide ceasefire agreement by the
Government of Myanmar with eight armed groups as a significant step and as
progress towards initiating an inclusive and comprehensive national political
dialogue with the objective of achieving lasting peace, encourages the Government
and remaining non-signatory ethnic armed groups to continue discussions towards
realizing the signing of the agreement, and urges all parties to end violence and to
fully implement existing ceasefire agreements, including by protecting individuals
against ongoing violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law and by granting safe, timely, full and unhindered
humanitarian access to all areas;
12. Urges the Government of Myanmar to intensify its efforts to address
discrimination, human rights violations, displacement and economic deprivation
affecting members of various ethnic and religious minorities and stateless
populations, and to counter incitement to hatred and hate speech leading to violence,
and expresses concern over the recent enactment of four laws relating to issues of
race and religion and continuing concern over the 1982 Citizenship Law;
13. Calls upon the Government of Myanmar to ensure the rule of law and to
further increase its efforts to promote tolerance and peaceful coexistence in all
sectors of society by, inter alia, further facilitating interfaith and inte rcommunal
dialogue, and to issue identity documents that secure the legal status and rights of
all former white-card holders in accordance with the Government’s international
commitments to respect human rights without discrimination of any kind;
14. Reiterates its serious concern about the situation of the Rohingya in
Rakhine State and of other minorities subject to marginalization and instances of
human rights violations and abuses, and calls upon the Government of Myanmar to
protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all individuals, including
persons belonging to the Rohingya minority, to allow for self -identification, to
ensure equal access to full citizenship and related rights, including civil and
political rights, for all stateless persons, freedom of movement, as well as the safe
and voluntary return of internally displaced persons to their communities of origin,
and rapid and unhindered access to humanitarian assistance without discrimination,
to ensure equal access to services, particularly health and education, the right to
marry and birth registration and to undertake full, transparent and independent
investigations into all reports of human rights violations and abuses in order to
ensure accountability and bring about reconciliation;
15. Calls upon the Government of Myanmar to ensure its full cooperation
with all parties and to allow full access for humanitarian assistance to affected
persons and communities, and in this regard urges the Government to implement the
various cooperation agreements not yet implemented, made between the authorities
of Myanmar and the international community for the distribution of humanitarian
aid to all affected areas, including Rakhine State, without discrimination;
16. Underlines its strong concern at the plight of migrants, including asylum
seekers, and refugees in the Andaman Sea and the Bay of Bengal and travelling
along land routes, and, welcoming the commitment by Governments in the region to
provide temporary shelter and protection for refugee s, encourages the continued
efforts of the Government of Myanmar, other countries in the region, regional
organizations and the international community to save lives, to take appropriate
measures to prevent and counter trafficking in persons and the smuggl ing of all

3/4

A/RES/70/233

Situation of human rights in Myanmar

categories of migrants, while extending protections to victims of trafficking and
smuggled migrants, and to address the root causes of this migration;
17. Welcomes the recent signature by the Government of Myanmar of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2 and the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, 7 and the Government’s progress towards ending the recruitment
and use of child soldiers, encourages consideration of the ratification of additional
international human rights conventions, including the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights 2 and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 8 also welcomes the engagement of
the Government with the United Nations, regional organizations and other actors, and
encourages the full implementation of relevant agreements and commitments,
notably the 2012 action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children
by the armed forces and the commitment to end forced labour by 2015;
18. Urges the Government of Myanmar to further facilitate the work of the
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar and to grant her unimpeded access to the country, bearing in mind the lack
of such access, including to Rakhine State, during her last visit, and to fulfil its
commitment, without further delay, to establish a country office with a full mandate
and in accordance with the mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights;
19. Encourages the international community to continue to support the
Government of Myanmar in the fulfilment of its international human rights and
international humanitarian law obligations and commitments, the implementation of
its democratic transitional process, its economic and social development and its
efforts towards achieving lasting peace;
20.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To continue to provide his good offices and to pursue his discussions on
human rights, democracy and reconciliation in Myanmar, involvi ng all relevant
stakeholders, and to offer technical assistance to the Government of Myanmar in
this regard, bearing in mind the considerations contained in his report of 19 August
2015 relating to the future of the mandate of his Special Adviser on Myanma r; 9
(b) To give all assistance necessary to enable the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Myanmar and the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in Myanmar to discharge their mandates fully, effectively and in a
coordinated manner;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its seventy-first session, as well as
to the Human Rights Council, on the progress made in the implementation of the
present resolution;
21. Decides to remain seized of the matter on the basis of the reports of the
Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur.
82nd plenary meeting
23 December 2015

_______________
7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2173, No. 27531.
Ibid., vol. 1465, No. 24841.
9
A/70/332 and Corr.1, para. 45.
8

4/4
