UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2292”

MEETING:

17 JULY

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2292) . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .L . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

. . .. . .. . . . .. . .. . .. . . .. . . .. . .. . . . .. . . . . .. . . . .. . ..

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 July 1981 from the Charg6 d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/145%) , , , , . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV .2292

NOTE
Symbols
of United Nations documents
are composed
of capital
bined with figures.
Mention
of such a symbol indicates
a reference
Nations document.

letters comto a United

Documents
of the Security
Council (symbol
S/ . . .) are normally
published
in
quarterly
Supplements
of the Oflcial
Records of the Security
Council.
The date
of the document
indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions
of the Security
Council,
numbered
in accordance
with a
system adopted
in 1%4, are published
in yearly
volumes
of Resolutions
and
Decisimts
of the Security Cwncil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively
to resolutions
adopted before 1 January
1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2292nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 17 July 1981, at 8.45 p.m.
&es/dent:

Mr. Id6 OUMAROU

(Niger).

Prrsc~tt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Provisional agenda (SIAgenrW2292)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 July 1981 from the Char&
d’affaires ai. of the Permanent Mission of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/145%)
The meeting

was callrd

to order

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council invite the. Permanent Observer of the
Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the consideration of the question entitled ‘The
situation in the Middle East’, in accordance with
usual practice of the Council.”
3. The proposal of the representative of Tunisia is
not madi pursuant to rule j7 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Council, but if ap
proved by the Council, the invitation to participate
in the debate would confer on the Palestine Liberation
Oruanization (PLO) the same rights of participation
as those conferred on Member States when invited to
participate in a debate in accordance with the provisions of rule 37.

at 8.50 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The ugendu

I have received a letter dated 17 July 1981 from the
representative of Tunisia [S/14597], which reads as
follows:

was adopted.

The situation in the Mlddlc East:
Letter dated 17 July 1981 fhun the Chcrg4 d’cfhlrca
8.1. cf the Permcncnt My:&5 g
United Ndow addmwd
Seeurlty ccundl w4!w)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from
Frenchj:
I rhould like to inform mcmbcrc of the Security Council
thct I have received kttcra hm the rcprcwntctivc8
of Israel, Jordan and Lebanon, in which they ask to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the agreement of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

4. Does any member of the Council wish to speak
on this proposal?
5. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
As recently as I2 June [228Oth meeting],
the United
States delegation explained to the Council the reasons
why the United States opposes the special procedure
proposed to afford the PLO the same rights of participation in the proceedings of the Council as if the PLO
were 8 state.
6. In brief, we cannot qp~ to a formula that conrtitutcr a departure from the ruler of procedure of the
Council, a formula which has 18 it8 purpose enhancing
the prestige of those to whom it is.directcd.
7. We have no objection to the Council’s hearing
the PLO but, in accordance with the rules, that can
legally be accomplished only on the basis of rule 39,
which empowers the Council to grant hearings to
persons speaking on Lehalf of non-governmental
entities.
8. Accordingly, I ask that the terms of this proposed
invitation be put to the vote. The United States will
vote “no”.

2. The PRESIDENT fiatcqmtatiorr
$wn
Frwwhj:
I should like to inform members of the Council that

9. The PRESIDENT (i,rtc~rp~cltclriorl from French):
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak at

this stage, I shall take it that the Counci;
vote on the proposal
of Tunisia.

is ready

to

1.~ fil~*ol/r:
China,
German
Democratic
Republic,
Ireland,
Mexico,
Niger, Panama,
Philippines,
Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Agcrittst:

United

Absictir?bti;:
Great Britain

States

of America.

France,
Japan,
United
and Northern
Ireland.

At the bvitrtticm
estine Liblwtiuu
Council table.

Kingdom

of

of the President.
Mr. Terzi (PulOrgnnizrttion)
took a pluce ut the

IO. The PRESIDENT
(Lterpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members
of the Council that
I have received
a letter dated 17 July 1981 [S//4598]
from the representative
of Tunisia
to the United
Nations,
which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security Council to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud,
Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations,
to participate
in the consideration
of the
question entitled ‘The situation
in the Middle East’,
under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure.”
11. If 1 hear no objection,
I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation
to Mr. Maksoud,
under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

12. The PRESIDENT
(interpretutlon
from French):
The Council is meeting today in response to the request
contained
in a letter dated 17 July from the Char&

d’tiaires

of the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the

United
Nations,
addressed
to the President
of the
Council.
I should like to draw the attention of members
of the Council
to the following
other documents:
a
letter dated 13 July from the representative
of Lebanon
addressed
to the President
of the Security
Council
]S//45XS];
and two letters dated 15 and 16 July from
the representative
of Israel, addressed to the President
of the Security
Council [S//4.59/ cud S//4594].
13.

1 call on the Secretary-General.

14. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I do not need to
stress to the Security
Council the seriousness
of the
situation
that has developed
in and around Lebanon.
After several weeks of relative quiet in the area, a new
cycle of violence has begun and-has, in the past week,
steadilv
intensified.
On IO July. the Israeli air force
attacked
targets in south Lebanon.
On the evening of

the same day, Palestinian
elements tired artillery
and
rockets into northern
Israel. Since that time there have
been further air attacks, including air strikes on the city
of Beirut today. There have aldo been exchanges
of
shelling involving
the Israeli defence forces and the
dejkto forces, on the one hand, and armed elements,
mainly Palestinian,
on the other. The areas affected by
the hostilities
include
Beirut,
Damour,
Zahrani,
Sidon, Nabatiyah,
Hasbaiya
and Tyre in Lebanon
as
well as Kiryat Shmona and Nahariya
in Israel. There
have been heavy civilian
casualties
in Lebanon;
there
have been civilian casualties
in Israel as well. I deeply
deplore the extensive
human suffering
caused by these
developments.
15. The Charg6 d’affaires
of Lebanon
has conveyed
to the Council
his Government’s
protest
over the
Israeli attacks. The representative
of Israel has transmitted to the Council his Government’s
protests over
the shelling by Palestinian
forces of towns and inhabited localities
in northern
Israel. I have also received
a series of communications
from the Chairman
of the
Palestine
Liberation
Organization
protesting
against
the Israeli attacks.
16. While these incidents
have been taking place,
the area controlled
by the United
Nations-Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has been tense but quiet.
To the extent that they could be observed,
UNiFIL
has reported
on Israeli air strikes and on exchanges
of
fire involving
positions close to the UNIFIL
area.
17. As an immediate
problem,
I wish to draw the
Council’s
attention to the very serious consequences
of
the destruction
of Kasmiyah
bridge on the Litani River

and other bridges and key points along the TyreBeirut

coastal

road.

The

blocking

of this

vital

com-

munications link is bound to create great difficulties
for the people and the economy of south Lebanon,
oarticularlv at this moment which is the oeak of the
&ricultu&l
season. UNIFIL will also be ‘a!Yected by
the blocking of its main SUDBIY route. UNIFIL is
studying, asa matter of the greaiest urgency, the best
meansofdealing with these problems and, in particular,
the transport of supplies via an alternative route
through its area.
18. Since the beginning of this latest series of events,
I and my colleagues
at Headquarters,
as well as the
United Nations representatives
in the area, have been
in contact with all concerned
with a view to securing
a cessation
of the hostilities.
I regret to inform
the
Council that so far these efforts have been to no avail,
as is tragically
affirmed
by the events of today.
19. I am sure that members of the Council share my
deep concern
and dismay at the heavy escalation
of
violence
in the area and, in particular,
the bombing
of centres of population.
All acts of violence
which
result in civilian
casualties,
wherever
they may take
place, are to be deplored.
In particular,
I am concerned
that a continuation
of this trend could destroy
any

27. Thirdly,
the market
place in the old part of the
city of Sidon and some coffee shops have been shelled
on several occasions.

possibility
of a peaceful
solution
of the great human
problems
which have to be faced in that vital part of
the world. I am convinced
that the only way outof this
tragic situation
is, as a first step, an immediate
return
to the cease-fire and a deliberate
effort by all the parties
to find means to put an end to the escalation
of violence
which is now taking such a tragic toll in this region.
1 have therefore
appealed
again to all concerned
to
revert
immediately
to the cease-fire.
I earnestly
hope that all concerned
will respond
urgently
to this
and similar appeals.

20. The PRESIDENT
The next
on whom

28. Pourthly,
for two hours seven aircraft
continuously bombed
and strafed
civilian
targets
in West
Beirut,
including
the Arab University,
a mosque,
a high school, a stadium and the roads leading out of
the city towards
the south.
29. As a result of these attacks,
preliminary
reports
speak of about 380 people killed and 800 wounded.
The latest casualty
figures
that we heard before
entering this hall included the case of a mother who had
given birth yesterday
who was killed and whose oneday-old
Infant son had his leg amputated.
The final
toll may be much higher.

~ir~tc~~p~ercrlio,ifrw~n Frcwh):

speaker is the representative
I now call.

of Lebanon,

21. Mr. SAGHIYYAH

(Lebanon):
Sir, I should like
to congratulate
you on your assumption
of the duties
of President
of the Council
for the month of July.
Your country,
Niger,
and that of your predecessor,
the representative
of Mexico,
have both played host to
large numbers
of our people.
Many of them went to
Niger and Mexico
in happier times, but many of them
have sought refuge from the carnage and tragedy
that
our country
has been going through
over the past
six or seven years.

30. Israel bears full responsibility
for these attacks,
for it was Israel which provoked
this recurrent
cycle
of violence.
This affair is more serious than usual,
because the civilian nature of the targets and the large
number of Lebanese women and children killed during
these attacks add a further
dimension
to the tragedy.
31. The members
of the Council
are aware of the
violence
and conflict
that took place in Lebanon
in
April,
May and June. No sooner had the fighting
stopped than Israel started its own version
of provoking conflict and violence.

22. I wish to thank the members
of the Council for
allowing
me to speak. I wish also to convey my Govemmen&
appreciation
for the very clear and-meaningful statement
that the Secretary-General
he.s just
made.

32. The dangerous
aspect of this escalation
is that
not only does it aim to destabilize
Lebanon but, in view
of the destruction
of the bridges I referred
to earlier,
it seriously
hampers and can Get-y well undermine
the
whole peace-keeping
effort decided on by the Council
on 19-March
lfi8-[reso/u/ion
425 (/9?8)].
A clear
pattern
is emerging
according
to which every
time
serious peace moves are under%ken
to find a settlement to the Lebanese crisis, Israel explodes
the situation and pretmpts
the success of those moves.

23. The latest Israeli attacks on Lebanon
have been
unwarranted
by the facts. Israel provoked
hostilities
and used the ensuing cycle of violence
as a pretext
to carry out its policy
of pre-emptive
strikes.
We
condemn
this policy,
and we equally
condemn
the
cycle of violence
in Lebanon.
We regret the loss of
innocent
life, the destruction
of property
and the
hardships created as a result for the Lebanese people.

33.
1 should

We wish

once

more

to emphasize

the fact that

Lebanon, which has never been heavily engaged in
actual fighting in the Arab-Israeli
wars, is being turned,
against the will of its Government and its people, into
an arena for a fifth Arab-Israeli war. My Government
has always sought pcaee with justice in the Middle East

to add a few details to the statement
that has just been made by the Secretary-General.

24.

like

25. First, the bridges at Zahrzni,
Kasmiyab,
J&ah,
Habboush,
Arab S&m,
Bourghoz
and Dell&l
were
completely
demolished
in an anoarent
attemnt
to

and will continue

to do so. Our

aim at this stnge is to

apply the regime established by the Lebanese-Israeli
Armistice Agreement of 1949.’ and to that effect we call
upon the Council to pronounce itself on the necessity
of reactivating the Israel-Lebanon Mixed Armistice
Commission. We should like the Council to make its
authority felt through the moral and political support
it can give to UNIFIL, enabling it to implement fully
its mandate to restore the authority and sovereignty
of the Lebanese Governm:nt over every inch of its
territory, and we condemn all acts which prevent the
realization of those aims.

isolate southc:n Lebanon from the rest of the country.
including the area of operations of the UNIFIL.
which has a Lebanese army contingent under its
operational command. This is a source of deep concern
to my Government and indeed, 1 think, to the members
of the Council.
26. Secondly, two important economic targets were
hit and destroyed. A refrigerator factory in the village
of Naameh, south of Beirut. employing several hundred
people, was hit, as was the American-owned oil pipeline terminal and refinery at Zahrani. At the time this
statement was written the tanks were in flames.

34. The Council has once again been called upon to
be seized and to continue to be seized of this situation
3

I should add that in the indiscriminate shelling of
Klryat Shmona a synagogue was also totally destroyed.
In today’s bombardment of the town of Nahariya
a hospital was hit and a number of patients were
injured.

and to take any action it deems necessary for the
immddiate cessation of hostilities. to prevent further
deterioration of the situation, to end aggression and
to help to create an atmosphere conducive to the total
implementation of UNIFiL’s mandate, so that it can
remain the “conflict control mechanism” in the area,
to use the words of the Secretary-General in his latest
report on the renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL
[S/14537, puru. 621.

42. The PLO has never made any secret of its lntention to expand and escalate Its criminal designs.
If any further proof were needed, only this week
Hanni Al-Hassan, one of Yasser A&at’s henchmen,
indicated in the Beirut weekly Momfuy Morning
that
the PLO was preparing to launch a massive offensive
against Israel, with the support and assistance of the
Soviet Union.

35. My Government and people, who have had
more than their fair share of suffering, appeal to you,
Mr. President, and to the other members of the Council, to stop the carnage. All military and armed action
should stop forthwith so that we can cope with the
problems already created: meet the demands imposed
by a massive exodus of the civilian population from
the areas under attack, hospltallze the wounded and
bury the deed. What everybody in this hall takes for
granted-the
right to live in peace and security.lppears to be a luxury in Lebanon. We have never
hurt any country or any people. We demand that thase
who are hurting us stop once and for all.

43. From Israel’s point of view, this public announcement only corroborated reliable information which
has been reaching us steadily over the last few months
about the PLO’s preparations to step up its attacks on
Israel.
44. In the last few months we have witnessed a new
phase in this campaign-an escalation of a kind and
size which has signalled a change in the tactics of the
PLO and its supporters, both within and beyond the
Middle East.

36. My delegation reserves the right to speak at
a later stage in this debate to elaborate further on this
question.

45. There has, of course, always been a division of
labour between the Arab rejectionlst States and the
PLO. In recent months, however, we have witnessed
a conscious policy on the part of certain Arab States
of oueninn their arsenals to the PLO and nutting into
its bands-heavy weapons with far greater fire-power
than before and in quantities which they have never
had before.

37. The PRESIDENT !interpretutbrr
from French):
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Israel. I call upon him.
38. Mr. BLUM (israel): Mr. President, at the outset
let me pay my respects to you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. I am
sure you will conduct the Council’s business with the
same skill and fairness which you exhibited in May of
last year, when the Council also deliberated a number
of difftcult issues.

46. The build-up has been massive and it has come
in the first instance from Libya and Syria. Libya, for
example, has supplied the PLO both directly and
indlrectlv throunh Syria with batteries of SAM-9
surface-&lr mi&les: In addition, the Libyans-those
well-known paymasters and quartermasters of international terrorism-have
also supplied the crews to
man thase weapons which are stationed in the areas
of Damaur pnd Beirut. In this connection, 1 should
aho ooint out that the headauarters of the PLO and of
all the organizations affiliated to it are located in
sections of Beirut and its environs which are under
direct Syrian control and protection,

39. I should also like to take this oawrtunitv of
ying a tribute to the representative’of
Me&o,
r. Muiioz Ledo. for the able manner in which he
conducted the Council’s proceedings last month.

E

49. How short political memories are. Pa
some members of the Council have forgottenYzt
despicable crimes perpetrated by the PLO at Avivim,
Ma’alot. Kiryat Shmona, Nahariya and many other
towns, cities and villages in Israel. If others have
forgotten, we have not. We know and remember that
,lte organization of international terrorists which calls
itself the PLO is engaged in a relentless campaign of
murder against Israel and its people.

47. Behind Syria and Libya stands that super-Power
which uses &hem and the PLO to advance its interests
in the Middle East with a view to continuing its penetration of the Middle East and the destabilization of
the area as a whole. The Soviet Union has not hesitated
in recent months to supply the PLO with new and
sophisticated military mcrtirkl.
These supplies have
reached the PLO through various channels, sometimes
through thrrd countries in the Soviet bloc and sometimes, as I have just mentioned, through various
Arab countries.

41. The number of people, Israelis and others, who
have been murdered in the PLO’s unending atrocities
in recent years runs into hundreds. In my letters of I5
and 16 July 1981 addressed to you, Mr. President
[S//45Y/ cc& S//45Y4i, 1 drew your urgent attention
to the latest of these PLO outrages involving the loss
of life and limb and considerable damage to property.
4

48. It is common knowledge that the PLO has long
used weapons of Soviet manufacture, including
130.millimetre and 155.millimetre Howitzers, as well
as, of course, Katyusha rockets and launchers. On
25 February of this year, it was announced that the
PLO would be supplied through a Soviet-bloc country
with over 50 additional tanks as well as troop carriers
and other equipment. Today, these Soviet-made tanks,
mainly T-34s, T-546 and T-558, are located in PLO
emplacements in Sidon and In Beirut. In southern
Lebanon, tens o? heavy artillery pieces have been
deployed by the PLO, including mortars and recoilless
rocket launchers of up to and including 12Zmillimetre
and 130-millimetre calibre.
49. All these supplies, both direct and indirect,
represent a significant escalation in the Soviet Union’s
arms supply policy to the PLO. They are designed to
bring about a substantial increase in the PLO’s offensive capacity and its methods of operation.

any condemnation by the United Nations of the PLO’s
criminal activities in general and those from Lebanon
in particular. In our numerous letters to the Council
and to the Secretary-General, we have repeatedly
emphasized the gravity with which those activities
must be viewed, as well as Israel’s duty to protect
the lives and security of its citizens. And I repeat:
all our communications have gone unheeded. In these
circumstances, it has fallen to my Government to stand
up to the scourge of PLO terror. Confronted by repeated PLO outrages coupled with the inability of the
Lebanese Government to fulfil its international obligations, Israel cannot be expected to sit back passively
and wait with folded arms for further barbarities to be
perpetrated against the civilian population by PLO
terrorists.
53. Indeed, I would ask what State represented on
the Council would sit back idly and allow Its own
women and children to be murdered and maimed by
terrorists?

50. If any last doubts lingered about the direct Soviet
involvement in the training of PLO operatives in the
Soviet Union, they were shattered by none other than
the PLO representative in Moscow, Muhammad
Ibrahim Al-Sha’ir, who gave an interview that was
published in Beirut newspapers on 17 February 1981
in which he stated:

54. Members of the Council need scarcely be reminded that under international law, if a State is
unwilling or unable to prevent the use of its territory
to attack another State, that latter State is entitled
to take all necessary measures in its own defence.
55. The Government of Israel is in fact exercising
the inherent right of self-defence enjoyed by every
sovereign State, a right also preserved under Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations. Israel’s response
to PLO terror is what anv self-respecting sovereign
State would do in similar circumstances.

“The oizanization is satisfied with this assistance.
Scores and hundzds of Palestinian oftlcers eligible
to command major sectors, such as brigades, have
graduated from Soviet military academies.”
He added that 2,000 Palestinians are studying at Soviet
schools and that the number of grants resewed for the
PLO was 800 a year, mostly in scientific and technical
fields.

56. I must stress that Israel’s actions are specifically
directed against concentrations of PLO -terrorists
in Lebanon. Among the tarpets hit yesterday and today
were the headquarters of the so-called Democratic
Front in Damour and of the so-called Arab Liberation
Front in Ain Al-Hilwc; a Fatah training camp ln the
Zahrani area; the operations centre of Fateh in Beirut;
and the centre of the Democratic Front in Beirut.
In addition, a number of bridges which served prlncipelly as the PLO supply Iinea were destroyed.

5 I. The PLO domination over large parts of Lebanon
and the anarchy it has created there are not ends in
themselves. They are, above all, a means of assuring
the PLO freedom of operation to conduct its indiscriminate acts of terror against my country. Thb is
deemed necessary by the Arab qiectionirt
States
because of the role that they have rllotted to the PLO
in their grand design for an all-out war agalnst Israel.
Those Arab States regard Lebanon as one of the most
important bridgeheads for launching what they call
the “next round” against Israel. While they are steadily
amassing artillery, armour; and aircraft in quantities
now exceeding those of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, they have allocated to the PLO a special
task and set it the objective of using Lebanon as a
launching pad for acts of hostility, terror, sabotage
and subversion against Israel and its civilian population.

57. The unfortunate fact Is that for years now, the
PLO in its cowardly way has chosen to take cover in
villages and refugee camps, particularly in that part
of Lebanon under its control.
58. The former Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations, Mr. Ghorra, did not mince
words on this subiect in his memorable speech of
14 October 1976 beiore the General Assembly,f and all
of us are well aware that since then the PLO has also
entrenched itself in parts of Beirut. as well as in the
towns of Tyre and Sidon virtually in their entirety.

52. Israel has invariably brought the outrages committed by the PLO against its population to the attention of the Security Council and of the SecretaryGeneral, but to no avail. One would look in vain for

59. I must emphasize that it has never been Israel’s
intention to harm innocent Lebanese civilians. Because
of the way the PLO deploys itself, they tragically find
5

themselves caught in the cross-fire. Israel deeply
regrets any loss of life or ir\iury of civilians on either
side of the Israel-Lebanese border.

by virtue of forcible expulsion and massive Zionist
terrorism, which resulted in 1947-1948 in their expulsion from what had been the lands of their forefathers
throughout history.

60. The real problem before the international community and before the Council at this moment is how
to put an end to international terror in general-of
which the PLO is the linchpin-and, more specifically,
how to put an end to PLO terror against Israel.

67. The world in its entirety must understand that
the Palestinians’ only wish is to return to their usurped
homes and homeland in occupied Palestine. They have
no desire to remain in Lebanbn, even though it is dear
to their hearts. Their day of deliverance will be the
day when they no longer have to endure the intolerable ordeal they have been enduring for 30 years as
residents in the squalor of refugee camps, while the
alien intruders live in their homes and toil their lands.

61. Israel is entitled to expect that the territory of
Lebanon will not be permitted to serve, as it has for
so many years, as a launching pad for murderous
attacks against its citizens. Any realistic appraisal of
the matter before the Council must take that fact into
account. If certain members of the Council are able and
willing to ignore the harsh realities confronting Israel,
we cannot.

68. The Israeli outlaws of today are a mere replica
of their own selves. They are terrorists who 30 years
ago brought about the uprooting of the Palestinian
people. The only difference is that today they are
called a State and armed to the teeth with the most
lethal weapons of destruction, heaped upon them by
either a misguided or a hostage United States, whose
policies towards the Middle East are evidently and
manifestly drawn up in places other than Washington.
What an unprecedented irony that a small nation of
3 million should have obtained the power to formulate
and direct a super-Power’s national interest, by the
bigotry and lawlessness of its small ally! What an irony
that weaponry systems of great sophistication should
be showered upon bloodthirsty, reckless and expansionist Israel even before such systems are given to
America’s closest allies in Europe and elsewhere!

62. Let me conclude by repeating what I have already
stated on several occasions previously. Israel has no
fIghI with Lebanon. Israel sincerely desires peace with
and in Lebanon. We have supported and we continue to
support the independence,- sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of Lebanon within its internationally
rec&ized
boutidarles. We wish that the effective
authority of the Lebanese Ciovemment could be
restored at an early date over those large parts of its
country controlled by foreign elements.
63. If the Security Council wishes to address itself
seriously to the question before it, it must abandon the
blinkered attitude it has so studiously exhibited thus far
In the face of the slaughter of tens of thousands of
Lebanese civilians by the Syrian army of occupation
and by the terrorist PLO over recent years. As a first
practical step, it must demand the removal of all foreign
armies and terrorists from Lebanese territory.

69. This question-and
it is a sad question indeed
for all of us-is being increasingly asked, both by many
discerning sections of the American people and by
people elsewhere, because the answer to it has a heavy
impact upon world peace and security: What is the
dividing line between the United States and Israel?
Or have the two practically coalesced? Or is one
overriding the other?

64. The PRESIDENT fintcrpretatiun
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

70. The United States possesses by far a preponderance of the Middle East’s strate@c resources.
including the utilization of staggering tbnds and unllmited economic opportunities. And yet Israel’s blatant
diktat imposes upon the United States the adoption of
brutal and immoral policip- against the very people
in whose area-the
Middle East--those colossal
interests are exploited. It is a truly unique and unprecedented situation---except for the dark chapter of
Viet Nam and the reckless bombing and cannibalization in 1970 of the people of Kampuchea, one of the
most civilized and ancient people in the world. That
triggered the appalling chain of events and the catastrophe which the Kampucheai? people are facing at
present, and which I hope the Middle East region will
be spared.

U, Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Sir, it ir my privilege
t@ express my felkitations to you, the representative
Of ftiendly Nimr, oti your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month of July, with full confidence in your statesmanship and wisdom. It is also
my privilege to congratulate Mr. MuRoz Ledo of
friendly Mexico for the exemplary and dynamic manner
in which he presided over the Council last month.
66. We are meeting today to discuss the barbarous,
systematic and indiscriminate war-mongering attacks
against the sisterly independent and sovereign State
of Lebanon, one of the early founding Members of the
United Nations. These attacks are a continuum and are
part of a vastly augmented pattern of undisturbed
iggression begun 11 years ago-against the indomitable
Lebanese people and their equally indomitable Palestinian refugee guests, who are there not by choice, but

71. Today’s massive raids on the capital of Lebanon,
the historic, beautiful and unmatched Beirut-and
I am sure many in this chamber know Beirut very
6

\\r,ll

IriW

rcsirlcnli:ll

I)\~‘I’ ?W innoccnl civilians in their
hospituls, schools, universities,

;I~~IIWIIIS.

~ilr~sr~~~r‘s WI rcl‘ugcc cmps,
in addition
of course to
~hr man) hundreds
wounded und rendered homeless.
No, one knows ~hc tinal count as yet, because there are

n\i\n~ IWIL

W~~IWI~

und children still under the debris

of dcstroycd
apartment
buildings.
In any case, as the
rcprcscntativc
of Lebanon
has said, the number
of
casualties will be far greater than the figure 1 have just

mentioned.
72. In I%& even before
had been forced to arm

the Palestinians
in Lebanon
themselves
in self-defence,

I was one of those who witnessed at close range
-possibly

at a distance

of 300 metres-the

almost

76. The PRESIDENT (intarprrtcrriolt
fitrm FrtwlrJ:
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organiration, on whom I now call.
77. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
If the representative of terrorist Begin believes that
the Security Council can believe that military tanks
T-349, T-349. T-S% and 155 Howitzers were in place
in the Arab University of Beirut and in the Mosque
of Imam Ali when both places were bombed today,
causing hundreds of casualties-if he believes that
that military hardware was also found in the refrigerator
factory in Naameh, then he would expect the Council
to believe anything.

total

destruction of Lebanon’s civil national airline on the
tarmac of Beirut international airport. Fourteen Boeing
and other civilian aircraft were destroyed. That was
in reprisal for what? That is what I should like to know.
The Security Council condemned the aggression in
1968.
73, No matter what the intensity of the verbal condemnation of the daily massive raids on Lebanese
civilians and Palestinian refugees, or the number of
mild slaps on the wrist, there is not a single citizen in
our region-and I am telling the truth-who
is not
completely convinced that even though the pilots
of those F-I% and F-lb
may have Israeli identity
cards, or possibly a dual nationality legitimized SW
cifIcally for the first time to serve Israeli purposes, the
television and compute&cd guidance systems and
aircraft are American-made. The Government of the
Unlted States, which has officially sanctified Israeli
aggression against Christian and Moslem Lebanon,
must bear the heaviest moral responsibility for the
innocent victims of those barbarous raids.
It has
declared-1 believe yesterday-that the use of such
weapons is an act of self-defence. 1 cannot see how the
killing of hundreds or thousands of civilians by F-l%
and F-165 is a legitimate act of self-defence. The
peopka of the Arab world know this fact all too well;
ihei; Governments have come round to this conclusion, which is inescapable.
74. As for the Security Council, if it should fail to act
decisively, in deeds and not in words, against such
blatant aggression, against this situation ofwar, then let
all the peoples of the world know that a new era of the
law of the jungle has practically
and undisguisedly
supplanted
the international
order based on the Chartel
and international
law. Let us face that sad fact.
75. It is a basic +cision
which devolves
upon the
Security
Council:
it must make the decision
and live
with the consequences.
It should not matter very much
-we
are accustomed
to this-that
an aggressive Israel
will as usual reject any Council decision,
as it has done
for decades.
What is important
is that the Council
should act without
inhibitions,
in accordance
with its
own provisions
and inspired by the guidance given by
the Charter.

78. At the outset I wish to say that I feel it a great
honour, Mr. President, that you, a son of liberated
Africa and brother freedom fighter, are chairing this
meeting. I wish to thank you, Sir, and through you
the other member5 of the Council who have also agreed
to invite the Palestine Liberation Organlzation to
participate in this debate.
79. At this point, I should also like to extend to the
representative of Mexico the expression of my highest
esteem for his prudence and the sense of diplomacy
that he manifested during the debate on another
Israeli criminal attack and act of aggression against
the peaceful country of Iraq, in its peaceful pursuit of
better conditions for its people.
80. For the representative of Begin I should like to
start bv savinn at the outset that the motto of the
crlmind and tehorist Begin, a5 pronounced in his book
7he Revolt. is this: “As for the United Nation5 Organization’s prohibitions, we would manage some&w.
In the circumstances this was no question of morals.”
That is the basis of the dealings of Begin and his respect
or disrespect for the Organization.
gl. I shall spare the Council a detailed study of the
terrorist mentality, the sacred terrorism practised
by the Zionirtr and Israel. I shall not refer to the bornbe
placed in the soukr of the Old City of Jerusalem in the
193th. I &all not now refer to the maasacm and B
of Deir Yassl.r, in which Begin took pride. I shall talk
about the latest in these criminal and terrorist attacks.
82. On I July, and after a long lull, in the most intensive shelling
of South Lebanon
for several
weeks,
Israeli artillery
pounded
the towns of Nabatiyah,
the
villages of Aichiye,
Arab Salim. Al-Kihan
and Habboush for over five hours. They also hit Beaufort
Castle, which overlooks
the Litani River and northern
Galilee.
83. It was not mere coincidence
that Israel resumed
its heavy bombardment
of southerrl
Lebanon
at that
time, on 1 and 2 July, in the wake of the Israeli elections
and after the first signs of a certain measure of detente
in the Lebanese arena-a
reconciliation
in Lebanonhad appeared.
The attack on I July, then. did not take

..,

.+2_

place in a vacuum, was not isolated from what was
happening, as my friend the representative of Lebanon has just mentioned.

.

;

runs, while others provided cover from a higher
altitude.
90. On IS July, at 1740 hours, there was intensive
shelling of Nabatiyeh and Arab Salim; at 1805 hours
there was intensive shelling of Ras AI-Ain. Rashidiyeh
and Kana Junction: at 1825 hours there was intensive
shelling of Sidon; and at 1830 hours there was concentrated shelling of Ras AI-Ain, Nabatiyeh, Sidon,
Kafer Roumane and Serba.

84. On IO July at 1 I o’clock in the morning, Israel
started another major air attack on two areas in southem Lebanon: Habboush, on the Sidon-Nabatiyeh
road, and Al-Wadi Al-Akhdar, north.eaot of Nabas
tlyeh. The raid lasted for over an hour and was accompanied by an Israeli artillery bombardment of
roads in south Lebanon, particularly in the Habboush
region. Several civilians were killed or wounded in the
raid.

91. At that moment we could not but retaliate, and
counter-attacks with rockets targeted at enemy sources
of fIre were launched.

85. Let us think for a moment about what 10 July
means. It coincides with the visit of the special envoi
of Resident Ronald Reagan, Mr. Habib, to the area.
So again, it is not accidental or an isolated event that
Israel escalated its attacks on that day-perhaps to
welcome Habib or to discourage him, I do not know.

92. Later that day, at 2040 hours, naval vessels
were operating in the vicinity of Sidon and Tyre, and
at 2110 hours the Israeli air force was overflying and
dropping flares over Rashidiyeh, Ras AI-Al& Nabatiyeh and Arab Mm. Six hundred Israeli shells were
fIred in that short period of time.

86. On I2 July, and that was last Sunday, at
I630 hours, while the Moslems were sitting down to
break their Ramadan fast, Israeli Phantoms, Mirages
and F-Ms attacked the coastal town of Damour and the
neighbouring villages of Naameh and Haret AlNaameh as well as Deir Zahrani on the SidonsNabatiyah road. The raid lasted for over 90 minutes and
involved approximately 24 planes. The refrigerator
factory in Naameh was severely bombed, and again,
as was mentioned by my good-friend and colle&e,
the respected representative of Lebanon, that was an
econotiic outlei employing scores of civilians. In
‘dition to the refrigerator factory, the Israeli aircraft
kz;ittdtile
factory in Damour, which was severely

93. That is not the law of the jungle: that is not “a
tooth for a tooth”: that is “a jaw for a tooth”.
94. But the Israelis persisted in their criminal attacks.
On 16 July they resorted to air strikes. At 1425 hours,
Damour was hit; at 1600 hours, Wadi Al-Akhdar,
Arab Salim and Jarmaq were hit, as well as Ain AlHilweh refugee camp and Zahrani and Habboush
bridges; at 1650 hours, there was another air attack on
Ain Al-Hilweh refugee camp; at 1730 hours, Kasmiyah
bridge was struck-and I think that that has affected
United Nations operations in that area: at 1735 hours,
Zahrani and Habboush bridges were again hit from
the air: at 1740 hours, the Habboush bridge was once
again hit and so was Deir Al-Zahrani; and at 1743 hours,
there were further air strikes on the Zahrani and
Habboush bridges.

87. Up to March this year, 6S civilians had been killed
and more than 100 seriously wounded. On that day of
I2 July-and it was a Sunday-I was instructed by
Chairman Arafat to approach the Secretary-OeneraI,
asking him to use his good offices to put an end to the
criminal attack. I certainly will leave it to him to inform
the Council, whenever the proper time may be, of his
;ytityt8 and endeavours. They were, of course, to no

95. In all those letters we addressed to the SecretaryGeneml we asked for his immediate intervention so that
efforta could be undertaken by the United Nations to
bring these criminal Israeli activities to an end. But,
again, to no avail. More than 50 people were killed or
8~Iourly wo~dcd on 16 July 1981.
96. I have just seen one of today’s newspapers. It
carries the banner headline: “Terror in Brooklyn
-Aged Couple Brutalized”. I wonder how the press
could describe the brutalizing and killing in cold blood
of civilians by the hundreds-and this is not yet the
end of these attacks.

88. Then, watching that escalation, Chairman Arafat
registered his strongest protest through the SecretaryGeneral; but he also wanted to state that there was a
limit to our patience, that the blood of our children
is not free for the spilling, and that our children and
women are not there lo be exterminated while the
world and we watch. And we have informed the Secretary-General that there is a limit to our patience.

97. I would describe today as an infamous day, to
the extent that the United States today cuuld not
decide whether another shinment of P .l6s could be sent
to Israel to be used to drop bombs on our refugee
cnmus and kill our civilians. I hoae to God that the
Uniied States will be sensible enouih not to send these
means of destruction and put them in the hands of the
bloodthirsty criminals in Tel Aviv.

89. Again on 14 July, Israeli bombers attacked five
villages in two areas of southern Lebanon. The attack
was directed at the Del-Hamia and Dibbiya region,
south of Damuur on the Beirut-Iiidon coastal road, at
Jarmaq and Arab Salim as well as the village of Zifta
nearby. Fine aircrafts took part in the actual bombing
8

Israeli crimes? Sometimes ono wonders. Or is the
American Administration naive enough to believe
otherwise?

98. Again, early today at 0100 hours, Beirut time,
Sidon was heavily bombed and Jamal Kaur hospital
was hit and 15 casualties were Irrportod: at 0120 hours,
Ain Al-Hilweh camp was again bombod by American
aircraft donated to the Israelis. Moreover. at that
time two Israoii destroyers were shelling iho area
between Tyre and Sidon. At 0905 hours. sholllnn was
resumed dn Zahrani, Jarmaq, Nabatiybh and-Habboush. At 1030 hours, the carnage came: there wore
more than 600 casualties-and
my colleague from
Lebanon has just mentioned that there wore 300 dead.
That was carnage; I cannot find another word for it.
It was a holocaust; it was the killing of infants in broad
daylight by dropping bombs on thorn. With surgical
precision. as the Americans iiko to say. those Israeli
pilots dropped AmerIcan.mado bombs-on the Arab
University’s Schools of Engineering and Communications and on the Mosque-of Imah Aii. Moslems
go for their Friday prayers at around noon, and that
is whore the Moslems were assembled; that is whore,
with surgical precision, the bombs wore direcied and
zeroed in on the Mosque. There woro no cross&e
victims: there was doliberato and, I repeat, surgical
precision in that attack. It was not cross&o, but a
deliberate attack. It was carnage not unlike the camago
of Deir Yassin, which Begin takes pride in having conducted in 1948.

101. Today was supposed to have boon the day when
the United States would docido whether or not it would
doiivor somo more of those lethal F-16 fighter planes
to Israel, and they must have had a very hard job
deciding not to deliver them today: but they will deliver
them tomorrow, or in a very short time. The United
States is criminally responsible for these criminal
attacks made against our pooplo with the aim of eiiminating them and should bear the consequences of
them.
102. Once again the PLO appoais to the Cmlncii to use
its good offices, to USC its authority and to use the
Charter in order to bring peace to the Middle East. We
appeal to you onto agaIn, please enable us to return
to our homes, because if we are not enabled to do so,
then we must force our way back thoro.
103. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russiun): The Security
Council has once again had to convene in an umont
meeting. Tho quostbn is not a new one, but it is-becoming increasingly tragic. It is the explosive situation
in the Middle East caused by Israel’s aggressive
actions.

99. Lot me assure the Council that Begin’s aim in
1948 was to create an atmosphere of terror, to torrorize
the Palestinians and force them from their homes. This
campaign of terror cannot bo repeated; we shall not
permit it to be repeated; we shall Bght back. We are
not here merely to announce this, but we are hore
to toll the Security Council that we have had enough,
that the Security Council itself has failed. What has the
Council achieved7 Recently. when Iraq was hit, we said
that failure to condemn Israol and make it pay for its
crime would encourage Israel to strike at other locations-and it did.

104. Just a few weeks ago the Council was considering the quostion of Ista;l’s aggrosslon against Iraq.
At that time it was a question of tho Ismoli air force’s
bombing of tho nuclear-rosoarch contra near Baghdad.
That criminal act was strongly condomnod by the
Council and quite rightly dosc&d as a clear vioiation
of the Chartor of the United Nations and of the norms
of international law.
105. Today the Security Council is once agaIn having
to consider tho question of Irtnoli aggression. This
time, it is a question of a aharp txpan&n of the barbarous war whioh lard hns ban w&w
for many
yoam now againrt tho L&Mow popb and Iho Palortinian rotistanco movomont.

100. Habib’s trips sometimes make us won& what
his mission in the area is. Is that envoy of Proshiont
Reupn then to remove tho Syrian misrilor, or is he
tlton just for a cover-up to allow lrrxol to act more
brutrtly in the area? I any thxt b86auao Bogia t43kI
tkc mombon of the Knesset-md
this wu npmed
h theJwusaht Past, 3 Juno to 4 July-that in the
days prior to the bombing of the Baghdad reactor, he
deliberately intensified his warnings about the threat

106. The Irmoli rmmlr
ele ODonIY docluln
that
they are llow et&~
l now pliue341 this r&cl.
In other words, the Israeli leaders, flouting the Zen-

erallyrecognizednormsof international
law, are<dte
posedby theSyrianmissiles
in Lebanon.Hispurpose brazenlyclaimingthe right to interveneopenly in the
wasto keeponly that oneissuein mindin foreign internalaffairsof Lebanon,onthe trumped-up
pretext
capitalswhile,naturally,heplanned
to attack Baghdad. of the so-calledpreventive strikes.They cynically
In plainEnglish,Habibwasbeingusedasa cover-up callthe borderwith Lebanon“the so-cailhd
b;rder 6f
whileBeginwaspreparing
for anothercriminalattack. the so-calledsovereignState of Lebanon”. Israeli
The questionis:-Is‘Hab6 beingusednow alsoasa heavyartilleryhasbe& savagelystrafingmanysouthcover-upto facilitatet’ eliminationof the Palestinian ern Lebanesetowns and villagesand Palestinian
people?That is a quesllonthat the United Statesis refugeecamps.Israeliaircraft, of Americanmanu..
under obligationto answer.Is the United States facture,arebombingfrom theair, theirhelicopters
are
sendingHabibto the regionbecause
of his beautiful landingtroopsandIsraeiiwarships
arebritlgingt .,.i s
lovable Arab name?Because“Habib” in Arabic of commandos
to Lebanesesoil to carry out :4
means“lovable”. Is it se.rdinghimasa cover-upfor tive raidsagainstthe civilian population.
9

I I I. We would have left those utterances to that
author’s conscience but for two reasons.

107. The receut large-scale escalation of Israeli armed
aggression in southern Lebanon has led to an increasing
number of victims among the Lebanese civilian population and the Palestinian refugees. Dozens of towns
and villages have suffered extensive damage, many
bridges have been destroyed, Lebanon’s infrastructure
has been seriously damaged, agricultural crops have
been destroyed and a significant sector of the Lebanese
population has been left homeless. These recent actions
by Israeli troops in Lebanon can be described as a
qualitatively new stage in Israel’s policy of international terrorism against the Arab States. Evidently
Israel considers that it has already resolved, to its
own advantage, the question of taking over the Arab
lands which it seized by violence in 1%7. Now it is
moving on to the policy of subjugating the neighbouring
Arab States. Yesterday it was a strike against Iraq:
today strikes against Lebanon; tomorrow, if the
aggressor is not stopped, its victims may be other
countries. That is how serious the situation is. The
policy of Israel, which has declared its intention to go
even further in whipping up this dangerous tension
around Lebanon and to resort to large-scale armed
attacks in the Middle East region, is becoming an
increasingly direct threat to peace and security.

112. The first is-and I think it would be useful for
the members of the Council and for the Middle East
countries to know this-that the author, Mr. Geoffrey
Kemp, is now involved in dW.lOping
the United States
policy on the Middle East and he reports on these
matters to the United States National Security Council.
113. The second, which is more widely known, is
that now it has in fact been declared by Washington
that a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict should be
postponed as not being urgent. In other words, looking
at the Israeli occupation of Arab lands as an asset
growing in value has become the official viewpoint of
Israel’s protectors. In the light of that, It is hardly worth
being surprised at Israel’s rushing to make more and
more statements about its right to intervene in the
internal affairs of the Arab countries and peoples.
114. The representative of Israel has tried to divert
our attention from the fact that it is Tel Aviv, as well
as the support for its aggressive oolicv bv the United
States of-America, that79 behind ihe pies&t explosive
situation in the Middle East. He said that the Soviet
Union was helping the Arab countries and peoples.
Yes, we do help, and we have never made a secret of
it. But we are helping the victims of Israeli aggression
-and there is a tremendous difference there between
our policy and that of the United States, which is
helping the aggressor, Israel. Moreover, just as soon
as Israel halts its aggression and occupation of the
Arab lands it has been occupying since June 1967,
there will be no reason for its so-called concern. That
is the clear policy of the Soviet Union: the representative of Israel only pretended that he did not know it.

108. The reason for Israel’s being so bold as to defy
the entire international community so blatantly and for
so long is hardly a secret to anyone. The reason is the
virtual encouragement given to the adventuristic policy
of Israel by Washington, which for many years has
been providing all kinds of assistance and support to
Israel in its armed attacks against the Arab States.
109. The reason for the current increase in Tel Aviv’s
audacity is also evident. It is that now the winds
blowing from across the ocean are particularly favourable for the aggressor. It has not passed unnoticed
that now, almost at the highest ofVicial levels, they
call Israel not simply a friend, but also an ally. This is
not semantics, this is politics, and the calculations
implied can be seen from what follows.

115. We believe it is time to put an end to this dangerous playing with fire in the Middle East at the
expense of the Arab countries and peoples, and the
first step in this direction can and must be taken immediately, today.

I IO. In January of this year, when they were working
on the United States policy in the Middle East, one
American author rather cynically wrote the following:

116. The Soviet Union advocates an immediate haIt
to Israeli ssprsssIon s&tat L&anon and refusea to
accept this dangerous develoumertt in the Middk Ea.
Isra&s recent armed attack- has once again convlncin& shown that we can no longer delay in taking

“At the political level a new strategy would
suggest that the United States Administration
seriously reconsider
the utility of United Nations

decisive action to curb the aggressor.
In these conditions,
it is incumbent
upon the Security
Council
strongly
to condemn
Israel for those acts of armed
aggression
against Lebanon
and demand
that Israel
halt them and not commit any further
similar acts.

resolution
242 (1967) as the model for an eventual
solution
to the Arab-Israeli
conflict.“*
And further

on, that writer

says really

appalling

things:

“It is thus a real question
whether
now is the
ideal time for Israeli withdrawal
from other occupied
territories.
just as these assets are growing
in
value.“*

1 17. The PRESIDENT
(i,lre~/~,ertrriori~o,,t
Frcwcl~~:
The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed to
speak in exercise
of the right of reply, and I call on
him.
118. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I believe that we are all
grateful
to the representative
of the Soviet Union for
IO

having clarified to us the real background of the tragic
situation that has been existing in Lebanon. One had
only to listen to his statement to understand that it is
really his country which is behind that tragic situation.
But then one did not really need that statement, for the
sinister role played by his country in the Middle East
over the past 2S years or so and the constant attempts
to destabilize our region are well-known facts.
119. He lectured the Council on questions of lnternational aggression-and here 1 would agree that he is
extremely well qualified and well placed to give us that
lecture. His country has acquired great experience
in international aggression: in Prague, 1948; in Budapest, 1956; in Prague again, 1%8; and, more recently,
in Kabul in 1979-and I could add many more examples
around the world. So, in actual fact, the heroes of
Prague, of Budapest and of Kabul are also the real
heroes of Beirut-and
no amount of diversionary
statements can obscure that simple fact.
120. I would also invite the Council to ponder another
curious phenomenon. We have here the representative
of Lebanon, who can and does speak for his country.
But there are also others here who arrogate to themselves that right. Is it not an anomalous situation that
here at the United Nations the terrorist observer feels
free to submit communications and to make statements
about the situation in Lebanon as if he were the territorial sovereign there, rather than leaving this matter
to the representative of Lebanon? But, then, so many
irregular privileges have been granted by the United
Nations to the terrorist PLO-some of them we have
witnessed in the course of this debate-that no one
seems to notice, or at least no one seems to think
twice about this patent irregularity. Nor is that the only
manifestation of the arrogation of Lebanese sovereignty by some outside terrorist.
121. The Lebanese Army cannot move freely within
those amas of Lebanon controlled by the terrorist PLO;
indeed, it can enter those areas only with the consent
of the terrorists and on the!r conditions. The main road
ftom Beirut to Tyre through Sidon is entimly under
t6Prorist cuntro1.
122. The PLO terrorists feel free to invite groups of
visitors, including foreign parliamentarians, to the
Lebanese territory that they control, without even
seeking permission from the Lebanese Government,
and this degree of highly publicized arrogance has
often caused the Lebanese Government considerable
embarrassment. Indeed, the PLO terrorists are so
cocksure of themselves that last summer they took
the initiative, over the head of the Lebanese Government, to request a meeting of the Arab League’s Arab
Defence Council to discuss the situation in Lebanon.
And on 6 September 1980, Radio Beirut reported that
the Government of Lebanon had protested to the
Arab League against that move by the terrorist PLO.
123. Finally, there is another aspect of the PLO’s
activities which deserves the close attention of the

Council. It relates to the fact that the PLO has become
the linchpin of what has come to be known as the
Terrorist International. The terrorist PLO has turned
the area it controls in southern Lebanon into a world
centre for international terror, Mr. Ovinnikov may
like this, but perhaps not everybody feels the same
way. The PLO trains in Lebanon large numbers of
terrorists from Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin America
in its bases there. Mr. Ovinnikov may like this, but
perhaps not all of us do. The PLO extends to these
international criminals means and facilities to plan
for and carry out their terrorist acts abroad, and then
it offers them refuge on the completion of their brutal
missions. Mr. Ovinnikov may like this, but some of
us perhaps do not like it that much.
124. The PRESIDENT flttlrrpr~tutlonfruttl
Fretwh):
The representative of the Soviet Union has asked to
be allowed to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I call on him.
125. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) littterpretatlon
from Rttsslatt):
The representative of Israel, Mr. Blum, has resorted to the usual
diversionary tactics, but that is not what we are
dealing with now. I noted that he nevertheless thanked
the Soviet representative for clarifying the position
of the Soviet Union, so perhaps I might expect a similar
kindness in return.
126. I would ask him just one short question: Is Israel
willing to withdraw its troops from the Arab territories
it occupied in June 1%7? In advance 1 must say that, if
Mr. Blum refrains from answering the question and
remains silent or if he once again resorts to his diversionary tactics and does not answer the question, then
that will mean a confirmation of the fact that Israel
does not wish to withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories, and that is the whole essence of the problem. And so, Mr. Blum, is Israel willing to withdraw
its troops from the occupied Arab territories?
127. The PRESIDENTtintrrpr~tatiunfrum
French):
The representative of Israel hu once a&n requested
that Ito k &owed to apeak in exorcise of the right of
reply and I now call on him.
128. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I wonder who is engaging
here in diversionary tactics. 1 have one simple question
for the representative of the Soviet Union: Would
he be good enough to produce before the Council
the licences from the Government of Lebanon for the
importation of Soviet tanks, Katyusha rockets, guns,
troop carriers and other pieces of Soviet military
hardware which his country has sogenerously supplied
to its stooge and proxy in Lebanon, the terrorist PLO?
If he avoids an answer to that question, 1 will be able
only to conclude that he indeed engages in diversionary
tactics.
129. Mr. PRESIDENT fi/rre,prc~tcctio/r,~o,rr I;i~r~c/~j:
The representative of the Soviet Union has again asked

IO be allowed to speak in exercise of the right of reply
and I call on him.
130. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republicsl fimerprutatlon
from Rlrsslan):
I thought
that the representative of Israel had listened more
carefully to the Soviet statement. I listened very
carefully to his statement, and 1 already answered hls
question in my statement Tho answor was that when
Israel withdraws its troops from the occupied Arab
territories, then chore will be no roason for his socalled concern. So I Just ropeat my answor. However,
in turn I shwld like to hoar the answor from the roprosentatlvo of Israel: Is Israel willine to withdraw its
troops from the occupied Arab territories?
I3 I, The PRESIDENT Iinferpre/a/ion
fPorn French):
I should like to make the following statement [S//45Y9]:
“The President of the Security Council and the
members of the Council, after hearing the report of

tho Socrotary-Oonoral, express their deep concern at
the oxtont of the loss of life and the scale of the
destruction cauead by the deplorable oven18 that
have been taking place for several days in Lebanon.
“They launch an urgent appeal for an immediate
end to all armed attacks and for the greatest restraint
so that peace and quiet may be established in Lebanon and a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
as a whole.”
The meeting

rose at 10.40 p.m.

NOTES
’ OJ7dul

Records

ofrhe

SecurNy

CMW~/.

Fortrrh

Yrur. S~sclal

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NAllONS

PUSLlCAllONS

-M3on

Wvhl IO)-June

IYXH-?.020
