TWENTY-EIGglTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

11 JUNE

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
P&p

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

17 20)

. . , . , + . , . . . , . . . . . a. . , , . , . . , . . ,

1

, . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , , . . , . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
fal Security Council resolution
33 1 (I 973);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General
under Security
Council resolution
331
. . . . *. . . . . . * . . . . . . I . . . . , . . 1. *. . I I 1.. I . *
(1973)@/10929)

1

S/PV. 1720

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTIETH

11 June 1973, at 10.30 a.m.

Held in New York on Monday,

At the invitution of the President,Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
(Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. A. H. sharaf
(Jordan] took placesat the Council table and Mr. X S&m
(United Republic of Tanzania),Mr. H. G. Ouangmotching
(Chad), Mr. I% Kelani (Syriati Arub Republic), Mr. 0.
Arikpo (Nigeria), Mr. A. Boutejlikn (Algeria), Mr. M, Zentar
(Morocco), Mr. A. Al-Pachachi (United Arab Emirates),
Mr. H. Nur h’lmi (Somalia),Mr. R. E. Jackson(Guyana) and
Mr. M. El Hassen(Muuritanrir) took the placesreservedfor
them at the sideof the Councilchamber.

President: Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l720)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

3. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):I should
like to inform members of the Security Council that as
President of the Council I have received letters from the
repreqentativesof Kuwait and Qatar containing requests
that their delegations should be invited to take part,
without the right to vote, in the considerationof the item
on the agendafor this meetingof the Security Council. In
accordance with establishedpractice and the provisional
rulesof procedure, I proposeto invite the representativesof
Kuwait and Qatar to take part, without the right to vote, in
the Council’s considerationof the questionof the situation
in the Middle East, Since there is no objection, it is so
decided. Accordingly, I invite the representativesof Kuwait
and Qatar to take the placesreservedfor them at the sideof
the Council chamber. I shall invite the representativesof
Kuwait and Qatar to take their placesat the Council table
when it is their turn to speak on the question under
discussion.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a] Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 33 1 (1973) (S/l 0929).
X4e meeting was called to order at 11. OSa.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929)

MEETING

Security

1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I should
like to draw the attention of members of the Security
Council to a new Security Council document which is
directly related to the examination of the situation in the
Middle East. The document/S/I 09441, which was issued at
the request of the representative of Guyana, Ambassador
Jackson, contains the resolution on the Middle East
question adopted by the Conference of Foreign Ministers of
Non-Aligned Countries at Georgetown, Guyana, in August
last year. It should be noted that paragraph 6, which refers
to the assistance of the non-aligned countries to take all
necessary initiatives for the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from the Arab territories, includes,
inter alia, a reference to the fact that the Security Council
is the international forum which shouldtake such action.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. Y. Jamal(Qatar)
and Mr. A. Y. Bishara(Kuwait) took the placesreservedfor
themat the sideof the Councilchamber.
4. The PRESIDENT (translationj?om Russian):The first
speakeron the list for today’s meetingis the representative
of Kuwait, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table to make his statement.
5. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): May I take this opportunity,
Mr, President, to congratulate you warmly andcordially on
the assumptionof your duties asPresidentof the Security
Council for this month. I feel confident that the constructive manner in which you are guiding the Council’s
proceedingsaugurswell for the work of this augustbody at
this grave juncture, and 1 am sure that under your
experienced captaincy the proceedingswill arrive at the
shoresof sensibility.

2.. In accordancewith decisionsadopted by the Security
Council at previous meetings,I intend, with the Council’s
consent, to invite the representativesof Egypt, Israel,
Jordan, the United Republic of Tanzania,Chad, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Nigeria, Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab
Emirates, Somalia, Guyana and Mauritania to take part,
without the right to vote, in the Council’sconsideration of
the questionof the situation in the Middle East.

6. Scores of resolutions,injunctions often flavoured with
condemnation or the word “deplore”, have not been able
to kindle a light of hope for the Palestinians,who are the
primary victims of the Zionist State of Israel. Conciliation
1

12. General Moshe Dayan, for example, made this clear
again after the 1967 war in replying publicly to a news
reporter’s question about Israel’s ability to absorb the Arab
population in the recently occupied territories. General
Dayan said, tersely and succinctly:

missions have shuttled back and forth to no avail; personal
representatives have crossed distances in order to bring
about a peaceful settlement of the Middle East tragedy. The
result is nil. Nor has Israel shown any readiness to redress
the wrongs it has inflicted on the Palestiniads, nor have the
Palestinians-who
constitute the main party to the dispute-abandoned their determination to go back to their
homeland from which they were forcibly evicted.

“Economically we can, but I think &at is not in accord
with our aims in the future; it would turn Israel into
either a b&national or poly-national Arab-Jewish State
instead of the Jewish State, and we want to have a Jewish
State. We can absorb them, but we won’t be in the same
country.”

7. The passage of years has not eroded the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians; neither has it convinced the Israeli
Government of the necessity for accommodating the people
of Palestine. Thus deadlock prevails. It is this solemn
occasion, in fact, that urges me to delve into the genesis of
the problem. Without grasping the roots, understanding the
genesis, identifying the crux of the issue, the Security
Council will not be able to diagnose the disease that has
permeated the region for more than two decades, Any
endeavour to cure the symptoms while ignoring the root is
bound to crumble, as the past years have shown.

13. Former Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion stated the
same idea at another time:
Israel”-he said-“is the country of the Jews and
only of the Jews. Every Arab who lives here has the same
rights as any minoruty citizen in any country in the
world, but he must admit the fact that he lives in a Jewish
country.”
‘L

.

8. What are the roots of the matter? The ro0.t of the
tragedy is the denial of the rights of the Palestinians in their
homeland, A people comprising about 2% million is not
given the opportunity to exercise its legitimate right of
self-determination. Around half of them live in the abominable shanties of the camps, on international alms-and, on
many occasions, a rather reluctant ‘rather than generous
charity. The injustice inflicted on them stems from the
Zionist character of Israel.

.

.

14. Prime Minister Golda Meir put it even more clearly
and lucidly in a debate in the Knesset, the Israeli
Parliament, on 25 June 1969. She said:
“I want a Jewish State with a decisive Jewish majority
which cannot change overnight. . . I always believed
[this] was plain Zionism.”
1.5. Besides maintaining a large majority by legislation, the
Israeli establishment has within the context of its Zionist
character confiscated non-Jewish Arab land and kept a
majority of land in Israel in Jewish hands. From 1948 to
1967, scores of Arab villages disappeared altogether and
many hundreds of thousands of acres of Arab land were
confiscated under the absentee property law and land
requisition laws, passed in the Knesset from 1950 to 1953.
In many towns, houses of Arabs w?re confiscated in 1948
because their owners had left them for some days in order
to be in safer quarters. Fields in villages were taken away
because of the owner’s absence from his property for some
few days.

9. The creation of a Jewish State entailed the displacement of the indigenous Arab majority. Thus different
methods designed to evict the Palestinians were employed.
Terror, force, and sometimes blandishments, among many
other things, achieved their end.
10. Years of dispersion have not stiffed the yearnings of
the Palestinians to return to their homeland. The future
does not bode well in this respect. Thus the conflict
continues, with Israel denying the rights of the Palestinians
in their land, and the latter clinging tenaciously to their
indisputable rights. Why does Israel negate these rights. The
answer lies in its Zionist character that prevents the
development of a State in which non-Jews can live, as well
as Jews, or even a State in which non-Jews-and this means,
most particularly, Palestinians-can live at all. This exclusivist character, which insists upon the maintenance at
almost all costs of a large Jewish majority, cannot allow for
the repatriation of Palestinian refugees.

16. After the establishment of Israel, all government Iand
and almost all confiscated land was given to the Jewish
National Fund. This amounts to over 90 per cent of Israeli
farmland. Jewish National Fund land may not be sold or
leased to Arabs.
17. Since the end of the June 1907 war Israei has begun to
build strictly Jewish settlements in many parts of the
occupied territories. Thus the Palestinians, who arc the
heart of the issue, have no place in their homeland. This
fact is due to the exclusivist structure of Israel. Their
aspirations are denied, their legitimate rights abrogated and
their determination derided.

11, The Zionist emphasis upon the continued existence of
a demographically Jewish State, which is embodied in
Israel’s framework, makes that so. The so-called, Israeli
Declaration of Independence does not declare the existence
of a sovereign, independent State for those who live there:
it rather declares a Jewish State for all the Jews of the
world, about 12 million of whom reside outside and only
slightly over 2.6 lnillion in Israel. Almost all Jews can
become citizens of Israel merely by going thcrc and opting
for such citizenship. By Zionist definition, then, Israel’s
citizenship or nationality base cannot allow any significant
numbers of non.Jews to become citizens or nationals.

18. Mrs. Meir stated the following in an interview
The ,Sun&y Times of London on 15 June 1969:

with

“There was no such thing as Palestinian people in
Palestine considering itself as a Palestinian peopIc and we
2

came and threw them out, and took their country away
from them. They did not exist.”

23. Thus, the admission of Israel into the United Nations
was conditional on its implementation of resolution 194
(III) pertaining to the repatriation of the Palestinians, and
on its acceptance of the continued validity of resolution
181 (II) of 29 November 1947 on partition, Israel, having
secured United Nations membership, spurned those
resolutions and disregarded their provisions, It retreated
from its declaration that obliged it to observe those
resolutions.

19, It is clear from such a statement that the Zionist
leaders of Israel are adamant in their rejection of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinians. Thus the incompatibility of Israel’s present policy with the inalienable
rights of the Palestinians constitutes the major obstacle to
the attainment of peace. It should be remembered that
between December 1947 and May 1948-that is, prior to
the termination of the British Mandate-the Zionists attacked and occupied the Arab towns of Jaffa and Acre and
many Arab villages. They also attacked and expelled the
Arab inhabitants of Tiberias, and hundreds of Arab villages
in the proposed Jewish State. The massacre of Deir Yassin
took place on 9 April 1948, more than a month before the
ending of the British mandate, and this resulted in the
terropstricken flight of many Palestinians, so that by 15
May 1948, 325,000 Palestinians had already fled or been
expelled, That was before the declaration of independence
of Israel.

24. The present mood of Israel towards the Palestinians is
best reflected in Mrs. Meir’s interview with the BBC, She
was asked if she would sit with the Palestinians. She
replied: “No, because we have no negotiation with the
Palestinians. They have nothing to offer us and we have
nothing to offer them.” That was reported in the [wadi
Digest of 13 October 1972, on page 1.
25. It is this congenital inability of Israel to realize the
depth of the Palestinians insistence on repatriation, coupled
with its exclusivist structure, that has made a just peace so
elusive. For us, peace and the rights of the Paiestinians are
so intertwined, so indivisible, so inseparable, that the denial
of the latter obliterates the former. The respect of the
rights of the Palestinians constitutes one of the two pillars
of a durable peace.

20. Arie Eliav, former Secretary-General of the Israeli
Labour Party, and Knesset member, wrote:
“The problem of the Palestinian Arabs is the source of
the entire dispute. It is the root of the sickness, and it’s
because of these people that three warshave been fought.
It is a festering sore which drips blood, their blood and
ours, which poisons the Arab world and ourselves. A
leader who wants to heal it will not flinch from using the
surgeon’s knife in order to lance it, so that it can be
cleaned. By rubbing empty phrases on this running sore,
or condemning anyone who tries to examine it, we will
make no progress towards an accurate diagnosis.”

strict adherence to the principle
of
26. The
non-acquisition of territory by force is the second pillar for
a durable peace in the region, ‘This principle cannot be
tampered with. Its sanctity is emphasbed in the United
Nations Charter and in international law. It is the basic
principle that governs relations between States and ensures
their territorial integrity. It is a fact of life that there is no
complete security of States in the world and tha! territory
alone does not ensure any State’s security. In the final
analysis, security is the outcome of mutual understanding
among neighbours. Moreover, no nation is secure by virtue
of might alone, No State maintains absolute security for
itself with utter disregard of the security of its neighbours.

Let the’ Israeli Government heed this healthy and sound
advice.
21. On 11 December 1948, the General Assembly voted,
in its famous resolutioh 194 (III), for the return of the
Palestinians to their country and compensation to those
who were unwilling to go back.

27. Security means reconciliation, understanding and
mutual harmony with the surrounding States. It does not
mean the imposition of the concepts of secure borders of
one State on its neighbours. Israel wants Jordan, Syria, and
Egypt to cede portions of their occupied territories in order
to obtain for itself the maximum of secure borders at the
expense of the security of its neighbours. This theory held
by Israel means that any State wishing to expand need only
to invade a neighbouring State, occupy its territory and
impose its territorial demands by means of superior force,
and then proclaim that it has the natural right to hold this
territory because it is secure and defensible. Israel’s theory
is completely illegal and contrary to the United Nations
Charter, and if it is allowed to prevail, then the world will
turn to the law of the jungle. Israel itself will suffer from
the horrible consequences of establishing peace based on
annexation. A prominent international lawyer, Mr. Gerhard
von Glahn, wrote the following in his book Law anzong

22. In General Assembly resolution 273 (III) of 11
May 1949, on the admission of Israel to the Unit&d
Nations, only after
“Nofing furthermore the declaration of the State of
Israel that it ‘unreservedly accepts the obligations of the
United Nations Charter and undertakes to honour them
from the day when it becomes a Member of the United
Nations’,
“Recalhg its resolutions of 29 November 1947 and 11
December 1948 and taking note of the deciardtions and
explanations made by the representative of the
Government of Israel before the acl /WC Political
Committee in respect of the implementation of the said
resolutions”,

Nu tiom: 1

did the GeneraI Assembly admit Israel to the United
Nations.

1 NewYork,Thc

3

MacmillanCompany, 1965.

to the international
Republic.

“The coming into force of the United Nations Charter
ended, ,n this writer’s opinion, the legality of. . . title to
territory through conquest. The relevant provisions of the
instrument”-especially
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter-“make
it abundantly clear that, from a legal
point of view, the use or threat of the use of force, in
violation of obligations assumed under the Charter, to
obtain territory from another State is clearly prohibited
to all States Members of the Organization.”

boundary

of the United

Arab

“.*.

I appeal, therefore, to the Government of Israel to
give further consideration of this question and to respond
favourably to Ambassador Jarring’s initiative.” [Ibid,
para. 88.1
33. The former United States representative, Charles Yost,
wrote in Life magazine, in its issue of 9 April 1971:

28. Israel has its own interpretation of international law
with regard to borders. It has become an international
celebrity in defying the universally acknowledged principle
of the inviolability of the territorial integrity of States.
Mrs. Meir, in an interview with Louis Herin of The Times of
London, on 12 March 1972, made the following points on
the boundaries Israel would require for a settlement. First,
Israel must have Sharm-El-Sheikh, which dominates the
Strait of Tiran, and have access to it. Sinai must be
demilitarized. There should be a mixed force to guarantee
demilitarization. Second, Egypt could not return to Gaza.
Third, the border around Elath, Israel’s port on the Gulf of
Aqaba, must be negotiated. Fourth, Israel would not
relinquish the Golan Heights. Fifth, Jerusalem must remain
united and part of Israel. Sixth, the Jordan river must no.
be open for Arab troops +o cross. Israel must have
something there and perhaps on the heights behind.
Seventh, it was opposed to an independent Palestinian West
Bank. Eighth, the final borders on the West Bank must not
divide but connect Israelis and Arabs. It is clear from such a
map that Israel is determined to impose a conqueror’s
peace upon the Arabs. It is not an offer but a provocation.
No Arab will accept such a diktat, nor would any other
peoples accept a similar one.

“It has been my strong impression, growing out of the
four-Power talks . . . that the Arabs have in fact been
ready for a year and a half to make such a peace and
undertake such commitments-as
Israel had been
demanding for more than 20 years. The Egyptians have
accepted the commitments requested by Jarring. The
Israelis have not. Ifthey do, the negotiations can proceed
rapidly to a settlement . . . If the Israelis do not accept,
the negotiations will before long break down, fighting will
resume, on a small scale at first but inevitably escalating.”
34. According to Newsweek

of 6 December 197 1:

“The Nixon Administration regards Israeli inflexibility
as the main cause for the diplomatic stalemate that has
afflicted the Middle East for the last four years.”
35. An editorial in The New York Times of 8 October
1971 stated that:
“ . . . the Jarring talks are stalled by Israel’s own failure
to give a more positive response to Mr. Jarring’s queries of
last February”.

29. General Dayan, a soldier noted for his prolific
statements on borders, said, as reported by Reuters on
5 April 1971:

36. This is the verdict of world public opinion on Israel’s
adamant rejection to fulfil the requirement for a durable
peace.

“If choice is withdrawal to the pre-Six-Day-War borders
or war. . . I would prefer not to withdraw. War along the
present line would be preferable.”

37. Israel’s insistence on direct negotiations is not an
honest deployment of a genuine desire for peace, but is a
decoy for Arab surrender. It wants to disregard the United
Nations Charter, the United Nations resolutions and the
will of the world community. It wants to use its superior
military power and bargaining position to impose its own
harsh peace terms on the Arabs. Israel has been primarily
concerned in the past, as well as now, not so much with
what procedure should be used to attain a peace settlement,
but with how much territory it could annex and how few
Arab refugees it would be required to repatriate. Harping
on the need for direct negotiations has been merely a
pretext and excuse to do nothing and to hold on to all
territoriesoccupiedillegally in 1948 and in 1967.

30. The insatiable covetousness of Israel for territory is
underlined more succinctly by General Ezer Weizmann,
former Air Force Commander, who said, as reported by the
Jewish Telegruphic Agency on 9 NovLnlber 197 1:
“If given the choice, I would prefer more of Sinai and
fewer Phantoms than more Phantoms and less Sinai.”
31. As the report of the Secretary-General shows, Israel’s
answerto the Jarring aide-memoireopenly stated that it
“would not withdraw to the pre-5 June 1967 lines”
[S/l 0929,para. 841,

38. An Israeliwriter and editor, SimchaFalapan, wrote in
December1971, in the New Outlook:

32. The former Secretary-Generalwrote:
“I wish moreover to note with satisfactionthe positive
reply given by the United Arab Republic to Ambassador
Jarring’sinitiative. However, the Government of Israelhas
so far not responded to the request of Ambassador
Jarring that it should give a commitment on withdrawal
4

“Mr. Abba Eban keepsdeclaringthat the best way to a
settlement is direct negotiations between Israel and its
neighbours.It is a fact, however, that the Arabs refused
suchnegotiationsfor the samereasonthat Israel proposed
them: in direct negotiations, Israel has the advantage of
playing out to the full the weight of a military

occupation, while the Arabs do not have the advantage of
bringing into the play their economic and political
influence throughout the world.”

immigration within the context of the “Aliyah” concept
were to prove successful-that is, if all, most or even many
of the roughly 12 million Jews now residing outside Israel
were indeed persuaded to emigrate to Israel-expansion by
that State would become an absolute necessity.

39. The Arabs have a genuine fear of the expansionist
nature of Israel. That fear existed from the early days of
the conflict, and has accumulated throughout the years as
irrefutable evidence of Israel’s expansionism demonstrated
itself. Not only had Israel sought to expand into areas.
assigned to the Palestine Arab State before the outbreak of
the war on 15 May 1948, but it actually made its greatest
territorial gains in that period during the second and
permanent truce which the United Nations had established.
On 14 October 1948, Israel deliberately mounted its
offensives in the Negev and in the Galilee areas despite the
United Nations permanent truces in order to conquer more
land and to expand as much as possible. That campaign was
called the “tenth plague”.

44. The tragedy of the Middle East has been in the’lap of
the United Nations since 1947. This august body took the
decision to partition Palestine into two States. It was that
decision that bolstered the morale of the Israelis and
equally inflicted a great injustice on the Arabs. The United
Nations is not alien to the problem. Its responsibility for
the attainment of peace based on justice is undeniable. Its
obligation to the principles embodied in its Charter is
inescapable. It is now at the crossroads. It either meets the
challenge of peace or succumbs to the temptation of inertia.
Years of hostility have accumulated rancour, bitterness and
alienation. The United Nations is duty bound by its moral
and legal commitments to embark on a serious and
unrelenting effort to attain peace in the region. It has
special responsibility towards the Palestinians who were
dispossessed because of its decision to partition their
homeland. It has a solemn responsibility to ensure
scrupulous observance of the principle of non-acquisition of
territory by force.

40. Acting Mediator Ralph Bunche reported to the United
Nations [S/l042 of 18 October 1948 and S/1071 of
6 November
19481 that the offensives had been
deliberately planned by Israel and were completely
unjustified, despite Israeli claims to the contrary. The
Security Council had met to consider the matter and on
4 November 1948 had adopted resolution 61 (1948) calling
for respect of the truce and an Israeli withdrawal to the
lines of 14 October 1948. Israel refused to abide by it.

45. The Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, in the
statement he delivered on 2.5 May 1973 at the Tenth
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), said:

41. On 22 December 1948 Israel again attacked in the
Negev to gain even more land, and again, according to
Mr. Bunche’s report [S/1152 of 2.5 December 19481,
without justification, even after 1948, Israel continued its
expansionist policy. Despite the United Nations opposition,
it seized control of most of the Syrian-Israeli demilitarized
zone, and in 195.5 all of the El-Auja demilitarized zone.
This horrendous record of expansionism, which climaxed in
1967, has exposed the true nature of Israel.

“The intractable nature of the problem may be largely
due to the fact that fundamental principles of the Charter
arc involved: the sanctity of the territorial integrity of
Member States, the right of every State to be secure
within its territorial boundaries and the inalienable right
of self-determination of peoples. These principles are of
crucial importance in the formulation of any peace
agreement.”

42. General Dayan declared to some American Jewish
College students on the Golan Heights in 1968:

That is an accurate diagnosis of the problem. The
observance of the principles forming the two pillars of
peace-namely, non-acquisition of territory by force and
the inalienable right to self-determination-is SOessential, so
indispensable, so overriding, that in its absence peace
becomes an evasive mirage never obtainable though
assiduously sought.

“During the last one hundred years our people have
been in the process of building up the country and the
nation, of expansion, of giving additional Jews additional
settlements in order to expand the borders here: let no
Jew say that the process has ended, let no Jew say that
we are near the end of the road.”

46. The negation of either of these principles makes
peace more remote; respect for both brings about a durable
peace. The area needs peace that endures, peace that
safeguards the interests of all, peace that takes into account
the legitimate rights of the evicted people of Palestine. NO
peace that overlooks this incontrovertible fact willlast. NO
peace that abrogates strict adherence to the principle of
non-acquisition
of territory by force will be able to
withstand the urgings of revenge. No peace will be achieved
through pressure for capitulation. History has shown that
peace based on arbitrary solutions is bound to crumble. The
causes of the Second World War are instructive and that
instruction should be heeded.

That was reported in Maariv of 7 July 1968.
43. The question that arises here is’ this: Why does Israel
have expansionist designs? The answer is to be found in
one of the central concepts of Zionism legislated into the
State’s character. It is the concept of “Aliyah”. “Aliyah” is
the idea that all Jews should emigrate to Israel. On 24
November 1952, the Knesset enacted a piece of legislation
known as the World Zionist Organization Jewish Agency
for Palestine Status Law. That law emphasizes that
recruitment for Jewish immigration is the “central task of
the State of Israel”. This recruitment, again to use the
words of the law, “requires constant efforts by the World
Zionist Organization to assist immigration of masses of
Jews from around the world into Israel”. If that call for

47. ‘This series of meetings is historic in the sense that the
Arabs and peace-loving peoples look to you with the eyes
5

At the imitation of the President, Mr. 0. Sakkaf (Saudi
Arabiu) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chumher.

of expectancy. Your decision is exceedingly crucial. It
either plunges the area into the morass of chaos and turmoil
or kindles a light of hope after decades of sombre
resignation and despair. The Security Council should act to
arrest the deterioration of the situation in the area and
reverse the trend therein so that people may have hope in
building a better future. The message brought by Egypt is
so serious that there is now no room for inaction or levity.
The peoples of the Middle East are at the end of their
patience. It is up to you finally to furnish them with some
real hope of attaining a just peace. Occupation should not
continue. The status qzrn is intolerable. You will either
shoulder your responsibility as a body entrusted with the
maintenance of peace or bear the onus of what will evolve
in the future. There are already enough signs of alarm to
spur the Council to act firmly and expeditiously. The
situation is fraught with danger. The area is entitled to your
assistance in allaying the fear arising from pcrpet,ual
tribulations and aggravations.

52. The PRESIDENT (translation Porn Russian): The
next speaker on the list for today’s meeting is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, whom I now invite to take a
place at the Council table.
53. Mr. BOUTEFLIKA
(Algeria) (interpretation
from
French): The Security Council @as already devoted a
number of meetings to the problems of the Middle East. Its
debates and its resolutions arc evidence of the complex
nature of a situation which, because it persists and
deteriorates,
constitutes
a formidable
threat
to
international peace. If more often than not the Council has
met under the pressure of events in order to quench an
outbreak of fire or shore up a breach in an always
precarious balance, in addition to making a necessary
evaluatiou of the situation, the present series of meetings is
designerl to carry out a genera1 examination of the questiolk
of the Middle East, to make a reappraisal of the facts and
an evaluation of the efforts that have been made and,
finally, to define a new approach and prepare the means to
be put into operation in order to try to reach a satisfactory
solution. I say this to show how important we feel the
debate is upon which we have just embarked here and how
appreciative we are of the courtesy of the Council, which
has been good enough to allow us, my colleagues and me, in
pursuance of the mandates we have been given not by our
respective countries but rather by the Tenth Assembly of
I-Lads of State and Government of OAU to participate In
the debate and to make the view of Africa known.

48. I speak with concern about the future because if a just
peace is not obtained the course of events will inevitably
engulf the Arabs and the Israelis and others in a bloody
confrontation.
As it is now, the situation threatens
international peace and security. Continuation of the
occupation by Israel of Arab territories in flagrant
contravention of the United Nations and its resolutions
constitutes an unprecedented challenge to the world’s
security and order. Such a challenge will have catastrophic
consequences.
49. The international community is obliged to take
measures desigucd to bring about Israeli withdrawal from
Arab territory and the achievement of peace based on
justice. International d6tente is a sham when some peoples
are languishing under the yoke of occupation. We should
not be deluded bi the state of “no war, no peace” in the
area. The absence of the thunder of cannon and the
explosion of hoinbs is not a sign of the prevalelice of
normalcy.

54.. I should like, Mr. President, to express my satisfaction
at seeing these debates take place under your guidance. The
ties of friendship and esteem which have long existed
between us and the relations of fruitful co-operation which
are developing so harmoniously between your great country
and mine are not the only reasons that we feel this
satisfaction. It is also based cm the great talents that we
have come to appreciate in you, as we have come to know
you, and on the long experience that you have had with
international problems and, in particular, with the problem
with which we are dealing today. We are convinced that
under your presidency this series of meetings devoted to
one of the most delicate and most burning problems of the
world today will take place at a level to ensure what all of
us expect of the Security Council.

50. The Security Council must bring momentum to the
efforts devoted to peace. If it fails, it will incur the wrath
of tlie international community and incurably ruin the
Organization. It is up to you to take the decision that
injects into the area the hope for peace-a peace that
respects the Charter and its provisions. Or, if you fail, the
United Nations and all it represents will crumbIe. I trust
you will act in a constructive and responsible way
commensurate with the gravity of the situation.

55. For more than 2.5 years the policy of various United
Nations bodies has been devoted strenuously to divesting the
Palestinian question of its fundamental facts and fending it
off with a humanitarian alibi. At the Security Council
level, in particular, circumstantial accommodation has
prevailed over global concepts, and in the course of these
meetings the Council has clelibcrately dealt with the
qllestion in a piecemeal fashion. This approach was
doomed inevitably to lead to an impasse and, in the last
analysis, to corlsolidatc a do?f?zfizctosituation flowing from
the repetition of Israeli aggression which attained its higb
point in 1967. The concatenation of events since that time
has daily placed us before the painful demonstration of the

51. The PRESIDENT (tnurslatian fiorn Russian): I should
like to inform members of the Security Council that I have
just received a letter from the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of Saudi Arabia, Mr. Omar Sakkaf, requesting that
he be given au opportunity to take part in the discussion of
the question cm the situation in the Middle East. In
accordance with established practice and the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, I intend to
invite the representative of Saudi Arabia to take part,
without the right to vote, in the consideration by the
Security Council of the question of the situation in the
Middle East.
6

flight
of the
responsibilities.

international

community

before

its

mount also to committingoueself solely to seek a semblance
of balance which sacrifices people to the interests of power.

56. At the outset, the in,ternational context, which was
still subject to the constraints of the post-war period, was
certainly favourable for the shameless exploitation of the
feeling of guilt, which resulted in the substitution of one
injustice by another injustice and in the designation of
Palestine as the dumping ground for the many and
reprehensible crimes of the West. This injustice towards the
Palestine people, consecrated by the United Nations despite
the fundamental principles of its own Charter, could never
be considered an irreversible fact, particularly since the
courts of that time, by their dimensions, their orientation
and their immediate concerns, were in no way empowered
to decide on the creation of an artificial State, which could
be nothing other than the anti-homeland of the Palestine
nation.

61. But false solutions, while they might nourish the
illusion oi’ those who want to entertain them, could in no
way stifle the will of peoples for liberation. When
distinguished international bodies find themselves confusing
the sacred rights of the Palestinian people with decisions
that run counter to nature and that are to say the least
open to question, injustice is so flagrant that it becomes
revolting. Such ambiguity has no result other than to give
the Palestinian people another source of frustration, a
fountain of awareness all the more acute because it is so
healthy. Thus if, cut off in full flight by British colonialism
and pursued without mercy by Zionist colonization, the
J’alestinian people-which has for a long time paid the cost
of international arrangements, and always to the benefit of
its oppressors-has taken the firm determination to free
itself by its own means, in so doing it is assuming a historic
mission by becoming the catalyst of forces in ferment
throughout the region which would not fail to bring into
play in the interests of justice all of the humaldtarian and
economic potential that they represent.

57, This problem
devolved from this fundamental
contradiction, which was already included in the Balfottr
Declaration. It is a problem which remains without solution
and one which affects the national existence of an entire
people and places the whole of the Middle East in a state of
continuing and dangerous tension. Why Palestine? The
choice was certainly not fortuitous. The close conjunction
of imperialist strategic calculations and the objectives
pursued by Zionism could culminate only in an ideology of
domination. Used to that end, in favour of deals still not
free from colonial concepts of the past, the implantation of
Israel in the very heart of the Arab nation thus acquires its
full sigrlificance in this strategic area, to which, by long
imperialist tradition, precise functions have been assigned.

62. In any event, the Palestinian people more than any
other people-1 say, more than any other people-has
become the incarnation of the bad conscience of mankind.
63. The 1967 aggression was supposed to have been
decisive, but far from achieving the goals it had set, it has
rather only served to bring out the existence of a Palestine
nation which has been affirmed with increased force and
vigorir in order to impose its image at the international level
and on the battlefield as the fundamental element in any
over-all and lasting solution for the situation in the Middle
East.

5X. The real role of the Zionist State is unceasingly
confirmed
by repeated aggressions, terrorist actions,
provocation implicit in the craze for power and, above all,
the systematic applicatio? of a vast plan for the anriexation
of territory. True, the objectives of this pnl::y enjoy a large
measure of flagrant support from international accomplices,
in order to ensure the supply of raw materials and power to
the industrial Powers, to control all movement for
emancipation which might endanger acquired positions in a
region which is particularly sensitive, since it is situated at
the crossroads of three continents, and thus to preserve a
launching point for planetary strategies.

64. Moreover, experience has shown the fUti!ity of
military methods and means of force in the face of the
resistance of peoples for whom time remains the staunchest
ally. Palestinian resistance, like that of other dominated
peoples who have preceded it in history, can in turn extend
over years and even over generations, but sooner or later it
will finally make its purpyose a reality as it has already made
that objective a reality in the right.
65, For all those who still refuse to understand the
llistoric nature of this phenomenon to seek refuge in
illusion is the worst aberration, particillarly Since the KM
disproportion
of material means involved in the
confrontation leads one to believe in the permanence of the
fait
:icc(~r~lp!i.
‘%le
$trq&!
Which
tfIc
i’ilk!stillia~l
1JeOplC
iS
carrying on to cfisurc its Own survival is not a sign Of
despair-.far from it- and its sacrifices of today are jUSt SO
ln:my
&.kive
argunmlts
in favour Of the justice of its
c:~usc, the legitilnacy of’ its struggle and the certainty that
its national xpirations will be realizcd.

59. Resorting
to manipulation
in the guise Of
neo-colonialism proved itself to be unsure, so imperialist
control created for itself a suitable tool for which South
Africa already constituted a prototype of known quality.
By its nature, by its projections, zionism offered a USefill
basis for the establishment on Palestinian soil of an
imported State, with moving frontiers to which WaS
assigned this specific mission which flows directly from its
vocation.
60. What is today called the crisis iu the Middle J3tst is
above all the dispossession of the Paalestinianpeople of its
homeland and its inalienable rights. To overlook the origins
of the problem, tq throw a veil of furgetfulness Over the
real cause of tension in the Near East in order to dwell only
on its side effects, is deliberately
to take the wrong course
and inevitably to condemn oneself to failure; it is tanta-

66. Two anniversaries noted and celebrated recently with
a few days’ interval between thctu have just given the world
an opportunity to compare two different concepts: one
based on the emergence of reborn forces guided by hope
and faith, and the other inspired by the mad vision which
confuses itself with the resurgence of a new imperialism. It
7

associates ostracism
and religious messianism with
permanent aggression and expansionist aims. Is it not a fact
that the celebration of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the
creation of Israel in annexed Jerusalem., in tortured and
captured Jerusalem, has led to military demonstrations
which are so incompatible with the first vocation of the
City of Peace? Is that not one more clear affirmation of
the nature of a State which, contrary to all allegations, has
chosen to live by war and for war?
67. The tenth anniversary of OAU, celebrated in dignity
and with fervour, in its turn has been another powerful
manifestation of this will of Africa, Africa which is always
vigilant, stung by insults, attentive to injustice, prompt to
unmask hostility and aggression and to suffer deeply from
these elements. The event indeed was shadowed only by
our sad realization that the page of the colonial era in
history has still not been turned. And here is all of Africa
which continues to be tried and beset on all sides by Portu
guese colonialism, by South Africa, Rhodesia and Israel,
So many problems to be solved, similar in their genesis,
comparable in their nature and complementary in their end
purpose. You will agree with us that, as far as the continent
is concerned, we have a serious source of concern and that
undoubtedly it involves for Africa its security, its
emancipation, and its vocation for unity.
68. On all these problems, OAU was obliged to have only
one policy, a common policy which would reflect its
determination to complete the decolonization of the
continent and ensure effective solidarity to those peoples
whose nationa territory was annexed or simply had been
amputated. In so doing, the Africa of today, because it
represents a third of the United Nations, constitutes a vast
reservoir of capital to be invested in fidelity to the noble
ideals of the international community,
to a just
cause-above all when it is its very own cause. The more the
positions of Africa on the colonial question are defined the
greater is its capacity to protect itself and to confroncf the
various dangers steadily besetting it as if it were only a
testing ground.
69. Precisely because they have such vast possibilities,it is
not mere chance that the African countries, which have
barely emergedfrom the trials of colonialism, seetheir will
to liberation counteracted by the reappearanceof the
forcesof domination andexploitation. No matter wherewe
look, the sameforces, supportedby the samemetropolitan
countries,tend to perpetuatetheir graspon sensitiveareas;
South Africa and Israel, have set themselvesup asbasesfor
aggression,
andthey respondto eachother like two polesof
the samesystem to which the samerole of guardian of
imperialistinterestsis assigned.
70. At a time when the complicated problems of the
post-war period are beginning to be solved in dynamic
concerted agreements,the situation in the Middle East
standsas an object of dealsand bargaining, which are not
always designed,unfortunately, to extend the benefits of
peacelo this regionof the third world. I clearly call this the
third world becausewe are both in Africa and in Asia. We
are not indifferent to the problemsof the Gulf and the Red
Sea, and we are carefully watching the evolution of the
energy problems. In short, what could bc lessreassuring

than a situation which, far from abating daily meetsmore
of the conditions apt to makeit contagiousandexplosive’!
71. If a solutionin accordancewith the demandsof justice
and peacewere not to be implementedby the Council, it
would no longer be possibleto control the flames which
inevitably will engulf all the Middle East. The fragile
balancethat you have beenable to preserveheretofore, in
the “no peace, no war” situation could hardly be more
vulnerable.Either you will consecratethe fait accompliand
the victors of today will not necessarilybe those of
tomorrow, or there will be a return to a more equitable
appreciationof responsibilitieswhich are naturally held by
high international bodies, and without delay we must
preparethe necessaryremedies.
72. The African Heads of State have considered this
situation at great length, primarily in the course of their
most recent Conference.True, the interest they have in the
evolution of the problemof the Middle East is nothing new,
and they have even attempted to help to solve it and to
facilitate the searchfor a satisfactory and lasting solution.
The failure of their efforts is most certainly one of the
direct consequences
of the impotence that heretofore has
beencharacteristicof international institutions, shakenas
they are by their own contradictions, frozen in a statusof
permanent hesitation-in a word, condemned to inertia.
Yet, although imperfect, the Charter does grant certain
obviousprerogativesto this Council.
73. The profound aspirationof the peoplesof Africa, the
largemajority of which have just accededto independence
and national sovereignty, is peace, which continues to be
the primary prerequisiteto their development.
74. Indeed there are too many similarities between the
Statesof the Middle East and the young African Statesfor
the continuing tension not to remind them by its foresee.
able consequencesof the threat to which these young
States may be exposed tomorrow. Moreover, beyond the
peaceto be restored to the Middle East, their constant
concernis that peaceshould extend throughout the earth,
so that Africa can better ensureits own development and
make its contribution to the elaboration of a new humanismthroughout the world.
75. Their major concern will always be, inspired by the
actions of the United Nations, to achieve a peaceful
settlementof the conflict, particularly on the basisof the
following provisions: the inadmissibility of acquisition of
territories by war, the necessity to work for a just and
lasting peace, the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the
territories occupied in the recent conflict; and, above all,
the just settlementof the problem of the Palestinepeople.
76. The hopesfor peacewhich the African States share
with the international community are founded very specifically on the acceptanceof theseprovisions by Israel. That
is why they have welcomed the efforts of Ambassador
Jarring to resolve the differing points of view on the
priorities that should be granted to the various commit.
mentsto be undertaken.

77. It is within the framework of complete support for
these efforts that the OAU Assembly at its June 1971
session, set up a committee of 10 Heads of African States to
help in the search for a solution. The mission which Africa
unanimously entrusted to the Committee of Wise Men was
a mission of peace. For the messengers of Africa, it was
obviously not a question of replacing Mr. Jarring in his role
as mediator, much less of putting themselves in the place of
the Security Council. Unfortunately, this African initiative
did not receive the reception it deserved. Aware of the
danger arising from a deterioration is the situation prevailing in the north-eastern part of the African continent,
because of the continuing aggression perpetrated against
Egyptian territory and othe: Arab territories, a danger
which constantly threatens the security, the territorial
integrity and the unity of our continent, the African Heads
of State at the end of their mission congratulated Egypt on
its co-operation with the Committee of 10 and on its
positive attitude and its persevering efforts to restore peace
to the region.

doubtful logic would be tantamount, in the final analysis,
at a different level, to requesting the independent States of
Africa, in the name of the right of asylum and of African
solidarity properly understood, to absorb into their own
peoples the peoples of Guinea (Bissau), Angola and
Mozambique, as well as the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia
and South Africa, which to the present day remain cfu&ed
under colonial domination and racial segregation, in order
to settle speedily and radically the problems which have
confronted
the continent for many years. By the
same token, one would cheaply assuage the international
conscience if the ridiculous nature of such a proposal did
not reveal its simplistic nature.
82. The African Heads of State have also underlined the
danger to the security and unity of the continent posed by
the continuation of Israeli aggression which could impel the
States members of OAU to take, at the African level,
individual or collective political and economic measures
against Israel. The fact is that they are convinced that Israel
is encouraged to persevere in its aggression and to peTpetrate acts of terrorism by the massive military, economic
and other forms of aid, as well as by the political and moral
support provided it by the United States of America, upon
which they call urgently to put an end to such an attitude.

78. Noting with satisfaction that the Arab Republic of
Egypt had spared no effort to reach a just and lasting
solution-an effort marked by the constructive co-operation
of that great African country with international bodies and
OAU, and in accordance with the Charter of OAUthey reaffirmed their active and total support for Egypt in
its struggle to recover its territorial integrity completely and
by all possible means.

83. The vast power of the United States and the role it
therefore plays in international affairs cannot be brought
into play in the problem of the Middle East if it continues
to practise a partisan policy which makes it incompetent to
hold the position of arbitrator which it would like to
assume in the conflict. Every day it becomes all the more
clear that the United States-Israel alliance is set off against
the rest of the international community, whose decisions
remain without effect in the search for a satisfactory
solution. Undoubtedly, the vast interests of that great
Power, both in Africa and in the Arab world, will one day
be appraised more correctly.

79. Moreover, they energetically condemned the negative
position taken by Israel vis-A-vis the mission of the 10
Heads of African States and Israel’s obstructionist position.
It was with deep concern that they noted that despite the
many resolutions of the United Nations and OAU enjoining
Israel to withdraw from all occupied African and Arab
territories, Israel not only persists in its refusal to implement those resolutions, but does its utmost to practise a
policy tending to create in those territories a situation of
fait accompli to serve its expansionist goals. Once again
they call for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of Israeli forces from all the occupied territories, declaring
null and void the changes made by Israel in those
territories, and they undertake not to recognize any change
likely to lead to a fait accompli or to undermine the
territorial integrity of the countries which are victims of
Israeli aggression.

84. The constant refusal of Israel to bow to the resolutions of the Security Council, and its persistent attitude
contrary to the position taken by all bodies of the United
Nations are all the more inadmissible since Israel is, in the
final analysis, nothing but the mere creation of this
Organization.
8.5. That position of OAU is, of course, the manifestation
of the natural solidarity of the African countries towards a
member of their community which has been the victim of
an act of aggression, and a part of whose national territory
is still under foreign domination.

80. The tragedy of the Palestinian people was also of
concern to the African Heads of State, who recognize that
respect for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people is
an essential element in any just and equitable solution, just
as it is a factor indispensable for the establishment of a
lasting peace in the region.

86. But this solidarity is only a partial explanation of a
position which is based, above all, on principles funclamental for the African countries. OAU has always come out
in favour of the preservation of the territorial integrity of
States and against all forms of aggression which might be
inflicted upon any member of the world community,
regardless of who that member is. That is all the more
reason why it could not accept conquest carried out
through the use of force, or allow an aggressor to retain the
benefits of an action condemnable under international law.
Moreover, what we are dealing with here is primarily a
colonial problem to which is applied the action of African

81. I think that this gives me an opportunity to deal with
a reproach that some, probably acting in good faith, have
directed towards the Arab States which, despite their
considerable wealth, allegedly have not made the necessary
effort to integrate the Palestinians into their own economic
and social systems. I would say, first of all, that in taking
such an approach we would be dealing very cheaply with
the national feelings of a people, its vital attachment to its
homeland and the pride that it has in its origins. This
9

.

countries which put the national liberation movements on
their continent on the same footing with the resistance
movement of the Palestine people which is struggling
tenaciously to recover its homeland and to have its
legitimate and inalienable rights prevail.

of the conflict heretofore have found themselves in an
impasse. It is because this was ignored that people contin&
to go round and round in a sterile game of ambiguous
interpretations, thereby strengthening even the thesis of
those who do not want to see in the explosive situation
which prevails in the Middle East anything but a chain of
action and reaction, thus placing the persons whose
territory has been occupied and the occupiers, the aggres.
sors and the person against whom aggression has been
committed, on the same level of responsibility.

87. The importance of this series of meetings will be
measured by the ability of the Council to again take the
situation in hand, to tackle in all of its dimensions the
problems raised by the aggressive policy of Israel in order to
draw the lessons from action which heretofore has been
faltering, made up of half measures, compromises and
concessions harmful to the search for peace based on
justice.
Today, more than ever, the Security Council should
resolutely give evidence of the breadth of its vision and
engage in healthy self-criticism in order to free itself from
the original sin on which is founded the pursuit of the
objectives of Zionism.

90. The time to act has certainly come and the will should
be expressed at the end of the Council’s work. This is what
Africa expects of the Council today. It is also what the
world as a whole expects as a result of its deliberations.
91. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I am
very gratified to have maintained long-standing relations of
friendship and acquaintance with Mr. Bouteflika, the Min.
ister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria. It was my great honour
to deal in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet
Union directly with questions of relations between the
Soviet Union and Algeria from the earliest days of the
proclamation of the independence of the Republic of
Algeria. I am therefore happy to note that since that time
and to this date the relations of friendship, mutual
understanding and co-operation between the Soviet Union
and Algeria have been-and I am deeply convinced will
continue in future to be-developed and strengthened. I can
assure the distinguished Minister, Mr. Bouteflika, of the
following: where the Soviet nation is concerned, our
Government and people will continue in future to make
every effort to develop and strengtherl friendship and
co-operation with Algeria.

88. The Security Council has adopted resolutions and
perhaps it is time to consider the effect they may have
produced and the reception that they have been given.
Since the role of the Council could not stop at the adoption
of a resolution, should it not therefore concern itself with
the implementation of that resolution and impose respect
for its decisions? The provisions of Chapters VI and VII of
the Charter do precisely give the Council the means of
assuming its responsibilities correctly and of ensuring that
all the members of the international community submit
themselves to its authority.
89. Everyone seems now to agree that the satisfaction of
the inalienable right of the Palestine people is essential to
any just and lasting settlement of the crisis of the Middle
East. The struggle it is carrying on with self-sacrifice,
courage and determination, while laying this down as the
primary clement for a final solution, has brought to the
surface the representatives authorized to speak on its
behalf, to make its view known and to defend its national
interests. Is it not time to pay attention to its claim and to
suggest to those who call for a dialogue that they can find
in that people the valid person with whom to talk, with
whom they should discuss the arrangements for a true
settlement? In any event it is clear that peace can never be
restored to the Middle East until the people of Palestine are
given a possibility, like other peoples and in accordance
with the principles of the United Nations Charter, to
exercise its right to self-determination. It is because that
right has been ignored that various attempts at settlement

92. The representative of Israel has requested the floor to
exercise his right of reply. Would he perhaps be so kind as
to postpone his statement until the next meeting, or does
he wish to exercise his right of reply now’?
93. Mr. TEKOAM (Israel): Mr. President, as I do not enjoy
the privilege of speaking one third of the time that the Arab
spokesmen do, I inevitably have to resort to the use of the
right of reply, but if this debate is to continue in the
afternoon, I shall be glad to reply to the speakers who
preceded me later on today.
YThemeeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

7%82001-June

1978-2,200
