S/2015/378

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 May 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2173
(2014), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2015 and requested
that I report every 90 days on the implementation of the mandate of the Mission.
The report provides an update and analysis of the conflict and the politica l and
operational environment in Darfur from 26 February 2015, the date of publication of
my previous report (S/2015/141), until 15 May 2015. It also presents the
achievements of UNAMID in implementing its revised strategic priorities endorsed
by the Security Council under resolution 2148 (2014), as well as progress in
addressing the challenges impeding the effective discharge of the mandate of
UNAMID. In addition, the report provides an update and recommendatio ns on the
process of transferring some mandated tasks of UNAMID to the United Nations
country team in the Sudan and on the development of an exit strategy for the
Mission.

II. Conflict dynamics and security situation
A.

Current trends and conflict dynamics in Darfur
2.
The reporting period was marked by an escalation of hostilities between
Government forces and the rebel factions, namely, the Sudan Liberation Army
faction Abdel Wahid (SLA/AW), the SLA faction Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and the
Justice and Equality Movement faction Gibril Ibrahim (JEM/Gibril). The
Government intensified its counter-insurgency operations with the launch of the
second phase of Operation Decisive Summer, led by the Rapid Support Forces,
leading to additional displacements of the civilian population. Violence also
increased as a result of intercommunal conflicts over land, access to resources,
migration issues and tribal rivalries. The proliferation of small arms and the
weakness in State authority also led to a rise in criminality and banditry targeting
the local population.

15-07909 (E)

280515

*1507909*

S/2015/378

Fighting between Government forces and rebel groups
3.
Fighting between forces of the Government of the Sudan and Darfur rebel
groups occurred mainly in the Jebel Marra area. Control of this territory, or at least
free access to it, is a key military objective for both camps. At the beginning of
March, after a lull in the second phase of Operation Decisive Summer in February,
Government forces launched a series of attacks against the armed movements in
some strategic locations in the Jebel Marra area. On 2 March, the Rapid Support
Forces ambushed a convoy of SLA/MM elements in Khormaley, Northern Darfur,
one of the two entry points into Jebel Marra. The attack reportedly caused
significant casualties on the SLA/MM side, with 17 elements killed. One member of
the Rapid Support Forces was also killed. On 8 March, the Sudan ese Armed Forces
and the Rapid Support Forces attacked an SLA/AW outpost in Tiro village, Central
Darfur. Reportedly, four Sudanese Armed Forces personnel and two SLA/AW
combatants were killed. In response, on 11 and 13 March, SLA/AW launched two
successive attacks against Government forces in Rokero, Central Darfur. The attacks
reportedly resulted in a high number of Sudanese Armed Forces c asualties, an
unspecified number of vehicles, weapons and ammunition being seized by SLA/AW
and the capture of the Sudanese Armed Forces base in the locality, forcing the
Government troops to withdraw from the area. On 19 March, heavily armed Rapid
Support Forces elements were observed moving from Golo to Rokero, which
according to reports received by UNAMID, Government forces recaptured on
20 March. As SLA/AW elements control the surrounding areas, the situation
remains volatile around Rokero. UNAMID has been unable to verify reports of
fighting in Rokero owing to access denials for its patrols by the Sudanese Armed
Forces.
4.
Fighting subsided from late March to mid-April, when Government forces
directed their efforts away from Jebel Marra towards securin g electoral operations.
The heavy deployment of Government forces during the election period led to a
significant reduction of activities by the armed movements. However, aerial
bombardments continued during the period. On 1 April, UNAMID received reports
of aerial bombardments taking place in Rowata village in Central Darfur in support
of a Sudanese Armed Forces ground attack against SLA/AW positions. A UNAMID
verification patrol dispatched to the area on 6 April was able to confirm the
dropping of 10 bombs that killed 14 civilians, including 5 children, injured
18 others and destroyed 15 houses. While the verification patrol was in the village,
the team witnessed another aerial bombardment on the same day, consisting of five
bombs close to where they were standing, damaging a UNAMID vehicle. One
civilian was killed and three others were injured during the concurrent
bombardment.
5.
Fighting resumed following the conclusion of the electoral process, when, on
26 April, the Rapid Support Forces reportedly ambushed a large Sudan
Revolutionary Front (SRF) convoy of approximately 300 vehicles coming from
South Sudan, comprising JEM/Gibril and SLA/MM forces, in the Nikhara area near
Tulus, Southern Darfur. UNAMID received reports of Government aerial
bombardment in support of that Rapid Support Forces attack. The bombing
reportedly resulted in the killing of 15 civilians and the wounding of 17 others in
the nearby village of El Tomat.

2/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

6.
Following the Nikhara battle, the Government announced that its forces had
defeated SRF, killing “thousands” of their elements, including field commanders,
and seizing a number of vehicles and weapons. Government officials also
announced the beginning of what they described as the “cleansing of Darfur” from
the remnants of armed movements. On 27 April, President Bashir travelled to Tulus
to congratulate his troops. On 29 April, JEM/Gibril issued a statement in which it
admitted its troops had suffered heavy casualties in the Nikhara battle, but refuted
that the war in Darfur was over.
7.
Several days later, SLA/MM announced that it had inflicted heavy losses on
Government forces during fighting in Northern Darfur on 2 May. The movement
claimed that its forces had killed 60 Rapid Support Forces elements, including a unit
commander, and had destroyed 9 vehicles. The fighting reportedly took place in
Jumeiza, in the vicinity of Kutum, Northern Darfur.
Local conflict and intercommunal violence
8.
During the reporting period, UNAMID recorded 11 incidents of
intercommunal clashes resulting in 278 fatalities, as compared to 8 clashes resulting
in 40 fatalities in the previous period. Conflicts between Arab tribes over cattle
rustling continued to be the main cause of increased violence, especially in Southern
Darfur. In most of the cases, the Government reacted with a view to stopping the
violence, but has had limited lasting success, as reconciliation processes initiated
did not address the root causes of inter- and intra-tribal conflicts over land, natural
resources and cattle rustling.
9.
The incidence of cattle rustling was particularly high in Southern Darfur
during the reporting period, with armed elements taking advantage of the ongoing
migration season to carry out raids against neighbouring communities. The relative
absence of security forces in most of the areas where the rustling occurred created
the conditions for violent retaliatory raids by community self -defence groups and a
vicious cycle of attacks and reprisals. In Central Darfur, Beni Halba and Borno
elements clashed on 6 March in Orokom in the vicinity of Zalingei. Two persons
were killed and four others injured. The conflict between Southern Rezeigat and
Habaniya tribes, which erupted on 24 March in the Sunta locality, Southern Darfur,
over mutual accusations of cattle theft, was an illustration of this pattern. The
conflict resulted in the death of 10 Habaniya and four Rezeigat individuals, and the
wounding of 16 Habaniya and 6 Rezeigat individuals. From 21 to 23 March, another
similar cycle of violence was observed in Radoum, between Salamat and Fallata.
The violence quickly spread to six villages in the vicinity, resulting in the death of
112 persons, the wounding of 42 others and the displacement of approximately
150 Salamat families.
10. Beyond cattle rustling, the weaknesses and limitations of local authorities
supporting reconciliation processes aimed at addressing previous tribal violence led
to the resumption of some conflicts. In this regard, a deadlock in the reconciliation
process between the Arab Ta’aisha and Salamat tribes following their violent
confrontation in 2013 led to a renewed vicious cycle of attacks and reprisals in
Riyad al-Bardi, Southern Darfur, throughout March, which resulted in the
evacuation of hundreds of Salamat families from the area. Similarl y, in Eastern
Darfur, the intercommunal conflict over land and resources between the Ma’alia and
the Southern Rezeigat Arab tribes resumed, following the failure of local authorities

15-07909

3/23

S/2015/378

to support the provisions of previous reconciliation mechanisms, in parti cular those
related to the establishment of native administration courts to strengthen justice at
the grass-roots level and the administration of the diya payment (blood money). As
a consequence, deadly intermittent clashes between the two sides were repor ted in
March and April, resulting in 28 casualties (10 Ma’alia and 16 Rezeigat individuals
and two Central Reserve Police personnel). Fighting resumed again on 11 May,
when approximately 7,000 Rezeigat and 4,000 Ma’alia heavily armed men clashed
in Eastern Darfur. The fighting started in Abu Karinka and spread to several villages
in the vicinity, where houses were burned, properties were looted and hundreds of
families were displaced. UNAMID reported on 11 May 2015 that at least 105
persons had been killed on the Ma’alia side and 60 injured, while 15 Rezeigat
individuals had lost their lives. The injured persons were evacuated to Adila and
Khartoum with UNAMID support. The fighting subsided on 12 May, following the
deployment of Government troops and mediation by local authorities, traditional
leaders and a delegation sent from Khartoum.
11. The destabilizing impact of numerous paramilitary groups also continued to
exacerbate tensions between local communities. In Northern Darfur, armed Arab
Zeyadiyah, reportedly members of the Border Guards and the Central Reserve
Police, attacked the Berti community on 27 February in two separate incidents in
Makisi village near Malha, killing five and abducting eight Berti. The attacks were
carried out in retaliation for the alleged murder of five Zeyadiyah by the Berti,
which the latter denied. Despite the signing on 23 March of an agreement to cease
hostilities mediated by local authorities, attacks by the Zeyadiyah continued until
the end of March, resulting in the killing of at least 33 Berti and 14 Zeyadiyah
individuals and the displacement of approximately 30,000 Berti families.
Criminality and banditry
12. Violence committed by organized criminals taking advantage of the overall
law and order and security vacuum remained a significant concern for the
population in Darfur. A total of 316 crimes were recorded by UNAMID during the
reporting period, compared with 61 in the previous one. Violence and gang activity
continued to be concentrated in major urban centres and i n the vicinity of internally
displaced persons camps. The most common crimes included armed robberies and
attacks (178 incidents), deadly shootings (23 incidents), assaults (25 incidents),
sexual and gender violence (37 incidents), carjackings (11 incident s), abductions
(8 incidents), cattle rustling (19 incidents) and arson (15 incidents). Most of the
crimes were perpetrated by Arab militia and unidentified armed groups.
13. Abduction remained a coercive method adopted by the various tribes in Darfur
to obtain the payment of diya claimed from other communities. On 26 February, a
group of armed Arabs kidnapped a Massalit internally displaced person in the
Ardamata camp and demanded ransom for his release. On 21 April, members of
SLA/AW abducted an Arab nomad for the alleged killing of another SLA/AW
element and obtained the payment of SDG 50,000 before his release.
14. The absence of Government authorities in remote areas impacted on law
enforcement, and the inefficient judiciary system continued to contribu te to a
culture of impunity and repeated crimes. On 26 February, two armed men shot and
killed two internally displaced persons and injured another in Oyuor, near Zalingei
in Central Darfur. On 4 March, a Sudanese Armed Forces soldier indiscriminately

4/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

fired at a group of people in a market in El Fasher, killing one person and injuring
four others. Unidentified armed men, on 7 April, attacked a commercial vehicle in
Sheq Jorab in Eastern Darfur, killing five passengers and injuring seven others. In a
similar incident, on 2 May, unidentified armed men attacked two buses in Hajar
Hamman in the vicinity of Kabkabiya. Three persons were killed and eight others
were injured.
15. An increasing trend of sexual and gender-based violence targeting women and
children was also recorded during the reporting period. In most of the incidents, the
victims were engaged in livelihood activities, while the perpetrators were not
arrested. On 9 March, a female internally displaced person returning from farming
activities was raped by an unknown man near Tawila, Northern Darfur. In the same
locality, two other girls were raped on 17 March by two armed men. On 13 April, a
female internally displaced person from Rwanda camp near Tawila was beaten and
raped by two unidentified men dressed in military uniform. In a similar incident,
armed Arab men, on 15 April, attempted to rape four Massalit female internally
displaced persons near Sisi camp. A male internally displaced person intervened
and, in the process, one perpetrator was injured. A group of armed Arab men
besieged the camp and claimed compensation of SDG 5,000 for the treatment of the
injured perpetrator. Lack of confidence among the victims and their families in the
Government’s capacity to conduct proper investigations, the abs ence of Government
police in some areas, fear of retribution and the social stigma attached to being
subjected to sexual violence continued to cause under-reporting of cases of sexual
and gender-based violence.

B.

Election security
16. The reporting period was marked by the conduct of the general elections in the
Sudan from 13 to 16 April. Polling activities took place without major security
incidents and amid reports of low voter turnout. Demonstrations against the
electoral process, however, took place in a number of internally displaced persons
camps, including the Hamidiya and Hassahissa camps in Central Darfur, Kalma
camp in Southern Darfur and the Mournei and Rogatas camps in Western Darfur. On
13 April, Government police forces dispersed a demonstration in the Mournei
internally displaced persons camp in Western Darfur, during which six internally
displaced persons and three policemen were injured. In addition, on 14 April,
anti-riot police arrested 20 students, while dispersing a demonstration of
approximately 200 students at El Fasher University. Seven policemen and an
unconfirmed number of students were injured in the incident. According to media
reports, these were violent clashes between students supporting the National
Congress Party (NCP) and students from Darfur in Khartoum, Omdurman and Port
Sudan.

C.

Operating environment
Attacks against UNAMID
17. During the reporting period, 60 incidents and hostile acts against UNAMID
and its personnel were recorded throughout Darfur, compared t o 46 in the previous
period. These included armed attacks and carjacking (9 incidents), robbery/road

15-07909

5/23

S/2015/378

banditry (18 incidents) and office break-in/burglary/theft (33 incidents). At least
12 out of the 18 incidents of armed robbery targeting UNAMID staff wer e recorded
in El Fasher. All of these incidents occurred in the special security zone established
by UNAMID with the support of the Government Diplomatic Police, creating an
environment of insecurity and forcing UNAMID to redeploy additional resources to
ensure the security of its personnel. During the reporting period, several incidents of
petty crimes, such as damage to UNAMID properties, were also recorded, including
at least three incidents targeting the water supply system of the Mission team sites.
18. On 23 April, approximately 40 unidentified armed men attacked UNAMID
troops protecting a water point in Kass. UNAMID forces responded robustly and
repelled the attack, killing four attackers and injuring one, in the ensuing exchange
of fire. During the incident, two peacekeepers sustained injuries and two UNAMID
vehicles were taken by the armed men. The Mission troops pursued the attackers
and successfully recovered the vehicles. The bodies of the four militiamen killed
were handed over to the Government of the Sudan Police Commissioner and
Sudanese Armed Forces Military Commander, who visited the team site later in the
evening.
19. The following morning, approximately 150 unidentified armed men were
observed on horses moving towards the Kass team site, up on which the UNAMID
Quick Reaction Force was dispatched from Nyala to the Kass team site for
reinforcement. The Quick Reaction Force was attacked near the team site and
returned fire. Four peacekeepers were injured in the attack. After a 20 -minute
firefight, Government forces intervened and the fighting ceased. After this second
incident, UNAMID engaged the Government of the Sudan at both the local and
national levels, urging it to conduct a swift and thorough investigation to ensure that
the perpetrators are brought to justice. However, in the following days, Government
officials accused UNAMID of killing defenceless Sudanese citizens in Kass,
claiming that a number of them had been killed inside the UNAMID camp in
violation of the status-of-forces agreement and their rules of engagement. Following
these accusations, a large number of armed men gathered and surrounded the Kass
team site, threatening UNAMID and requesting the payment of diya for persons
killed during the attacks on the Mission. They dispersed on 27 April.
20. On 7 May, armed members of the Government Diplomatic Police personnel,
aboard three gun-mounted vehicles, arrived at the main entrance gate of the
UNAMID headquarters in El Fasher. They forced their way into the compound to
demand payment of their monthly allowances for services rendered under the Joint
Security Operation Centre. Gate activity was suspended for six hours until the
situation was resolved. That was the second such incident related to the violation of
UNAMID premises by armed elements of the Government during the reporting
period. On 14 April, Government police pursuing a student of El Fasher University
who was fleeing after a demonstration forced their way into the compound and
apprehended the student, who was trying to seek refuge inside the camp.
21. On 13 May, Sudanese Armed Forces military intelligence personnel fired
warning shots at a UNAMID helicopter that reportedly flew over their camp in
Muhajeria, Eastern Darfur. Military intelligence personnel subsequently advised the
Mission to avoid flying over their sites in the future.

6/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

Attacks against United Nations agencies, international non-governmental
organizations and humanitarian personnel
22. The worsening security environment in parts of Darfur continued to have
significant implications for the safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
assets. Carjackings, lootings and general banditry reduce the ability of humanitarian
actors to provide assistance, and/or increase the costs of doing so, creating an
untenable situation. In most areas of Darfur, United Nations agencies rely heavily
on UNAMID for escorts, area security and logistical capacity as a means of
mitigating security risks and operating constraints.
23. A total of 40 criminal incidents against humanitarian actors were recorded by
UNAMID during the reporting period, a relative decrease compared to 73 in the
previous period. These included 1 armed attack, 7 carjackings, 5 robberies or road
banditry incidents and 27 office break-ins, burglaries and thefts. Out of the seven
carjackings, only three stolen vehicles were recovered.
24. Among the most notable incidents was one that occurred on 10 March, when
an unknown armed group attacked a convoy of 19 World Food Programme logistics
trucks escorted by UNAMID in Neni village, Northern Darfur. A UNAMID national
staff driver was severely injured and evacuated to El Fasher. During the incident,
UNAMID troops escorting the convoy exchanged fire with the assailants who
subsequently escaped with three vehicles, one contracted fuel tanker and some food
items. Only the three vehicles were recovered. On 12 May, a group of armed men
carjacked a World Food Programme car in Um Dukhun, Central Darfur. Government
police recovered the vehicle on the same day, but no arrests were made and the
investigation is ongoing.
Restrictions of movement, access denials and denial of clearances imposed
on UNAMID
25. UNAMID continued to experience restrictions of movement, access denials
and denial of security clearances for its patrols and other activities. During the
reporting period, UNAMID encountered 24 restrictions compared to 39 in the
previous period. Restrictions were most often imposed by local officials in areas of
ongoing or recently concluded hostilities between Government forc es and rebel
factions. In this regard, since the last inter-agency assessment mission to Jebel
Marra in June 2014, the authorities have denied UNAMID permission to escort
humanitarian actors to Jebel Marra and insist that Government police should
provide armed escorts to aid agencies.
26. Local authorities also imposed bureaucratic impediments, particularly in
relation to the provision of administrative authorizations, thus hindering the conduct
of some specific mandated tasks. Subsequent to the incidents o f 23 and 24 April in
Kass, Southern Darfur, UNAMID resupply convoys travelling from Nyala were
denied access to the Kass team site by Government authorities on 25, 26, 27 and
28 April before finally being granted passage on 29 April.
27. During the reporting period, the Government of the Sudan refused clearance
for 68 sorties out of 2,189 planned UNAMID flights, compared to 30 out of 3,910
during the previous reporting period. Flight restrictions were imposed following the
attack against UNAMID troops in Kass, with 49 out of 949 scheduled flights
cancelled between 28 and 30 April. On 30 April, Government authorities informed

15-07909

7/23

S/2015/378

the Mission that it would no longer be allowed to operate direct flights from team
sites in Southern Darfur to headquarters in El Fasher, and that all flights would have
to proceed through Nyala. These changes and unprecedented delays in the clearance
of routine and properly submitted passenger and cargo manifests for fixed -wing and
helicopter flights connecting the Mission’s main axis from Khartoum to El Fasher
and from El Fasher to Sectors East, South and West led to the cancellation of a
number of flights. These restrictions have had a significant impact on UNAMID
operations, causing delays in troop rotations, resupply operations, the movement of
civilian personnel and increased costs, as additional flights had to be added to sector
operations.
28. On 26 April, the National Intelligence and Security Services refused to allow
an emergency medical evacuation of an injured Ethiopian peacekeeper to proceed,
by air, from Mukjar to Nyala, citing security concerns. The peacekeeper, who had
been injured in an accident, died the same day.
Access denial and restrictions imposed on humanitarian actors
29. While it has been possible to provide basic assistance to tens of thousands of
newly displaced people, previously reported challenges in terms of partial or
delayed humanitarian access remain unresolved, as evidenced by the continued
inability of humanitarian actors to reach areas in Central Da rfur reported to be worst
affected by Government operations against armed groups. With the exception of
Guldo, the authorities continued to deny access to other locations in Jebel Marra,
despite reports from local officials and humanitarian partners of gro wing needs and
tens of thousands of displaced people.
30. In addition, local authorities in Zalingei turned down a request by the
European Commission Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection Department to
conduct monitoring visits on projects in deep-field locations. This is the third time
this year that local authorities have denied donors access to monitor their projects in
Central Darfur. Such denials hinder efforts by aid organizations in Darfur to
mobilize resources, thereby contributing to broader fundin g challenges. At the time
of reporting, only $280 million of the $1,035 million required to meet humanitarian
needs across the Sudan in 2015 had been provided (27 per cent).
Visas
31. During the reporting period, 595 visas were approved by the Governme nt,
including for 35 civilians, 1 United Nations Volunteer (UNV), 94 military,
242 police, 132 contractors, 10 consultants, 68 official visitors and 13 depend ants.
However, challenges resulting from the denial or delayed issuance of visas continue
to have an impact on the ability of the Mission to implement the mandate,
particularly through gaps in the deployment of personnel appointed to fill existing
and sometimes key vacancies. Seven visa applications were rejected, including for
senior-level vacancies. Those denials have posed a considerable challenge to the
UNAMID senior leadership in fully implementing the recommendations of the
strategic review.

8/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

III. Mandate implementation
32. During the reporting period, the Mission continued to focus on the th ree
strategic priorities reflected in its revised benchmarks (see S/2014/279) endorsed by
the Security Council in resolution 2148 (2014) and further in resolution 2173
(2014).

A.

Support for an inclusive peace process
High-level mediation and national dialogue
33. During the reporting period, a breakaway faction from SLA/MM signed a
peace agreement with the Government of the Sudan in N’Djamena on 26 March.
The faction, known as the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army-Reformist Group, is
led by a former SLA/MM commander and consists of approximately
400 combatants. The agreement, which was mediated by the Government of Chad,
made no mention of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. It provides for a
general amnesty for the members of the group, the integration of a limited number
of its combatants into the Sudanese Armed Forces and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the remainder of its members. These parallel
initiatives, which are outside the Doha Document for Peace framework or the
ongoing efforts of the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel, aim at the
fragmentation of the rebel movements by weakening the movements individually
and the SRF alliance more generally.
34. No tangible progress has been made with regard to the direct negotiations
between the Government of the Sudan and the non-signatories armed movements of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, despite efforts by the African Union High Level Implementation Panel, the Joint Chief Mediator and the Special Envoy for the
Sudan and South Sudan. The direct talks have been suspended since late November
2014. Preparations for the Sudanese national dialogue between the Government and
the political opposition, armed movements and civil society representatives also
reached a deadlock, with the failure to hold a pre-dialogue procedural meeting
scheduled to take place in Addis Ababa on 29 and 30 March (see para. 36).
35. In an effort to reinvigorate the national dialogue process ahead o f the
elections, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Germany, in cooperation with the
Berghof Foundation and the German Institute for International and Security Affairs,
invited the representatives of the Sudan Call (National Umma Party, Sudan
Revolutionary Front, National Consensus Forces and Civil Society Initiative) to a
meeting in Berlin from 24 to 28 February 2015. The meeting resulted in the signing
of the Berlin Declaration, in which the participants expressed their readiness to
engage in a national dialogue preparatory meeting to be convened by the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel. They further reiterated their call on the
Government to take measures to create an environment conducive to a successful
outcome of the dialogue, including the formation of a transitional government, the
postponement of the elections, the release of all political prisoners and the abolition
of the constitutional amendments adopted by the National Assembly in January
2015.
36. Further to the outcome of the Berlin meeting, the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel invited the Government and allied political parties,

15-07909

9/23

S/2015/378

opposition political parties, armed movements and civil society to a meeting to
discuss the mechanisms, structures, decision-making processes and implementation
modalities and guarantees necessary for an inclusive and credible national dialogue.
While this pre-dialogue procedural meeting was initially scheduled for 29 and
30 March in Addis Ababa, on 29 March, NCP issued a statement announcing it s
decision not to attend the meeting because invitations had been extended to all
opposition forces instead of to the national dialogue Preparatory Committee only.
Following the cancellation of the meeting, all opposition stakeholders condemned
the decision of the Government to move forward with the elections and called for
the creation of a conducive environment to enable an inclusive and credible national
dialogue.
37. The armed movements from Darfur further called for a cessation of hostilities
and humanitarian access as a basis for their future participation in the national
dialogue. On 4 April, the Sudan Call signatories issued a statement calling for a new
approach, which envisages a stronger mandate for the African Union High -Level
Implementation Panel to lead a comprehensive process focusing on ending the
persisting violent conflicts in the Sudan, protecting human rights and facilitating
democratic transformation. They also demanded the establishment of a national
government that would oversee the management and implementation of that
dialogue.
38. The national elections in the Sudan, which were boycotted by all major
opposition forces, took place from 13 to 16 April. On 27 April, the National
Elections Commission announced that President Bashir won the presidential race
with 94.5 per cent of the vote and that NCP had secured a majority of 323 out of
426 seats in the National Assembly. The general elections did not appear to have
demonstrated any significant shift in the political dynamics in Darfur. Th is could be
explained by the seeming lack of active participation of the population in the
electoral process and the boycott by the opposition, including Darfur’s rebel groups.
39. In his public address following the announcement, President Bashir expresse d
gratitude to Sudanese voters and reiterated his rejection of any criticism of the
electoral process. Representatives of the opposition have, in turn, claimed that the
boycott has successfully discredited the process and announced their rejection of the
results.
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
40. Progress in the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur by
the Government of the Sudan, the Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM) and
JEM-Sudan remains limited. At the end of February, LJM split and formed two new
political parties, one led by the former Chair of LJM, Tijani al -Sissi, the other by
Secretary Bahar Idriss Abu Garda. The Government could not prevent the split, but
it allowed both to contest vacant seats in Darfur during the elections. For its part,
JEM-Sudan did not complete its transformation into a political party but still fielded
candidates during the elections.
41. On 16 March, the acting Joint Special Representative travelled to Doha for
consultations with the Government of Qatar on the future of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, in view of the timetable and deadlines for implementing some of its
specific provisions, in particular those related to the Darfur Regional Authority and
the Darfur Regional Development Fund. According to the Doha Document, the

10/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

Darfur Regional Authority is scheduled to formally end by 14 July 2015, four years
after the signing of the Doha process, with its extension or abolishment to be
determined through a referendum. To date a referendum has not been held. The
inclusion of the Doha Document in the national constitution in January 2015,
however, suggests that the Darfur Regional Authority will remain in place beyond
14 July.
42. The first phase of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultations process was
successfully concluded during the reporting period. Community outreach meetings
were conducted at the local level throughout Darfur with all stakeholders. The
meetings focused on identifying priority issues to be addressed in each locality, and
selected representatives for the second phase of the process, which has been
scheduled to take place at the end of May. The Government of the Sudan released
$2 million as part of its contribution to the funding of the Darfur Internal Dialogue
and Consultations. This constituted a positive development in the light of the
serious funding constraints the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultations is facing,
which raised questions about the future of the consultations it had launched.
43. The final security arrangements of the 6,525 LJM former combatants
commenced on 28 February 2015. Of that caseload, only 2,018, including
314 women, were found to be eligible for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. Some 1,000 ex-combatants will be integrated into the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Police Forces, while the remaining 1,018
will be demobilized and provided with reintegration opportunities. UNAMID and
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) are providing tec hnical
assistance to the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission and Darfur Security Arrangements Implementation Commission for the
planning and implementation of the demobilization and reintegration of the
identified former combatants.

B.

Protection of civilians
Provision of physical protection
44. The total number of patrols conducted by the UNAMID military force during
the period under review decreased compared to the previous period, owing to the
access denials imposed by Government forces. UNAMID conducted a total of
10,376 patrols, comprising 5,567 routine patrols, 682 short -range patrols, 204 longrange patrols, 2,007 night patrols, 178 humanitarian armed escorts and 1,738
logistics and administrative armed escorts. A total of 5,008 villages were covered
during these patrols.
45. The UNAMID police conducted 4,282 patrols, comprising 2,187 confidence building patrols to internally displaced communities, and 2,095 patrols specifically
designed to address the security needs of the most vulnerable civilians. In addition
to enhancing the Mission’s visibility in the vicinity of internally displaced persons
camps and villages, these patrols provided an opportunity for the military, police
and civilian personnel to work jointly in assessing protection risks and gathering
information for early warning indicators.
46. The Jebel Marra area remained the most volatile region, the military
operations by the Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA/AW having negatively affected

15-07909

11/23

S/2015/378

the civilians inhabiting the area. Civilians from a number of villages in the vicinity
of Golo and Rockero towns and the outlying areas of Jebel Marra were displaced to
internally displaced persons camps in Guldo, Nertiti and Zalingei. UNAMID
continued to provide protection to these internally displaced persons, including
through increased patrols to internally displaced persons camps and sites.
47. In Northern Darfur, UNAMID continued to focus on the protection of the most
vulnerable groups, such as women, and to tailor its initiatives to their protection
needs. To this end, a protection committee was formed in Fata Bornu and Kassab
internally displaced persons camps in Kutum locality on 29 and 30 March,
respectively, which included women representatives and other community leaders,
as well as UNAMID components based at the Kutum team site, to coordinate
relevant protection activities, including firewood collection patrols in the area. In
Southern Darfur, the provision of firewood escorts for Kalma and Al Salaam
internally displaced persons camps was reactivated following an increase in the
number of attacks on women when engaged in livelihood activities.
48. Intercommunal conflict also continued to generate humanitarian needs, most
notably around Mellit in Northern Darfur and Katila in Southern Darfur. An
inter-agency mission to Mellit and neighbouring areas was initially postponed by
the authorities, but a team reached the area between 21 and 23 April. Displaced
persons had dispersed across a large area, creating challenges i n producing
comprehensive data on needs. Humanitarian partners rehabilitated the water station
in Mellit hospital; health partners delivered medical supplies and essential drugs to
various health facilities adequate for 24,000 people for one month. In Kati la,
humanitarian partners provided water and sanitation support to more than 3,000
people, as well as initial food assistance to some 1,800 vulnerable people.
49. Following extensive consultations between the Mission, humanitarian agencies
and local authorities, the 7,222 internally displaced persons who had sought refuge
at the UNAMID Um Baru team site in January and had been registered by the
agencies were relocated to nearby new sites. The decision was taken in view of the
overcrowding and lack of hygiene in the team site, which caused health risks for the
internally displaced persons, humanitarian workers and UNAMID personnel. The
Mission has been monitoring the security situation in the area and conducted
confidence-building patrols to the villages of origin of the internally displaced
persons to assess their living conditions. As of April, some internally displaced
persons had begun to return to their villages owing to the improving security
situation. Concurrently, Darfur State experienced some of the highest fatality rates
in a continuing measles outbreak, which by the time of reporting had reached 32
localities across the country, illustrating the region’s heightened vulnerability to
public health emergencies.
50. UNAMID continued to mitigate the threat posed by explosive remnants of war
through clearance of suspected hazardous areas. During the reporting period, 467
items of unexploded ordnance were located and destroyed during clearance
operations in 21 villages. UNAMID also collected evidence of two air-delivered
cluster bombs near Kirigiyati village, Northern Darfur, and disposed of them safely.
Having completed the task of destroying over 1.9 million shelf life expired small
arms ammunition at the Zam Zam team site, UNAMID is currently planning to carry
out similar activities in Nyala, Southern Darfur. The clearance activities and safe
destruction of these items will improve safety and security in the community. More

12/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

than 59,000 civilians, including women and children, received explosive ordnance
risk education messages through direct communication. Radio drama broadcasts
conveyed safety messages to an estimated 250,000 civilians.
51. In an effort to strengthen national capacity, UNAMID has trained and
equipped a national organization to conduct explosive ordnance clearance activities
in Darfur. At the request of the Government police, UNAMID refurbished three
weapons and ammunition storage facilities for Government Police in El Fasher.
Further assistance is planned for the four remaining Darfur Sta tes. Training on
weapons and ammunition management will be provided to Government police
personnel. Planning is ongoing to provide sustainable income generation activities
for survivors of unexploded ordnance accidents and people with disabilities across
the five Darfur States.
Logistical and security support to humanitarian operations
52. During the reporting period, UNAMID provided 67 armed escorts (against 173
in the last reporting period) to facilitate delivery of humanitarian assistance and
assessment and monitoring missions in different parts of Darfur. Most of these were
to the World Food Programme, which delivered 3,002 tons of food to needy
populations in various locations across Darfur.
53. In addition, UNAMID has shared with humanitarian actor s a matrix showing
the storage capacity at its team sites, in order to enable the prepositioning of
emergency relief items in the proximity of hot spots. The Mission accommodated 80
aid workers at its residential facilities across Darfur and is co -locating with some
agencies at some of its sector offices and team sites. Humanitarian assets such as
vehicles and other machinery also continue to be kept inside UNAMID facilities for
safety and security. Under these arrangements, a total of 117 vehicles belongin g to
agencies are currently being kept at UNAMID facilities.
54. Humanitarian partners continued to respond to the needs of newly displaced
people, while maintaining key support for the larger displaced population. At the
time of reporting, it had been possible to reach some 50,000 newly displaced people
in Northern, Central and Southern Darfur States with basic humanitarian assistance.
Owing to the easing of intercommunal tensions in the area, humanitarian actors also
reached some 6,300 previously inaccessible people in Morlanga in Mukjar locality,
Central Darfur, who had been displaced since June 2014. Following advocacy by
humanitarian partners, humanitarian operations were able to resume on 3 May in
Southern Darfur. In the Dereig internally displaced per sons camp near Nyala, food
distribution for 21,161 beneficiaries recommenced. In Kass, local authorities
allowed World Vision International to conduct a general food distribution for over
55,000 people. Restrictions on movement into internally displaced pe rsons camps in
Nyala town were also lifted, allowing operating partners access to Kalma, El Salam
and Al Sereif camps.
Promoting a protective environment
55. The human rights violations and abuses documented during the reporting
period were similar to those recorded during the previous period. UNAMID
documented the occurrence of 118 new alleged human rights violations and abuses
involving 252 victims (17 minors), compared to 83 incidents involving 191 victims
during the last reporting period. UNAMID confirmed that 79 of these were cases of

15-07909

13/23

S/2015/378

human rights violations and abuses, while 39 cases remain unconfirmed, although
they are highly likely to have occurred on the basis of corroboration from various
sources. Of the 118 cases, 55 cases involving 134 victims were allegedly perpetrated
by the Government of the Sudan security forces and proxy entities. The remaining
63 cases, with 118 victims, were attributed to unidentified armed men, often
described by the victims as “armed Arab men”. UNAMID documented viol ations of
the right to life, accounting for 25 cases with 47 victims; violations of the right to
physical integrity, accounting for 51 cases with 111 victims (7 minors); 10 cases of
abduction involving 18 victims; 4 cases of arbitrary arrest and detention involving
29 victims; and 28 cases of sexual and gender-based violence, including conflictrelated sexual violence, involving 49 victims (5 minors).
56. The right to redress by victims of human rights violations continued to be
affected by the reluctance of law enforcement authorities to pursue cases brought to
their attention. This failure to address human rights violations perpetuates the
insecure environment for civilians in Darfur and contributes to widespread
impunity. For example, 30 of the 118 documented cases were reported by victims to
the Sudan law enforcement authorities. However, only 7 cases have been
investigated, resulting in 5 arrests, whereas in the remaining 23 reported cases,
UNAMID confirmed with victims and/or witnesses that law enforcement authorities
did not take any action. Government authorities have cited a lack of capacity of the
law enforcement authorities and lack of information on the identity of perpetrators
as reasons for the lack of progress in investigating cases. Victims and their families
blamed lack of willingness on the part of the authorities to investigate cases.
57. During the reporting period, UNAMID trained and sensitized national partners
on child rights and child protection. The capacity-building programme was aimed at
securing the community ownership of the child protection agenda, and to strengthen
monitoring, reporting, response and prevention of grave child rights violations.
Between 30 March and 2 April, the United Nations Children’s Fund supported
training on the Media and Reporting Mechanism, which was facilitated by the
co-Chairs of the Darfur Taskforce; 22 members of the technical working group in
Central Darfur benefited from that training.
58. During the reporting period, a mapping conducted by UNAMID indic ated that
out of 65 administrative localities, only 19 have formal courts, while only 29
localities have Government police stations. This seriously undermines the ability of
Darfur’s rule of law institutions to contribute to combatting criminality and
impunity. Judicial authorities have, at the same time, made some efforts to improve
the delivery of and access to justice. Between 29 March and 1 April, during the first
visit of an incumbent Chief Justice to Darfur since 2005, three new courts were
inaugurated in Nyala, Southern Darfur, as well as the new judiciary headquarters in
El Fasher, Northern Darfur.
59. Prosecutors trained by UNAMID have now been deployed to various localities
across Darfur: 20 to Northern Darfur (5 of them assigned to the Special Cou rt for
Darfur Crimes), 25 to Southern Darfur, 11 to Central Darfur and 10 to Western
Darfur. Lack of office space, equipment and accommodation remains an issue
impacting the effective discharge of their duties.
60. In its efforts to support the functioning of the Special Court and related
transitional justice mechanisms, UNAMID sponsored a team of three Sudanese
prosecutors, including the Special Prosecutor, on a two -day study tour on 23 and

14/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

24 March to the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in Arus ha, in order to
strengthen their capacity in prosecuting serious crimes according to the standards of
international humanitarian law.
61. On 14 April, in Central Darfur, inmates in the Zalingei prison staged a violent
break and seized a machine gun-mounted police vehicle from the prison. In an
exchange of fire, one police officer and one prisoner were killed, while five other
police officers and two prisoners were injured. Thirty-two prisoners, including 12
inmates on death row, escaped towards Saraf Umra. That incident highlighted
continued security challenges in Darfur prisons, including a lack of basic security
infrastructure and management and operational capacity.
62. The implementation of community-based labour intensive projects included a
variety of training projects for a total of 1,200 direct beneficiaries from 15
communities to reduce their risk of being conscripted into conflict.
63. During the reporting period, UNAMID police continued to work closely with
the Darfur Police in its capacity-building and sensitization training in order to foster
a protective environment. The focus of capacity-building was on the use of
proportionate and less than lethal force in quelling public order disturbances and on
investigation of heinous crimes, specifically those related to aggravated genderbased violence. Sensitization training of the Darfur police revolved around working
together with community policing volunteers of internally displaced persons camps
to resolve minor infringements at the community level and to create an environment
of trust between long-term internally displaced persons and the Darfur police.
English language training classes were regularly organized for Darfur police
personnel to enable them to interact with the United Nations country t eam,
especially the humanitarian component, which receives escorts from the Darfur
police in delivering relief materials. A total of over 1,700 male and 350 female
Darfur police officers received professional training from their UNAMID police
counterparts.
64. During the same period, over 400 Community Police Volunteers from
internally displaced persons camps received training in community policing
essentials, and over 3,000 internally displaced persons, mostly children but also
women and girls, received training in English language. The emphasis on
community-oriented policing and continuous interaction between UNAMID police
officers assisted by the formed police units and the internally displaced persons is
incrementally improving the latter’s access and interaction with the Government
police and security organizations.
Local conflict mediation
65. While UNAMID, in collaboration with Government authorities and other
stakeholders, has continued to support the mediation of intercommunal conflicts,
relapses in existing conflicts and fresh outbreaks have continued, leading to
increased protection needs for the vulnerable population. In this context, the
emphasis continues to be on early warning, preventive measures, capacity -building
and efforts to address the root causes.
66. The Mission facilitated mediation through engaging ajaweed (traditional
mediators), ageed and hakamat (women traditional war singers), native
administration and community leaders. Following the resurgence of conflict

15-07909

15/23

S/2015/378

between the Berti and Zayadiya tribes in Northern Darfur, the Mission effectively
used this approach to engage both tribes and the mediation committee to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict. Seven meetings were held in March with key
stakeholders both in Northern Darfur and Khartoum as part of efforts to reach a
peaceful and speedy resolution of the conflict. Similarly, on 6 April, UNAMID
facilitated a meeting between the Darfur Regional Authority’s Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission and 13 community leaders fro m the Zayadiya tribe on
the issue. The Mission also engaged with Darfuri civil society organizations and
influential personalities in Khartoum to consolidate efforts for dialogue and
reconciliation.
67. In its continued efforts to support the reconciliatio n between the Ma’alia and
Southern Rezeigat communities, UNAMID engaged with the leadership of the two
communities and other key stakeholders, following their inability to reach an
agreement at a Government-led reconciliation conference in February 2015 in
Merowe, Northern State. Following the resumption of clashes between the two
tribes on 10 and 11 May, through its continued engagement with tribal leaders and
Government authorities, UNAMID continued to exert efforts to mitigate the impact
of the fighting on the civilian population in the area. On 14 May, the Mission
facilitated the visit of the High-level Government delegation to El Daien, Abu
Karinka and Adila with the aim of reducing tensions between the two communities.
In addition, UNAMID assisted the Sudanese authorities in evacuating nine of the
critically injured to Khartoum for treatment. It also provided Eastern Darfur State
medical authorities with medicines and other surgical equipment that were in short
supply. In addition, UNAMID coordinated closely with the United Nations country
team to facilitate delivery of critically urgent assistance to those affected by the
conflict. The Mission’s troops in Eastern Darfur raised their level of preparedness
and put in place proactive response measures to address any potential demands for
physical protection or shelter for affected civilians.
68. The Mission continued to support the Massalit and Fallata and all other
stakeholders engaged in the search for a peaceful resolution of the conflict that
erupted between these tribes on 29 January. Two separate meetings were held with
the leaders of the Advisory Councils of the two tribes on 12 March, whereby both
parties reaffirmed their commitment to resolve the conflict peacefully. UNAMID is
working collaboratively with local authorities in Southern Darfur to conduct further
reconciliation meetings for both parties.
69. These fruitful interactions built upon previous UNAMID efforts in February in
Southern Darfur, which engaged ageed and hakamat, mobilizing them to play a
pivotal role in peacebuilding. Supported by local authorities, these efforts led to the
formation of six joint local committees comprising ageed and hakamat to entice
them to desist from, pre-empt and prevent communal conflicts.

IV. Implementation of the strategic review recommendations
A.

Improved effectiveness and staff streamlining
70. The Mission has continued to implement the recommendations of my special
report of 25 February 2014 (S/2014/163) to further improve its capabilities and
effectiveness. Currently, UNAMID has 40 units deployed (27 military and

16/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

13 formed police units). The Operational Readiness Assessment team established to
inspect and train units in team sites on areas targeted for improvement noted steady
progress in the performance of the various contingents. During the reporting period,
the military component completed deployments of an Indonesian battalion, a
Pakistani battalion and a Bangladeshi reserve company.
71. The serviceability of contingent-owned equipment continued to show
improvement, reflecting positively on the performance of UNAMID troops and the
formed police units. Out of the 27 military units deployed, 19 have equipment
shortfalls below 10 per cent, while 8 have shortfalls in excess of 10 per cent. This is
an improvement, compared to 13 units with shortfalls below 10 per cent and 11
units with shortfalls exceeding 10 per cent in the last reporting period. There has
also been a slight improvement in the overall serviceability of equipment of military
units from 86.7 per cent in the last reporting period to 88.9 per cent as at 30 April.
The armoured personnel carrier serviceability rate, which was a major impediment
to effective patrolling, is now at 85 per cent for military units and 88 per cent for the
formed police units. The major equipment serviceability rate is now over 90 per
cent for 8 of the 13 formed police units (as against 6 during the previous
assessment). Overall, the memorandum of understanding servic eability rate is now
86 per cent for the formed police units, as against 83 per cent in the third quarter of
2014. The robust reactions by units in attacks and the proactivity shown in resolving
threatening situations against internally displaced persons d uring the reporting
period are indicators of continuous improvement as a result of the requested change
of attitude, robustness and training.
72. Secretariat and Mission staff cooperated closely to complete the first phase of
the streamlining exercise, abolishing 790 positions (213 international, 257 national
and 320 UNVs). Teams were established at United Nations Headquarters and the
Mission to prepare and synchronize the steps needed to ensure a smooth and fair
process. With the support of a United Nations Headquarters team, the Mission
successfully conducted comparative reviews, identified qualified international staff
for their deployment to other missions, assisted staff in the preparation of résumés,
obtained approval for payment of termination indemnity in accordance with the
rules of the Organization, prepared and conducted a job fair for the placement of
national staff inviting Sudanese companies, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations to provide advice, and devised a communicatio ns
and security strategy to respond adequately to the impact of this sizable reduction
on the Darfur economy. The comparative reviews for national and international staff
were completed in February, followed by counselling of staff who could not be
deployed to other missions or find jobs in the Sudan. The abolition of posts was
completed by 31 March 2015 without any security incident. A further 488 posts (476
national, 10 international and 2 UNVs) have been proposed to the Fifth Committee
for reduction in the 2015/16 budget as part of the second phase of the streamlining.
73. Simultaneously, UNAMID has continued to implement the reinforcement of
substantive staff to field offices in accordance with the recommendations of the
streamlining report. Sector Joint Operations Centres have been established in all
five Darfur States to further improve timely and accurate reporting and facilitate
operational coordination. The recruitment process for the post of Chief Joint
Operations Centres has been completed and deployment should be finalized during
the next reporting period. After a two-year vacancy, the Chief Public Information
Officer arrived to the Mission on 22 February and has focused, with the help of a

15-07909

17/23

S/2015/378

senior consultant, on the UNAMID communications strategy a nd outreach. After
some delay in the issuance of a visa, the Director of Mission Support finally took up
his functions in El Fasher on 10 March.

B.

Transfer of mandated tasks to the United Nations country team
74. Further to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 2173 (2014), UNAMID
and the United Nations country team in the Sudan have identified relevant tasks that
could be transferred to the latter following the revision of the Mission’s strategic
priorities. As part of the process, an analysis was undertaken regarding which of
these mandated tasks could only be carried out by UNAMID and which tasks should
be implemented jointly with the country team and in which the latter would have a
comparative advantage. This analysis was conducted on the basis of the integrated
strategic framework for UNAMID and the country team for the period 2014 -2016,
which guides their cooperation during that period and will also serve as a basic
framework for the operationalization of the transfer.
75. In accordance with its first strategic priority, UNAMID will continue to
support efforts to achieve a comprehensive solution to the Darfur conflict through
the mediation led by the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel and the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The country team will
continue, in close collaboration with the Mission, to support the reintegration aspect
of the Doha Document planning and security arrangements. Core -mandated tasks
related to the physical protection of civilians and the provision of security and
logistical support for the delivery of humanitarian assistance are inextricably linked
to the Mission’s logistical and military assets, as well as the extent of its presence
on the ground, and therefore cannot be transferred to the country team. Similarly,
UNAMID will continue to monitor and report on human rights, sexual and gender based violence and criminal trials and support community policing. UNAMID and
the country team will jointly implement the early warning and respons e system and
the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations committed against
children in armed conflict. The Mission will continue to explore the possibility of
gradually transferring certain ordnance disposal services to national institutions ,
while capacity-building and risk education activities would be transferred to the
country team. The Mission police component will continue to work jointly with
UNDP and other partners towards the establishment of an effective, responsible and
accountable Sudanese police service. Under the Global Focal Point umbrella, and
with a view to their gradual transfer to it, the country team will work jointly with
the Mission in enhancing the prison system and strengthening capacity of rural
courts and transitional justice mechanisms. The country team will work on
improving access to justice and provide capacity-building in the area of human
rights.
76. Based on its extensive presence across Darfur and good offices role, the
Mission remains ideally placed to provide logistical support for local mediation
efforts and to promote dialogue. UNAMID will expand its partnership with the
country team in community stabilization, including prevention of recruitment
among youth, community violence reduction and arms reduction. The country team
may complement these efforts through projects aimed at addressing the root causes
of the conflict, particularly through the Darfur Development Strategy, if funding is
available, including capacity-building of local mediation mechanisms, support to

18/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

national reforms regarding access to, and use and management of, land and other
natural resources and migration-related livelihood issues.
77. In line with the strategic review of UNAMID in 2014 and the revised strategic
priorities, the Mission has gradually discontinued tasks related to the monitoring of
and advocacy with the location population and capacity-building on HIV/AIDS and
gender mainstreaming issues. While the country team has a comparative advantage
in these activities, it would require additional funding and support in order to carry
them out.
78. The operational plan for the implementation of the transfer, which will be
developed jointly by UNAMID and the country team, will be based on benchmarks
and will need to take into account certain preconditions, including the upfront
mobilization of adequate financial resources from the outset of the process and
necessary support by relevant actors, including the Government of the Sudan. In the
long term, a further transfer of tasks will require a more conducive security
environment throughout Darfur allowing for the safe, rapid and unimpeded civilian led delivery of assistance and a significant improvement in the protection of
civilians, which, in turn, would lay the groundwork for development and recovery
and also increase the availability of international donor funding.
79. On 10 May, UNAMID adopted its revised protection of civilians strategy
following consultations within the Mission Joint Protection Group and the country
team. The strategy provides for a strategic, geographical and operational
prioritization of protection threats in Darfur that will serve as the basis for the
Mission’s joint planning with the country team.

C.

Exit strategy
80. In its resolution 2173 (2014) of 27 August 2014, the Security Council
requested an assessment of the implementation of the 2014 strategic review of
UNAMID (S/2014/138), including specific achievements under the revised strategic
priorities and progress in addressing the challenges facing the Mission. It also
requested an overview of significant developments in Darfur and recommendations
on the mandate of UNAMID, steps towards an exit strategy and a handover of
certain tasks to the United Nations country team. My special report of 6 March 2015
(S/2015/163) provided an analysis of the situation and concludes that given the lack
of progress on the benchmarks and the significant deterioration of the situation, th e
three strategic priorities of UNAMID as defined in 2014 remain valid.
81. A joint working group was established between the African Union, the United
Nations and the Government of the Sudan to respond to the request for an exit
strategy and address particular concerns raised by the Government of the Sudan in
this regard. Following agreement on its terms of reference in February 2015, the
joint working group met in Khartoum on 17 March and, between 18 and 24 March,
travelled to all five Darfur States to assess the security and humanitarian situation
and ascertain options for a smooth exit, in keeping with the agreed terms of
reference. The joint working group met again from 15 to 19 April and from 13 to
19 May to discuss recommendations to be presented to the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council ahead of mandate
renewal discussions in June.

15-07909

19/23

S/2015/378

82. While a conclusion could not be reached by the joint working group by the
time of the writing of the present report, the joint working group discussions were
conducted in an atmosphere of respect and appreciation for the positions of all
sides. The consultations with the Government of the Sudan have been suspended
and shall be resumed at a time yet to be confirmed.
83. In keeping with the findings of the 2014 strategic review of UNAMID and my
report of 6 March 2015 (S/2015/163), which reiterated the validity of the three
strategic priorities given the challenging security and human itarian situation, the
African Union/United Nations team proposed a two-pronged approach to the
Government. The first element would be the gradual and phased withdrawal of the
UNAMID force from Western Darfur and a progressive handover of its tasks to the
Government and the United Nations country team, as the conditions for the
consolidation of security in the State are created by the national authorities.
Fighting has remained concentrated in the centre of Darfur, and there has been no
major armed group activity or any major intercommunal fighting in Western Darfur
in the past two years. The gradual reduction of the UNAMID presence in Western
Darfur, with a handover to the Government and a transfer of tasks to the United
Nations country team, would reflect the overall efforts of UNAMID to concentrate
on its three strategic priorities, while further demonstrating flexibility and efficiency
by reducing its size. As part of this, UNAMID would also close three other team
sites in Northern and Southern Darfur that, in accordance with findings of the
recently conducted military capability study, are assessed to be in areas that do not
currently necessitate the presence of UNAMID.
84. The withdrawal from the other areas/States will be based on progress towards
the achievement of the UNAMID benchmarks. The premise of this second part of
the exit strategy is that a political solution to the conflict must be found and direct
talks between the parties initiated, starting with a cessation of hostilities. Such
negotiations will lay the groundwork for recovery and create the conditions for
development.
85. Both elements of the exit strategy require satisfactory security, humanitarian
and early recovery arrangements for the protection of civilians, in particular for the
internally displaced persons and voluntary returns. Equally important is the
requirement to address intercommunal conflict through comprehensive and
inclusive consultations with the communities, the establishment of appropriate legal
and political frameworks and the reinforcement of the justice and law enforcement
sectors.

V. Financial aspects
86. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/261 of 29 December 2014,
appropriated the amount of $1,153,611,300 for the maintenance of UNAMID for the
period of 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015. As at 7 May 2015, unpaid assessed
contributions to the UNAMID Special Account amounted to $263.9 million, while
the total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations
amounted to $1,958.6 million. Reimbursement to contributing Governments for
contingent-owned equipment costs and for troop and formed police costs has been
made for the period up to 31 December 2014 and 31 January 2015, respectively, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

20/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

VI. Observations and recommendations
87. Since my last report, there has been no tangible progress towards the
resolution of the conflict in Darfur. The fighting between the Government of the
Sudan and the armed movements continued and resulted in high numbers of ne wly
displaced persons. The second phase of the Government’s military offensive,
Operation Decisive Summer, was aimed to put an end to all armed rebellions in the
Sudan. In Darfur, the main focus of this phase was on reclaiming Jebel Marra and
preventing the armed movements from crossing the borders with South Sudan and
regrouping. Despite their numerical superiority, better equipment and logistics, the
objective of the Sudanese Armed Forces/Rapid Support Forces joint operations,
which was to dismantle the rebel stronghold of Jebel Marra and establish a firm grip
on the area, was not achieved.
88. Despite the continuation of local mediation efforts, the underlying causes of
intercommunal violence remain largely unaddressed. This has led to periodic
outbreaks of violence and an increase in the protection needs of vulnerable
populations. Beyond the resource conflicts, the destabilizing impact of broader
political tensions, the proliferation of small arms, the influence of numerous militias
in the region and the manner in which local authorities have responded to insecurity
have contributed to aggravation of the situation. Criminality also remains a major
source of insecurity. Meanwhile, direct talks between the Government and the
non-signatory armed movements, which began in Addis Ababa in November 2014,
have not resumed. I reiterate that there is no military solution to the conflict in
Darfur and urge the Government and the armed movements to engage constructively
in a negotiated settlement, without any preconditions. I call on the Government to
immediately investigate the use of cluster munitions in Northern Darfur, which are
prohibited under international law and pose a particular threat to the civilian
population. I also call on the Government to address decisi vely intercommunal
violence by focusing on its root causes.
89. I regret that, on 26 April, the Government of the Sudan denied a flight request
for the emergency medical evacuation of an Ethiopian peacekeeper injured while
performing his duties in Mujkar, Western Darfur, as reported in paragraph 28 of the
present report. The peacekeeper died hours later. I convey my condolences to the
Government of Ethiopia and to the family of the deceased. I call on the Government
of the Sudan to respect the status of forces agreement signed with the United
Nations, lift all restrictions placed on UNAMID and remove all obstructions to the
implementation of its mandate. I also call on the Government to lift all restrictions
imposed on humanitarian actors.
90. On 27 August 2014, under its resolution 2173 (2014), the Security Council
extended the mandate of UNAMID for a period of 10 months, until 30 June 2015. In
my special report of 6 March 2015 (S/2015/163), I provided the Council with an
analysis of the implementation of the strategic review of UNAMID, which
concluded that the three strategic priorities of the Mission remain valid. Given the
current situation in Darfur and the progress made towards implementing the
strategic priorities of UNAMID and in addressing the main challenges identified by
the review, I recommend that the Security Council consider extending the mandate
of the Mission for 12 months until 30 June 2016, without modification.

15-07909

21/23

S/2015/378

91. With respect to the UNAMID exit strategy, I call on the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council to provide clear direction on this
issue, in order to allow a swift conclusion of this process.
92. In conclusion, I would like to thank the Acting Joint Special Re presentative/
Joint Chief Mediator, Abiodun Bashua, and all the women and men of UNAMID,
the United Nations and the non-governmental organizations, who, in the face of
considerable challenges, continue their relentless efforts to improve the lives of the
people of Darfur. I also commend my Special Envoy for the Sudan and South
Sudan, Haile Menkerios, and Presidents Thabo Mbeki and Abdulsalami Abubakar of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel for their efforts to resolve the
conflicts in the Sudan.

22/23

15-07909

S/2015/378

15-07909

23/23
