UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
15 February 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SIXTH MEETING (Resumption 3)
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Tuesday, 15 February 1994, at 3.30 p.m.

President:
Members:

Mr. OLHAYE

(Djibouti)

Argentina
Brazil
China
Czech Republic
France
New Zealand
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. CARDENAS
Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. HE Yafei
Mr. KOVANDA
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. KEATING
Mr. GAMBARI
Mr. AL-KHUSSAIBY
Mr. SHAUKAT
Mr. LOZINSKIY
Mr. BIZIMANA
Mr. PEDAUYE
Mr. WOOD
Mr. ROSENSTOCK

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

94-85191 (E)

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
212

The meeting was resumed at 4 p.m.
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received a letter from the representative of Lithuania, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual

practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simutis (Lithuania)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council that I
have received a letter dated 14 February 1994 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations, which
reads as follows:
"On behalf of the members of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
have the honour to request that the Security Council extend an
invitation to His Excellency Mr. Ahmet Engin Ansay,
Ambassador, Permanent Observer of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference to the United Nations, to address the
Council under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure in
the course of the Council’s consideration of the item ’The
situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina’.
That letter will be published as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/1994/174.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
213

(The President)
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to His Excellency
Mr. Ansay.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now continue its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The next speaker is the representative of Morocco.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. SNOUSSI (Morocco) (interpretation from French):

It is

a privilege for me, Sir, to convey to you today my sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for February.

The wisdom and perspicacity of your country and its

President are and will continue to be the best gages of your
success.
I should also like to commend the Ambassador of the Czech
Republic on the very effective way in which he guided the work of
the Council last month.
After 22 months of a terrible war in which the Bosnian Serbs,
overtly assisted by the Serbs in Belgrade, have deployed before our
very eyes the full arsenal of horrors and atrocities against a
country that is a member of our international community, we are
meeting here today to deplore the latest atrocity and the latest
horror in a long, long list, having already denounced and condemned
the crimes, the rapes, the "ethnic cleansing" and the destruction
of mosques and other places of worship.

Thanks to television, we

have all seen the scores of mutilated corpses and the panicstricken populace, unable to believe their eyes when they see just
how far hate and intolerance can drive men whom nothing has been
able to stop.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
214

(Mr. Snoussi, Morocco)
The Council, of which we have had the honour of being a
member, in two years has issued over 40 resolutions and 50-odd
statements.

Not one of these resolutions and not one of these

statements has been observed by the Bosnian Serbs and, by an irony
of fate, only the one that imposed the embargo on the Bosnian
Muslims has been scrupulously observed, thus depriving that people
of its fundamental right to defend itself on an equal footing, in
terms of weaponry, against an invader that has at its disposal the
most sophisticated weapons and the most deadly engines of war.
Nevertheless, the international community will once again
witness the good will of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has agreed
to withdraw its heavy weapons even though resolutions
824 (1993) and 836 (1993) impose no obligation on it to do so.
Meanwhile, several conferences have been held and, given that
they have not achieved an end to the occupation, to the war, or to
the barbarity, they have taken turns at chipping away a little
further at Bosnia, at the Bosnian territory recognized by our
international community.

Each time, we hoped that Serb

expansionist pretensions were about to stop, but, each time, while
the Bosnian people, now a people of refugees, sought the shelter of
the road in the countryside and in neighbouring countries, their
country, melting away like ice in a fire, grew smaller every day.
And since then, absolutely nothing for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But now, suddenly, today there is a glimmer of hope.

The

international community, in a praiseworthy U-turn, has realized
that, in the face of so much contempt, so much recklessness and
arrogance, only fear can give pause for thought.

And NATO’s

warning has, for the first time, slowed the hellish pace of the
Serb onslaught.

But this ultimatum, and even air strikes - if air

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
215

(Mr. Snoussi, Morocco)
strikes there are - will not bring back to life the hundreds of
thousands of dead Bosnians who wanted only to live in peace.
This glimmer of hope is that what is left of the Bosnian
people will from now on be better protected.

But that protection

still needs to be extended to all the stricken towns, as there is
nothing to show that, once Sarajevo is out of range, the Bosnian
Serbs will not attack the other towns, even if they are
symbolically protected by our resolutions.

And the disarmament

still needs to become real disarmament, the aggressor still has to
be punished, the perpetrators of these new crimes still need to be
brought to justice and sentenced.

And we still have to ensure that

our principles, our Charter, our laws and our ethics are no longer
flouted.
This supposes, of course, greater vigilance and more
responsibility on our part.

It supposes that the determination we

have expressed in respect of Sarajevo covers all the "safe areas"
we have created.

It supposes that the flow of humanitarian

assistance also becomes a condition in the ultimatum that has been
issued.

And it supposes that Serbia’s diplomatic and economic

isolation becomes effective and total.

The United Nations has had

proof that this has been effective elsewhere, but let us not wait
for a miracle that will not happen.
On this holy day in the month of Ramadan, when Muslims join in
pious devotion, we would pray, along with all believers in the
world, for an end to lamenting about the stricken people of Bosnia
and for a beginning - at last - to protection for them against the
genocide that is being committed every day, against extermination
and against a country that wants to make us relive the horrors

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
216

(Mr. Snoussi, Morocco)
which our world experienced in 1939 and which it wanted to forget
at all costs.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Morocco for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh.

I

invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. RAHMAN (Bangladesh):

Mr. President, let me at the

outset express our commendation on the successful way in which you
have conducted the affairs of the Council for this month.

My

delegation also joins its voice to the tributes paid to your
predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Karel Kovanda, for his important
contribution in steering the work of the Council in January.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
217

(Mr. Rahman, Bangladesh)
The Council is meeting once again under the impetus of an
unprovoked massacre in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The indiscriminate

shelling of the Dobrinja area and of the Sarajevo market on 4 and
5 February 1994 has shocked a world benumbed by a continuous series
of murderous atrocities.

Bangladesh can only voice its helpless

sympathy to the Government and the people of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina over this latest heinous tragedy.
One clear message emanates from this Council debate:

an

unambiguous call for action within the stipulated deadline to
ensure the implementation of the ultimatum issued by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 9 February 1994 and of
Security Council resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993).
Intent must be translated into realities on the ground, since
one truth is now palpably evident:

the cynical pattern of

opportunism followed by the Serbs.

They have extracted every

advantage at the expense of a credulous and dilatory international
community bent on the pursuit of a negotiated peace at any cost.
If negotiations are indeed to be pursued in good faith, military
balances must be preserved by determined action, not a mere
commitment to act.

The elasticity of that intent has been tested

and fine tuned into an art by the Serbs, to their continual
advantage.
We welcome the Bosnian Government’s agreement to withdraw its
weapons voluntarily and to place them under United Nations control.
The Serbs must be made to follow suit.

Security Council resolution

836 (1993) provides a clear legal framework for using all necessary
means, including air strikes against Serb positions, especially
around Sarajevo.

We welcome the forward steps initiated by the

Secretary-General in his letter to the Secretary-General of NATO,

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
218

(Mr. Rahman, Bangladesh)
as summarized in his letter of 11 February addressed to the
President of the Security Council, to coordinate procedures for the
initiation and conduct of specific air strikes and to delegate
authority to his Special Representative with respect to air support
for the defence of United Nations personnel anywhere in the
Republic.

That cover must extend to all other "safe areas" to

prevent Serb diversionary tactics.
A clear pattern of consensus has emerged on immediate actions
that must be implemented.

Those actions are:

an effective cease-

fire and a complete cessation of hostilities throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the lifting of the siege of Sarajevo and of other
"safe areas" and besieged towns; the withdrawal of heavy weapons
and their regroupment under the control of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR); the facilitation of the unhindered
flow of humanitarian assistance, including through vital access
points such as Tuzla airport; and the provision of security to
protect UNPROFOR forces.
The determined pursuit and implementation of those immediate
goals is an essential precursor of the ultimate objective of
negotiating a just and sustainable peace acceptable to all parties,
within the parameters laid down by United Nations resolutions and
the immutable objectives of the United Nations Charter.

Bangladesh

fully supports the triumph of the logic of peace over that of war,
but peace must be justly and uniformly ensured, if necessary by the
use of force.

To that end, Bangladesh’s position fully conforms

with the declaration of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina, adopted at Geneva on
17 January 1994.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
219

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Bangladesh

for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the United Arab
Emirates.

I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to

make his statement.
Mr. SAMHAN (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from
Arabic):

I take pleasure, Sir, in congratulating you on behalf of

the State of the United Arab Emirates upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month.

We have complete

confidence that your abilities and diplomatic experience will
contribute to the success of the work of the Council.
It gives me pleasure also to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic,
for the effective and able way in which he guided the Council’s
work last month.
The Security Council is meeting yet again to consider the
tragic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Council has

repeatedly discussed the situation in that Republic, and has
adopted many resolutions and presidential statements.

Previous

speakers have analysed the situation and demonstrated its danger to
regional and international peace and security, especially since the
horrific massacre of Bosnian civilians in Sarajevo on
5 February 1994 by Serb shells.

That caused the martyrdom of more

than 60 people and injuries to more than 200.
That massacre was not the first.

It is but the latest in a

long series of heinous crimes, including "ethnic cleansing", rape
and the destruction of historical, cultural and religious
monuments.

We all feel ashamed in the face of such crimes:

ashamed to see a State Member of the United Nations having been
subjected for nearly two years to blatant Serb aggression.

And as

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
220

(Mr. Samhan, United Arab Emirates)
the international community is renewing its respect for human
rights, we see human rights violated, systematically and with
impunity, because of the international community’s lack of the
necessary political will to repel the aggression.
We have been attentively following the Geneva talks that
recently began again, under fresh circumstances - following the
barbaric massacre in Sarajevo and the recent NATO decision to
permit air strikes against Serb positions and heavy weapons if the
Serbs refuse to withdraw those weapons from the Sarajevo area.
While we believe that the NATO decision is a step in the right
direction, we do not consider it sufficient, as it makes no
reference to the other "safe areas" mentioned in Security Council
resolution 824 (1993), which continue to be blockaded by the Serbs.
Hence, there is a need for a stronger position and for rapid
intervention on the basis of resolution 836 (1993) to put an end to
"ethnic cleansing", aggression and occupation.

The international

community is very well acquainted with the procrastination and the
manoeuvres of the Serbs in the current negotiating process, aimed
at gaining time and at eventually imposing a fait accompli.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
221

(Mr. Samhan, United Arab Emirates)
International diplomacy has thus far failed to find solutions
to the dispute based on international law - solutions that would
guarantee respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and send a signal that the aggression and
occupation of another’s territory by force will not be recognized.
In addition, the imbalance of military force in favour of the Serbs
and the pressures being exerted on the Bosnian Muslims - who
represent the majority of the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina to force them to accept a series of concessions lead to the
conclusion that the Geneva negotiations are not in favour of
legality in Bosnia.
In view of all this, there are essential questions that must
be clarified with respect to the Geneva negotiations.
It must be clear that the call for recognition of a status quo
that has resulted from the use of force and occupation is contrary
to all legal principles and international law and would only
prolong the conflict.

What is worse, the Republic of Bosnia and

Herzegovina, a Member State of the United Nations, might be in
danger of being partitioned.

Should the international community

approve this, it would give legitimacy to the acquisition of
territory by force and through occupation.

This blatantly

contradicts many of the resolutions adopted by this Council, in
which the sovereignty and political independence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have been affirmed.
These measures jeopardize the basic principles of
international conduct, which is why the international community and
its mechanism for collective security, the Security Council, should
intervene with collective measures based on the United Nations
Charter and international law.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
222

(Mr. Samhan, United Arab Emirates)
Both the Government and the people of the United Arab Emirates
at all levels have expressed their profound sadness at the
suffering of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina - especially the
Muslims - as a result of the Serb and Croat aggression.

We have

repeatedly condemned the barbaric and unethical actions of the
aggressors, especially the heinous crime committed recently in
Sarajevo.

From the very outset, we have advocated the taking of

the measures necessary to put an end to this aggression and these
crimes against humanity.

We believe that disputes should be

resolved through dialogue and peaceful negotiations on the basis of
the letter and spirit of the United Nations Charter and
international law, and with respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.

Respect by everyone for these

objectives and principles would enhance regional and international
peace and security.
Under these dangerous and very uncertain conditions we are
more convinced than ever that there is no legal or political
argument whatsoever that can warrant the continuation of the arms
embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In this respect we,

together with most of the countries of this international
organization, fully support the right of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter.
right is based on international law.

This

It is not fair or just for

the political and military balance to favour aggression during the
negotiating process.

That is why lifting the arms embargo could

truly support the political negotiations.
We also call for the lifting of the blockade against various
villages and cities, and for support for international efforts to
ensure that humanitarian convoys are not interfered with.

At the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
223

(Mr. Samhan, United Arab Emirates)
same time, we consider it extremely important that those
responsible for crimes of rape, aggression and "ethnic cleansing"
and for the blatant violations of human rights committed in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991 be brought to
justice.

These acts represent a clear violation of the rules and

norms of international humanitarian law and international legality.
It is imperative that the Security Council send a clear signal to
the Serb leaders that they must abandon their expansionist
ambitions and "ethnic cleansing" and work toward implementing the
Security Council resolutions, based on Chapter VII of the Charter.
They must seek comprehensive and peaceful solutions based on
international law, in the interest of peace and security in the
area.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the United

Arab Emirates for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Greece.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. EXARCHOS (Greece):

Allow me at the outset,

Mr. President, to congratulate you on the exemplary manner in which
you are conducting the work of the Security Council.

The same

congratulations should be addressed to His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic, Ambassador Kovanda, for the
very professional way in which he carried out his task during the
month of January.
The tragic incident in Sarajevo’s central market-place
highlighted in particular the need to bring about an immediate
lifting of the siege of the city and to settle the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina at the negotiating table rather than on the
battlefield.

Last Monday in Brussels my Foreign Minister, along

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
224

(Mr. Exarchos, Greece)
with his European Union counterparts, expressed revulsion at the
recently renewed brutal shelling of civilians in Sarajevo, which
resulted in a high number of civilian casualties, an aggravation of
the already severe humanitarian situation and a serious disruption
of essential services.
My country has spared no effort to assist the peace process
for the former Yugoslavia.

We believe that the European Union

Action Plan, the basic principles of which have been accepted by
the parties concerned, is still valid and, in our view, constitutes
the only hope for peace.

We have repeatedly called on the parties

to show the necessary flexibility and we have addressed specific
requests to each one of them.
Greece will continue to do its utmost to facilitate the
conclusion of an agreement to restore peace to the region.

Peace

is now imperative in order to spare the region from further
bloodshed and suffering.

We fully support the Co-Chairmen of the

Steering Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia both in the discharge of their overall mandate and in
their efforts to place the administration of Sarajevo under the
authority of the United Nations.
us in our endeavours.

We call upon all States to join

We call once more upon the parties to put an

end to the widespread hostilities, to negotiate in good faith and
to show the political will necessary to reach a breakthrough.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
225

(Mr. Exarchos, Greece)
The unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid to those in need
throughout the former Yugoslavia is of primary concern to us, and
we are making enormous and unrelenting efforts to help the civilian
population overcome the present situation.

We consider the role of

the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) invaluable.

We

commend the bravery of the personnel of UNPROFOR and of other
United Nations and relief agencies and call upon all parties to
respect their safety.
In this context, I would like to stress the great importance
we attach to the unhindered rotation of UNPROFOR contingents in
Srebrenica and elsewhere and to the opening of the Tuzla airport
exclusively for humanitarian purposes.
Following the recent encouraging developments which, according
to the reports of the Co-Chairmen, Lord Owen and Mr. Stoltenberg,
have taken place in relation to the demilitarization of Sarajevo,
my Government has expressed reservations with regard to the
advisability and the repercussions of eventual air strikes and the
ensuing escalation of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We

have made the point that we should not lose sight of our ultimate
goal, which is the restoration of peace in former Yugoslavia, and
that we must evaluate very carefully the consequences of such air
strikes, such as a possible all-out war and its spillover effects.
Greece is one of the countries that are closest to the crisis
area.

For this reason, all our initiatives are geared towards the

exhaustion of all possible peaceful means, rather than the resort
to force.

In short, my country is fully cognizant of the

responsibilities we all have in regard to facing the present
situation.

At the same time, we are also conscious of the great

responsibilities we all bear for the results of any hasty decision.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
226

(Mr. Exarchos, Greece)
We cannot become involved in military activities, and it is our
view that no other country in the region should do so.
In concluding, I should like to reiterate our firm
determination to continue our efforts to help the parties find a
solution to the conflict which will pave the way towards peace and
stability in the area.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Greece for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Kuwait.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. ABULHASAN (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):

At

the outset, I should like to congratulate my Muslim brothers on
this occasion of the month of Ramadan.
I should also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month.

You represent Djibouti, our Arab sister State, which we are

proud to call a fellow member of the Arab world and with which my
country maintains close ties.

You have demonstrated skill and

statesmanship during your presidency.
While my Government welcomes the decision of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to give an ultimatum to the
Serb aggressors to withdraw their heavy weapons from the vicinity
of Sarajevo, Kuwait believes that this ultimatum came very late.
It came as a response to the request of the Secretary-General.
under paragraphs 9 and 10 of Security Council resolution
836 (1993), for NATO member States to make urgent preparations to
use air power to forestall further attacks against civilians.
Since the establishment of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its later admission to the United Nations, in

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
227

(Mr. Abulhasan, Kuwait)
May 1992, it has been the target of one massacre after another.
The most recent massacre in the Sarajevo central market, despite
its brutality, should not divert our attention from othermassacres,
such as the recent killing of six innocent children while they were
playing in a Sarajevo street.
Kuwait, while condemning and censuring these Serbian
brutalities, calls upon the Security Council to take a firm
position and to act effectively to rescue the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina by implementing all its relevant resolutions,
especially resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993).

The Council is

also duty-bound to bring to justice all the perpetrators of those
massacres.

The credibility of the Security Council is today more

than ever before genuinely at stake, and the Council should
therefore fulfil its true mandate as envisaged in the Charter.
We appreciate the response of NATO and its member States to
the request of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, and the
decisions taken by NATO on 9 February 1994, including the decision
on an ultimatum of 10 days for the Serb forces to withdraw their
heavy weaponry from the vicinity of the city of Sarajevo.

We view

these recent decisions by NATO as a serious ultimatum to the Serb
forces, designed to put an end to their aggression and to confirm
that negotiations are the only avenue that can lead to a peaceful
and just settlement.
It has become quite clear that the Serb aggressors understand
no language but that of force.

My country wishes therefore to

emphasize the following points.
First, NATO should be firm and demonstrate resolve in
implementing its ultimatum to the Serb aggressors.

Indeed, the

ultimatum should be expanded to cover all the territories of the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
228

(Mr. Abulhasan, Kuwait)
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Otherwise, the Serb forces

will very likely use the heavy weaponry withdrawn from the Sarajevo
area in other areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Secondly, the Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be exempted, as the victim of aggression, from
the military embargo imposed on the former Yugoslavia under
Security Council resolution 713 (1991).

Such an exemption would

enable the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to exercise its
right to self-defence under Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter.

It does not stand to reason that a people which is a

victim of genocide should continue to suffer from an arms embargo
while the arrogant aggressors continue to receive reinforcements.
My country supported the decisions and recommendations of the
London Conference, and we have encouraged the holding of
negotiations for a settlement of the problem in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The Government and people of Kuwait stands on the

side of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a result of principles anchored
in justice and international law.

We have given all possible

assistance to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Our position

does not emanate from religious bigotry or religious affinity.
Rather, it is the same one adopted by Kuwait when it was a victim
of Iraqi aggression - and the support we demand is the same we
expected from the international community.
Political negotiations in Geneva have clearly reached an
impasse.

The Council is duty-bound to fulfil its obligation to

revive those negotiations by moving them to New York, where they
will be under its direct supervision.
historical crossroads.

We stand at a dangerous and

Either the Serb forces will continue their

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
229

(Mr. Abulhasan, Kuwait)
aggression, thus defying the international community - an outcome
we reject totally - or the Security Council will fulfil its
responsibilities and put an end to this brutal massacre.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
230

(Mr. Abulhasan, Kuwait)
Thus the Council should directly supervise the political
negotiations in order to find a permanent and just solution to this
crisis.
The Secretary-General indicated in his recent report,
submitted to the Security Council on 29 December 1993, that there
was agreement between the three parties to organize Bosnia and
Herzegovina into a confederation made up of three republics.

He

also indicated that there was agreement that the republic with a
Muslim majority would get 33.3 per cent of the territory; the
Croats would have 17.5 per cent of the territory; and the Serbs
would have about half of the territory of the republic.
In fact, the proposed status for Muslims under the partition
plan involves serious potential dangers on the international level,
given the following considerations.

First, this would mean that

the Security Council would abandon the idea of implementing its
previous resolutions under Chapter VII of the Charter; secondly,
the situation of the Muslims in the safe areas would be tantamount
to being in sporadic and disconnected concentration camps, thus
bringing a virtual end to the Islamic entity within that State;
and, thirdly, acceptance of the partition on the basis of the
status quo would mean consolidation of the outcome of aggression
and the principle of the acquisition of territory by force.

That

principle is rejected under the Charter of the United Nations and
is rejected by the international community.
Therefore, Kuwait believes that the Security Council should
determine in specific terms the actions to be taken for settlement.
We must bear in mind that no settlement will be viable as long as
an aggressor party has imposed its will by force and there is on
the other side a victim of the aggression.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
231

(Mr. Abulhasan, Kuwait)
We call upon the international community to insist on meeting
the territorial demands of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially in terms of giving it access to the sea, so that the
viable requirements of statehood would be met and so that the
proposed accord would not be a reason for wars and conflicts in the
future.
My delegation fervently hopes that the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be bright, as that country is a State Member of
this world Organization.

Such a future will not be possible unless

the United Nations addresses the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the basis of the tenets and underpinnings of the new
world order.

We notice that the credibility of this new world

order is being tested today, when the United Nations is involved in
peacemaking instead of crisis management and peace-keeping, which
is the role that would promote the rule of international law and
the consolidation of the principles of justice throughout the
world.
In closing, I should like to take this opportunity to salute
the people and Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We pray to

Allah, the Lord of the Universe, to put an end to the injustices
and aggression from which they are suffering during this very month
of Ramadan.

At this moment, we are inspired by the words of Allah

in the Holy Koran:
"If God helps you, none can overcome you" (The Holy Koran,
III:160).
May Allah bring upon you peace, mercy and blessings.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
232

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Kuwait for

the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Estonia.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. JAAKSON (Estonia):

Allow me to congratulate you, Sir,

on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February.
Estonia is pleased to note that the united efforts of the
western Powers to achieve a breakthrough in the Bosnian conflict
are yielding their first results.

The ultimatum issued by the

Council of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on
9 February gives hope for the disarmament of Sarajevo and lasting
enforcement of the cease-fire, which is a precondition for a
political settlement of the crisis.

This proves that resolute

international action in today’s situation is the only possible way
to deal with a conflict that has lasted for 22 months.
The deterioration of the military, political and humanitarian
conditions in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been followed in Estonia
with deep concern.

Estonia highly appreciates the efforts of the

peace mediators of the United Nations and the European Union in
trying to settle the Bosnian crisis by way of negotiations between
the parties, and it expresses regret that these have not so far led
to a just and peaceful solution to the conflict.

The worrisome

aspect is the fact that at the present moment a just and peaceful
solution of the conflict seems more remote than only a few months
ago, and that the parties to the conflict have expressed their
willingness to achieve a solution by military means and continue
the armed fight, which would threaten to widen the conflict and
prolong the suffering of the population.

It also creates anxiety

because of the activities of those forces in Russia who openly

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
233

(Mr. Jaakson, Estonia)
support the Serbian aggression in Bosnia, thereby endangering
international efforts to achieve peace.
If the conflict in Bosnia continued, a situation might arise
in which it would not be possible to deliver humanitarian relief
and the peace-keeping forces could not fulfil their duties.

The

threat of stopping humanitarian relief and withdrawing of
peace-keeping forces should not be used as a means of pressure to
force the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to agree to the
conditions of a peace treaty.
Estonia condemns the shelling of Sarajevo and other Bosnian
cities, for which the larger part of the responsibility falls on
the Serbs.

Lifting the economic sanctions against Serbia and

Montenegro should not be considered before the conclusion of a
Bosnian peace treaty.
It is the position of Estonia that a just solution to the
Bosnian conflict should be based on the principles adopted at the
London Conference and should guarantee territorial integrity,
political independence and State sovereignty.
The crisis in the territory of the former Yugoslavia has shown
that post-cold-war Europe must learn to take responsibility and
assert its courage to become involved in local conflicts, because
Bosnia and Herzegovina is not the only area in Europe in which
over-emphasized ethnic differences are used as a pretext for armed
intervention with geopolitical purposes.
Estonia has supported those United Nations resolution efforts
which will lead to the end of the arms embargo against Bosnia and
Herzegovina, because the situation in which the representatives of
the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina refuse to agree to the
plan for the territorial division of their country was caused by

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
234

(Mr. Jaakson, Estonia)
the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina, a State Member of the United
Nations, has been left without the possibility of defending its
territory against aggression, in accordance with Chapter VII,
Article 51, of the Charter of the United Nations.

At the same

time, the United Nations has repeatedly shown a lack of unity and
political will to resolutely involve itself in the interests of a
State left without the right of self-defence.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
235

(Mr. Jaakson, Estonia)
A decisive international involvement in achieving a just
solution to the Bosnian crisis would prove that there is a force in
Europe which is able to stand up for the defence of States that
have fallen victim to aggression.

The perception should not be

allowed to develop that the principles contained in documents of
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) and the
Charter of the United Nations are not applicable to the newly
independent States that have arisen as a result of the collapse of
the Communist empires.
That having been said, Estonia supports the decisions made by
NATO on 9 August 1993 and 9 February 1994, and the declarations
made on 10 February and 11 February 1994 at a summit conference in
Brussels; which supported the use of retaliatory air power in
Sarajevo, as specified in United Nations Security Council
resolution 824 (1993), which, along with Security Council
resolution 836 (1993), calls for the protection of people living in
Bosnia and for support of the United Nations peace-keeping
activities and humanitarian assistance.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Estonia for

his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Brunei Darussalam.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. ABDUL MOMIN (Brunei Darussalam):

Allow me, on behalf

of my delegation, to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.

I should

also like to thank all the members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to take part in this open debate.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
236

(Mr. Abdul Momin, Brunei Darussalam)
Many aspects of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
been discussed among the members of this Council, in the General
Assembly and at other international forums.

It is distressing that

we should have to discuss the tragedy yet again, following last
week’s horrifying attack on innocent civilians in Sarajevo.

We

share in the sorrow of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
offer our condolences and profound sympathy.

We also understand

the indignation felt by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
has been shared by the world community.
Several resolutions directed at resolving the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia have been adopted by the Security Council.

They

have not, however, put a stop to the various crimes committed
against the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
been followed by yet more acts of violence.

In fact, they have
We believe that the

senseless killing of innocent civilians has gone on far too long.
Strong action by the international community is long overdue.
We expect to see the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
act in accordance with its recent ultimatum.

The international

community needs to demonstrate now that it will not continue to
stand by while acts of atrocious inhumanity take place in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

For us, action by NATO would offer a clear

indication that the international community is determined to
implement the various United Nations resolutions.
Brunei Darussalam looks forward to the day when peace and
stability are restored to a sovereign and independent Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In pursuit of this end, the international community

must now be prepared to act decisively and put an end to the
violence and cruelty we have seen for the past two years.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
237

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Brunei

Darussalam for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is His Excellency Mr. Ahmet Engin Ansay,
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the Islamic Conference to
the United Nations, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.

I invite him

to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. ANSAY:

At the outset, I should like to extend to you,

Sir, my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council during this difficult period.

I

am confident, and privileged to know, that your vast experience and
professional skills will serve you well in advancing the work of
the Council under your able guidance.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic,
Ambassador Kovanda, for his able performance in steering the work
of the Council during the month of January.
On 5 February, another dark, tragic day for the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the world saw 68 innocent people murdered
and 197 injured during the shelling of the market-place of
Sarajevo, the capital city of a fully-fledged, sovereign Member of
the United Nations.

This latest terrorist act of genocide, which

was committed in cold blood by the Serbian gunners surrounding the
city, has brought the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to a point
of such desperation that they feel as if they are all condemned to
death.
The Governments and the peoples of the Member States of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) express their
heartfelt anguish, condolences and sympathy to the Government and
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the bereaved families,

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
238

(Mr. Ansay)
while condemning this heinous crime in the strongest possible
terms.
In his statement regarding this tragedy, the Secretary-General
of the OIC, His Excellency Mr. Algabid, in his statement regarding
this tragedy, strongly condemned this murderous act by the Serbian
gunners, which is in open defiance of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and in outrageous disregard for all norms of humanity
and civility.
Only two days before this crime was committed, two Heads of
Government from OIC Members States - two lady Prime Ministers,
Mrs. Bhutto from Pakistan and Mrs. Ciller from Turkey - had
courageously visited Sarajevo to demonstrate their solidarity with
the innocent Bosnian victims and had called upon the international
community to finally do something to preserve the sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and political independence of Bosnia
and to reverse the consequences of "ethnic cleansing".
The Organization of the Islamic Conference is deeply
concerned, frustrated and angered over the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In an extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the OIC

Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina held in Geneva on
17 January last, the OIC Ministers stressed that if the peace
process is to have any success and legitimacy, it must ensure the
following:

the independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty

and unity of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina; a
geographically and economically viable and defensible territory for
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina; that the Serbs be compelled
to return all lands seized by the use of force and "ethnic
cleansing"; that the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina retain its
sovereign exit to the Sava River and the Adriatic Sea; that

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
239

(Mr. Ansay)
Sarajevo remain the undivided capital of Bosnia, as a symbol of
unity, tolerance and integration; the return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes; and international guarantees for
the implementation of a peace agreement and guarantees for future
security.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
240

(Mr. Ansay)
The OIC Ministers also called for the reopening of Tuzla
airport, without further delay, for humanitarian assistance.

They

also demanded that the strangulation and siege of the city of
Sarajevo should be lifted, and that hostilities and shelling should
be stopped immediately.
Furthermore, they noted the recent North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) Summit’s reiteration of NATO’s commitment to
use air strikes against Serb positions in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and urged that this decision be carried out rapidly, as already
authorized by the Security Council.
For two years, many, many appeals regarding Bosnia were made
by members of my organization and by several other countries and
bodies before this Council, the General Assembly and other
international forums.

Finally, a light has appeared at the end of

a long, dark tunnel.

We welcome the decision taken by the Council

of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization on 9 February giving an
ultimatum to the Serbs to lift the siege of Sarajevo and to remove
their heavy weaponry from the Sarajevo exclusion zone of
20 kilometres or face punitive air strikes by 20 February.

We see

this decision of the NATO Council, taken at the request of the
United Nations Secretary-General - however belated it may be - as a
step in the right direction.
If our appeals had been answered earlier, and if a decision
had been taken, say, 18 months ago, many Members would have been
able to avoid shame and would have been able to escape the future
condemnation of history.
Now, NATO member States have a great responsibility to ensure
that all the provisions of the NATO ultimatum and the relevant
Security Council resolutions concerning "safe areas" are met by the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
241

(Mr. Ansay)
Serbian side.

We hope that, unlike in the case of previous

threats, this decision will be fully and thoroughly implemented,
and with great speed.
For a very long time now, Serbian forces have prevented the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) from opening Tuzla
airport for humanitarian operations.

Bihac is also reported to

have been under Serbian attack for the last few days.

The

international community must also pay equal attention to the
security of the civilian population in all "safe areas" and in
other threatened towns and cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In this regard, we fully support the concept of declaring the
city of Mostar a United Nations protected "safe area".
The OIC also believes that, for the sake of international
justice and the prevention of more acts of genocide and other
crimes against humanity, the International War Crimes Tribunal,
established to judge crimes perpetrated on the territory of the
former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia should start functioning
without any further delay.
On this occasion, I should like to reiterate the OIC’s full
support for the right of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
defend itself under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, and,
in this regard, once again call for the lifting of the arms embargo
against the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The need to allow the Bosnian Government to defend itself has
become all the more urgent given recent reports of the presence of
regular troops of the Serbian and Croatian armies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Serbia and Montenegro, and the Republic of Croatia,

have also been violating the arms embargo by supplying arms and
equipment to their surrogates in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
242

(Mr. Ansay)
We await with keen interest the report by the SecretaryGeneral regarding the full withdrawal of Croatian army elements and
their military equipment from Bosnia.

If the Croats fail to comply

with this demand by the Security Council, stringent economic
sanctions should immediately be imposed on Croatia too.
In conclusion, the Organization of the Islamic Conference
reaffirms its strong and unswerving support for the just struggle
of the Bosnian people against aggression, genocide and
ethnic/religious cleansing.

The OIC fully endorses the

constructive Bosnian position on the principles for a peaceful
settlement to the conflict.
Unless all parties concerned take cognizance of the legitimate
demands of the Bosnian people, peace will remain elusive in the
entire Balkan region; thus, the security of that area, as well as
that of the world at large, will be in jeopardy.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank Mr. Ansay for his kind words

addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Lithuania.

I invite

him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement
now.
Mr. SIMUTIS (Lithuania):

Mr. President, allow me to

congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February.

I wish you every

success in presiding over deliberations concerning extremely
difficult and important issues.

I also wish to congratulate your

predecessor, Ambassador Karel Kovanda, on his successful presidency
of the Council, conducted in his elegant manner, during the
preceding month.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
243

(Mr. Simutis, Lithuania)
Please allow me, Mr. President, to express my appreciation for
this opportunity to address the Security Council, which is
entrusted by the Member States of the United Nations with the
primary task of maintaining peace and security in our turbulent
world.
The Government and people of Lithuania are appalled by the
protracted aggression against Bosnia and Herzegovina and by the
arrogance of the aggressor forces in flaunting their disregard for
international humanitarian law and customary rules of war.
Lithuania’s parliament, the Seimas, has condemned the act of
terrorism committed in Sarajevo on 5 February 1994 in which many
civilian residents of the capital city of Bosnia and Herzegovina
were killed.

The Seimas has appealed to the parliaments of Serbia,

Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Croatia to do everything in their power
to end the slaughter of innocent people.

It has declared its

support for the efforts of the United Nations, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe and other international organizations directed at resolving
the tragic and dangerous conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Government of Lithuania welcomes the demand by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization directed at the aggressor forces that
they cease shelling Sarajevo and withdraw or hand over their heavy
weapons to United Nations forces.

This is not an extreme demand.

In fact, it is a long overdue step to enforce Security Council
resolutions 824 (1993) and 836 (1993) on safe areas, of which the
city of Sarajevo is one.
The stakes, however, are high for the entire international
community.

Failure to enforce the cessation of the indiscriminate

shelling of Sarajevo would send a dismaying signal that the

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
244

(Mr. Simutis, Lithuania)
international community is prepared to tolerate and accept
aggression, as well as systematic violations of international
humanitarian law.

The Security Council can hardly afford one more

failure to enforce its decisions, as this would result in a
disastrous loss of credibility for the United Nations, as well as
for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
245

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Lithuania

for the kind words he addressed to me.
The representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina wishes to make a
statement, and I call upon him now.
Mr. SACIRBEY (Bosnia and Herzegovina):

I have asked to

speak in reply to the statement made by Ambassador Djokić.

I have

no option but to refer to him as Ambassador Djokić, since that is
the way the Security Council refers to him.
Before I continue my comments, I would be most unkind to the
members of this body and to all the other speakers who participated
in this debate if I did not thank them for their time and effort
and for their contributions.
Ambassador Djokić appeared before the Security Council under
doubtful circumstances, especially in view of his country’s
aggression against its neighbours and its unapologetic complicity
in the design of a "Greater Serbia", in terrorism, and in "ethnic
cleansing".

The terms of General Assembly resolutions 47/1 and

48/88 bring into greater doubt the legitimacy of his appearance
before the Council.
None the less, Ambassador Djokić was afforded this
opportunity, and, unfortunately, the opportunity has once again
been abused.
First, Ambassador Djokić chose to allude to my country, a
fully recognized Member of the United Nations, as the "former
Bosnia and Herzegovina" (supra, p. 212).

His choice of words is

not just intended to be a slight, but is designed to contribute
directly to the acts of aggression and genocide against our
Republic.

Serbia and Montenegro has attempted to use this Chamber

and this most noble body to propound the view that our Republic is
no longer - as a consequence of Serbia and Montenegro’s criminal

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
246

(Mr. Sacirbey, Bosnia and Herzegovina)
military aggression against our country.

They seek to complete in

this Chamber what they have not as yet managed on the battlefield.
Secondly, Ambassador Djokić pleads for no new action to
confront the aggression.

We must remind everyone that it is Serbia

and Montenegro that has for so long had a free hand in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its campaign of genocide and "ethnic cleansing".

It

is Serbia and Montenegro that now pleads for the forces of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to stay out, while it
rejects the calls of the international community to station
monitors at the international boundary between the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and Montenegro.

This amounts to

a burglar demanding that the police stay out of the home that is
being burglarized.
Thirdly, Mr. Djokić chooses to conceal or ignore the wellsubstantiated record of his country and its surrogates and their
responsibility for war crimes against our civilian population, and
deflects his nation’s criminal responsibility by accusing the
victim of self-infliction.

Whatever the difficulties that the

United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) may have in conclusively
allocating blame in this instance, there is no practical doubt with
respect to the market-place massacre - and UNPROFOR has certainly
had no difficulty in placing conclusive responsibility in dozens of
other terrorist incidents.
It is clear that it is Serbian forces and weapons that have
maintained the siege and the suffering of the civilian population
of Sarajevo.

We are now to believe, according to

Ambassador Djokić, that while the citizens of Sarajevo are
encircled and shelled by the Serbian forces, we have not had quite

S/PV.3336 (Resumption 3)
247

(Mr. Sacirbey, Bosnia and Herzegovina)
enough of this suffering:

so now we Bosnians also shell ourselves

for good measure.
The PRESIDENT:
speakers.

There are no further names on the list of

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

The Security
