S/PV.8655

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8655th meeting

Thursday, 31 October 2019, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila/Mr. Mabhongo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alsabah
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Clay
Mr. Barkin

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
in Kosovo (S/2019/797)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-34419 (E)
*1934419*

Kosovo

S/PV.8655

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.

Determination, party and the Democratic League
of Kosovo. The two parties are currently exploring
coalition options.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2019/797)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/797, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: The holding of early general elections
in Kosovo on 6 October, which gave the people an
opportunity to select their representatives from among
1,067 parliamentary candidates, including 343 women,
has brought about the most significant change in
Kosovo’s political landscape in 12 years. Allow me to
make some observations about those election, in which
the turnout was the highest since 2010. The decision to
call a snap election came at a time that was characterized
by internal political division, a broken unity with the
governing coalition and, most importantly, public
perception of the inability to deliver on promises to
the people of Kosovo. The preliminary results point
to a victory by the opposition Vetevendosje, or Self2/25

31/10/2019

The change in the political environment was
manifested by the decision of most voters to rally behind
unconventional political candidates who do not share
the background or vision of past leaders. The Kosovo
Serb majority areas have recorded the highest voter
turnout in recent times, confirming a trend of active
participation by that community in Kosovo elections.
The Serbian List may become the only Kosovo-Serb
parliamentary group represented in the legislature.
Overall, the elections were assessed positively
by international observers but challenges such as
campaign financing, intimidation and voter pressure in
the Kosovo Serb-majority areas were also highlighted.
In terms of women’s political participation, the
election marked the first time that a major political
party in Kosovo had nominated a woman as the
candidate for Prime Minister. Other encouraging signs
were campaign pledges made towards greater gender
parity in Government and the high turnout among
young voters.
I remain hopeful that the new leadership can use
the momentum of the election to deliver on its promises
to the people by advancing the rule of law, fighting
against corruption and organized crime and tackling
unemployment. The international community also
expects the new leaders to affirm their commitment
to the negotiations with Belgrade and to ensure that
obstacles to dialogue are removed. A particular effort
should be made to ensure that political rhetoric and
actions are conducive to the resumption of and progress
in the dialogue after a year of stalled negotiations.
I welcome the continuous efforts by many
international players to give new momentum to the
political dialogue. While I am convinced that an
agreement between Belgrade and Pristina can be
sustainable only if it is based on responsible action and
local ownership of the process, it is also imperative
that during the transition in Kosovo the international
community stand united and firm in its support towards
a viable agreement. Let me turn to an issue that was
raised during the previous debate on Kosovo on 10 June
(see S/PV.8541).
As the Council is aware, on 28 May two staff
members of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) were arrested by the
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

Kosovo police. The arrest took place in the course of
a police operation targeting smuggling and organized
crime. As I told the Council on 10 June, UNMIK stands
fully behind the efforts of the Kosovo institutions to
combat organized crime and corruption.
I wish to recall that during their arrest, both staff
members were badly beaten and injured. They were
subsequently detained and later released. In addition,
criminal proceedings were instituted against both
staff members, including a detention hearing against
one of them. To ascertain the facts, I established an
investigation team, comprised of United Nations
Secretariat staff members from outside UNMIK with
extensive investigative and legal expertise.
The team carried out a thorough investigation,
interviewing more than 50 witnesses and examining
photographic, video and documentary evidence.
International partners and Kosovo institutions,
including the Kosovo police, cooperated with the
investigation. The investigation team has now submitted
its report to me. These are the facts.
The investigation team found no evidence to support
the accusation of wrongdoing by the two UNMIK
staff members. The team confirmed that both were
on official duty when they were arrested. Their arrest
and detention occurred despite their having clearly
identified themselves as United Nations staff. The team
found substantial evidence of the use of excessive force
by the Kosovo police: Mr. Krasnoshchekov had suffered
fractures in the back and side of his skull, cheekbone
and upper jawbone and was assessed to have acute stress
and anxiety-related depressive reactions. Mr. Dimovic
suffered multiple contusions and skin excoriations on
his head and thorax, in addition to hearing loss in both
ears and a deviated septum. He has also been diagnosed
with post-traumatic stress disorder.
Without the prior authorization of the United
Nations, the Kosovo police drove and retained an
UNMIK vehicle, and forensic examinations were
conducted on an UNMIK-owned telephone and two
SIM cards. The arrest and detention of Kosovo staff
members while on official duty and the institution
of criminal proceedings against them were in clear
violation of their immunity from arrest, detention and
legal process. The use of excessive force, interference
with Mission property and the continuation of criminal
proceedings against staff members are in clear breach
of the applicable legal framework, including resolution

S/PV. 8655

1244 (1999), UNMIK regulations and international
human rights law standards.
The international staff members were also declared
persona non grata — a concept that is not applicable, to
or in respect of, a United Nations person. These actions
are unacceptable and should be deplored. All ongoing
criminal proceedings against the two staff members
must therefore be terminated immediately. The status,
privileges and immunities of United Nations personnel
must be fully respected at all times. The Kosovo
authorities should investigate the Kosovo police
officers involved in the incident to ensure appropriate
accountability, and steps should be taken by the
institutions of Kosovo to ensure that such incidents will
not be repeated.
In recent days, UNMIK has engaged with the
Kosovo authorities on the outcome of the investigation.
I am pleased to report that the discussions have been
taking place in a positive spirit. As long as the Council
maintains the mandate for international presence in
Kosovo, I look forward to the institutions of Kosovo
and UNMIK operating with full respect for one another.
We are proud that UNMIK played a central role in the
formation of the Kosovo police and judiciary, and we are
hopeful that they intend to address any failure in their
operations and to act in accordance with international
norms and standards.
In advancing our mandate, we continue to foster
the rule of law and human rights, an essential element
of which is access to justice for every individual. An
UNMIK-funded legal aid centre provides free legal
assistance to people from vulnerable groups. In support
of court infrastructure across Kosovo, we continue
to assist the investigation into the integration of the
judiciary in northern Kosovo. In addition, we are
assisting the local authorities in northern Kosovo to
establish the first-ever shelter in the region for survivors
of gender-based violence. We have also launched a
platform that brings together civil society organizations
across Kosovo to empower people in advocacy and
grass-roots monitoring of their fundamental rights.
Within our trust-building framework, which
remains central to our vision, the Mission has
advanced support for language rights and cooperation
with the Language Commissioner of Kosovo and the
International Organization for Migration. We have
engaged language experts from Belgrade and Pristina

19-344193/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

to prepare the first Albanian-Serbian dictionary since
1984, which is available online.
Today marks 19 years since the Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. On this occasion, I would like to underline
the importance of a gender-inclusive and responsive
political process. Our Mission continues to support
such efforts with women leaders and international
partners, including UN-Women and the European
Union, through concrete projects.
I would like to reiterate the Secretary-General’s
call for assistance for the most vulnerable communities
in Kosovo through contributions to the United Nations
trust fund established to support the Ashkali, Egyptian
and Roma communities in Kosovo. I welcome the initial
contribution to the trust fund received earlier this
year. However, I would urge the making of additional
contributions to enable a meaningful response to the
pressing needs of the affected communities.
As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, we are reminded of the central
importance of “we the peoples”. These first three
words of the Charter of the United Nations remind us
that the vital work of Governments in the maintenance
of international peace and security can endure only if
anchored in strong societal foundations. This vision of
our founders inspires UNMIK’s work.
I wish to express my deep appreciation to the
Security Council for its sustained engagement and
continuous support for our Mission.
The President: I thank Mr. Tanin for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): For seven
long years now, I have taken part in the meetings of the
Security Council. This is my twenty-second statement.
Regrettably, this is the twenty-second time that I have
had to say that nothing has been done in Kosovo to help
the Serbs and other non-Albanians lead decent human
lives there. My obligation is therefore to continue to
speak on behalf of those whose voices are not heard,
whose rights are not respected and who have not been
able to return home for more than 20 years.
4/25

31/10/2019

Some of those present may remember that the
phrase “standards before status” was used for many
years in the Security Council. All of a sudden, following
the unilateral declaration of independence by so-called
Kosovo, the standards of respect for human rights and
the rule of law have disappeared from the Council’s
considerations. Today standards are a rare topic, given
that, by and large, most of the discussions in this organ
are focused on the need to achieve a so-called lasting
solution for the question of Kosovo and Metohija.
Nevertheless, it is the duty of all of us not to allow the
people of Kosovo and Metohija to be held hostage to a
solution that we have yet to find.
Even before any agreement is reached, the physical
safety, freedom of movement, employment and property
rights, the right to return, religious freedom and the
right to participate in political life of the people of
Kosovo and Metohija must be ensured. Ordinary people
in Goraždevac, Orahovac, Klina, Mušutište, Zubin
Potok and Zvezdan have no time to wait for us to reach
an agreement, for they have to go on with their lives.
Unfortunately, as elsewhere, the quest for solutions to
conflicts is not an easy or short-term process.
The Brussels Agreement that I signed in my
capacity as Prime Minister six years ago was
perhaps a ray of hope. The Agreement was the result
of difficult negotiations and of even more difficult
political decisions. It was the manifestation of my
country’s willingness to compromise, and it has been
borne out by our implementation of the Agreement. That
is why I can credibly say that the people of Kosovo must
not be dependent on Pristina’s whims and one-sided
acts aimed at aborting the continuatin of dialogue.
Let me be clear. Serbia is ready to resume
negotiations as of tomorrow, provided that the
conditions are right. Let me remind the Council that
last November, Pristina decided to increase tariffs on
goods from central Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
by 100 per cent. That decision was taken in the wake
of so-called Kosovo’s unsuccessful attempt to join
INTERPOL. Considering that two weeks ago we
saw Pristina abandon its renewed attempt to join
INTERPOL, I now wonder what the purpose of the
tariffs was and how Pristina justifies them. Instead of
resuming the dialogue after two years of failure, Pristina
submitted a new application to INTERPOL only two
months later. At INTERPOL’s General Assembly, held
in Santiago earlier this month, it decided to take back
the application at the very beginning of deliberations,
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

once it realized that it would end in an even bigger
debacle. I spoke with 82 Foreign Ministers before the
General Assembly, and far from supporting Kosovo’s
actions, many disparaged them.
I want to emphasize once again that since the
beginning of the Brussels dialogue, Serbia has insisted
that all matters, including the issue of membership
in international organizations, should be subject to
negotiations. The constructive way in which the question
of Kosovo and Metohija’s participation in regional
forums was resolved, through dialogue and mutually
acceptable agreements, provides telling evidence of the
advantage of resolving all issues by agreement. The
damages arising from these illegal measures amount to
several hundred million dollars and increase with each
passing day.
Let me point out that attempts in this regard to
establish a false equivalency between Belgrade’s and
Pristina’s responsibilities for the breakdown in the
dialogue — and the explanation that the decision on
tariffs was taken in response to Serbia’s campaign to
have so-called Kosovo’s recognition withdrawn — make
no sense and are unacceptable. Serbia’s actions in that
regard are motivated by the campaign by so-called
Kosovo for recognition since its unilateral declaration
of independence, with the wholehearted assistance
of some Council members. Accordingly, if Council
members are calling on Serbia to cease its campaign,
they should also call on Pristina to stop its lobbying,
and they should stop doing it themselves.
While they are asking Serbia to stop, representatives
of so-called Kosovo are working all over the world hand
in glove with Albanian diplomats on the recognition of
its independence. While the Council is asking Serbia
to stop its campaign, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation is calling on all Muslim countries to
recognize so-called Kosovo. While the Council is
asking Serbia to stop its campaign, representatives of
the United States and the United Kingdom in particular
are calling on Member States at nearly every Security
Council meeting to recognize the independence of socalled Kosovo. We may be small, but we are not dumb.
Let me remind those who allege that our activities,
and the withdrawal by 15 countries of their recognition
of so-called Kosovo, are undermining the dialogue
that after the negotiations began in 2012, 25 countries
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence
while all along Serbia participated in the dialogue,

S/PV. 8655

despite Pristina’s refusal to fulfil its obligations under
the Brussels Agreement. How can the Council say
now that the withdrawal of recognition undermines
dialogue? Serbia continued to pursue dialogue even
though Pristina refused to fulfil its obligations under the
Brussels Agreement for more than six years, including
through its failure to establish the community of Serb
municipalities. It was not Serbia that discontinued
the dialogue.
I repeat, trade blockades are virtually unheard of
in today’s world. We can only hope that Pristina will
realize that it cannot achieve anything without an
agreement with Serbia, that unilateral acts diminish the
prospects for solutions and that there is no alternative to
dialogue. For its part, Serbia is ready for that moment.
Allow me to say a few words about the recent
general elections held in Kosovo and Metohija. Before
they took place, Serbia warned that the election
campaign would be used for political purposes and
for propaganda hype against the Serbs. Regrettably,
that is what came to pass. The Serbs were attacked,
their shrines were vandalized, and there were multiple
provocations. Nevertheless, despite these incidents and
such administrative obstacles as a ban on the use of
Serbian documents in the election process — despite
the fact that their use had been permitted in previous
elections — and a ban on Serbian officials entering
the provinces, and other bans, Serbs participated in
the elections and managed to survive in Kosovo and
Metohija and fight for their future.
We saw that Pristina was not pleased with the
election results, and in the days following the elections,
it once again attempted to meddle by fabricating
stories and incidents such as the alleged poisoning of
members of the Central Election Commission through
contact with election materials brought from central
Serbia. After melodramatic scenes reminiscent of
forensic television series parading investigators in
surgical masks and gowns as if Ebola or a smallpox
epidemic were involved, blood tests done in Pristina on
those allegedly infected showed that there had been no
poisoning. The epidemic was one of lies churned out by
Pristina. Manipulations of this type may have worked
in the past, but this time around the international
community will surely recognize Pristina’s true
intentions and call them out.
The issue is very simple: either poisoning occurred
or it did not. Doctors in Pristina established that there

19-344195/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

was no poisoning. Why, then, were poll workers
dressed in space suits or the clothes we have seen
on TV shows about Ebola while they were counting
Serbian votes? Was that racism towards Serbian voters?
We are asking for an answer. When Albanians vote in
Serbia, should someone count votes as Serbian votes
are counted in Kosovo? Is this the democracy and the
democratic society the Security Council fought for
when it supported Kosovo?
The situation in so-called Kosovo and its society
is illustrated by the rise of its new leader, Albin
Kurti — a man who throughout his entire political
career has called for the creation of a greater Albania.
After he won the largest number of votes, we have seen
him with the Albanian flag, not the flag of so-called
Kosovo. He wants to be the Prime Minister of so-called
Kosovo by flying the flag of Albania rather than the
flag of Kosovo.
We therefore have a very serious question. If some
diplomats from countries on the Security Council are
photographed against that background, does that mean
that members of the diplomatic community approve of
those intentions? For years, the Council has asserted
that Serbia is undermining the territorial integrity of
Kosovo. But now that its representatives are sitting in
Pristina in front of the Albanian flag with the newly
elected Prime Minister of so-called Kosovo, who
denies the territorial integrity of Kosovo? Where was
the flag of so-called Kosovo in this picture? Why are
Council members silent about this? The next time they
visit my country, what would happen if I received them
under the flag of Republika Srpska from Bosnia and
Herzegovina? Would they be silent, as they are now?
I would like the Council to remind its diplomats
that they are ambassadors to Pristina, not Tirana. I
am being put in a very unpleasant position. It will be
difficult to defend the territorial integrity of so-called
Kosovo when Albin Kurti, who is supposed to be the
next prime minister of Kosovo, says that he does not
want to talk to the Serbian List, which, as the party
that won in the parliamentary election, is the legitimate
representative of the Kosovo and Metohija Serbs. How
can a prime minister refuse to accept the results of
an election because they are not to his liking? All the
agreements reached to date will be re-examined once
he assumes power and declares that the most important
part of the Brussels Agreement, the establishment of a
community of Serbs, is a dead letter.
6/25

31/10/2019

Albin Kurti’s statements have become increasingly
sharp lately. He has said that he is going to demand
that Serbia pay war reparations for Kosovo’s alleged
financial claims. Perhaps he is not familiar with the
fact that Serbia has been paying annuities on the nearly
$1 billion in loans taken out by users in Kosovo and
Metohija. If it is an independent State, as it claims, why
does it not pay its own debts?
All of these counterproductive actions and rhetoric
are very far from creating the atmosphere necessary
for overcoming existing differences and building
confidence among communities. I firmly believe that
all who oppose dialogue are determined to undermine
both Serbs and Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija. I
hope that after the formation of the new Government,
Pristina will remove the tariffs and thereby create
conditions conducive to dialogue and the quest for
peaceful compromise solutions to all outstanding
issues. I also hope that Pristina will do away with the
policies of hatred, intolerance and discrimination that
radicalize the Albanian community, for which the
Pristina Government bears outright responsibility.
The consequences of such policies are patently
evident. The past year has been very difficult for Serbs
and other non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija. The
right of Serbs to life, freedom and property has been
targeted. According to the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Mission in Kosovo, there
were 183 inter-ethnic incidents in the first half of this
year, which is almost 30 per cent more than in the
preceding six months. These facts must not be ignored.
The most dangerous methods of intimidation used
against the Serbian population are the frequent raids
in northern Kosovo and Metohija carried out under
the guise of anti-organized-crime operations by the
special Regional Operational Support Unit police.
After the incident of 28 May, which we discussed in
the Security Council in June (see S/PV.8541), there was
another special-unit operation two weeks ago in which
arrests were made. I want to explain that the raids in
northern Kosovo and Metohija by heavily armed units
composed exclusively of ethnic Albanians, conducted
on various pretexts for various reasons using excessive
force, are merely provocations with immense potential
to destabilize the already fragile security situation on
the ground. It is of paramount importance in that regard
that the Brussels Agreement be strictly honoured and
that the Kosovo Force (KFOR) act decisively to deter
these kinds of actions, which may increase instability
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

and spark a spiral of violence that would be hard
to control.
Let me remind the Council that in addition to
the Serbs who have been injured, a Russian national,
Mikhail Krasnoshchekov, was declared persona non
grata by Pristina, in contravention of every possible
rule and regulation, while Mr. Dejan Dimovic continues
to be the subject of judicial proceedings. What are the
Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija to expect if personnel
from international missions are treated this way? I call
on all Council members to condemn these unlawful
acts by Pristina and demand that proceedings against
the staff of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) cease.
I would like to express my gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2019/797). I would ask the
Council to pay attention to the report’s conclusions
because at the most recent Council meeting on this
subject, the UNMIK staff members were accused of
abusing their power and of not being on duty when
they were arrested, and it was said that no violence was
used against them. However, the report says otherwise.
They were on duty and force was used against them, in
breach of their privileges and immunities as members
of UNMIK. They were gravely injured and one of them
was declared persona non grata. The conclusion in the
report and by Mr. Tanin is that those responsible should
be brought to justice, which Serbia was not expecting.
We do expect the Security Council to respect the
Secretary-General’s Mission, reports and expertise,
and that charges will be brought against those who
breached the immunity of the UNMIK staff members.
Let me draw the Council’s attention to a very
important issue mentioned in the report, which is the
return to Kosovo and Metohija of foreign terrorist
fighters and their families from the Middle East, and
Syria in particular. There are more than 250 of them,
the greatest number of members of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham in any country in Europe. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, there have been
arrests of people who have attempted to set up terrorist
groups in Kosovo and Metohija, North Macedonia
and Albania, with a view to attacking the Kosovo and
Metohija Serbs and KFOR, which validates our warning
about the real danger of terrorism not only in Kosovo
and Metohija and the Balkans but throughout Europe.
The report of the Secretary-General also provides
telling evidence of Pristina’s arrogance with respect

S/PV. 8655

to the Serbian cultural and religious heritage in
Kosovo and Metohija and the flagrant desecration of
monuments and attempts to pirate cultural identity.
Novo Brdo, Dečani, Bogorodica Ljeviška and other
cultural and religious shrines have never been nor will
ever be Kosovar, regardless of Pristina’s efforts to
create a chasm between communities in Kosovo and
Metohija and to usurp and falsify history so as to erase
every trace of the centuries-long Serbian presence in
Kosovo and Metohija.
This is the idea behind falsehoods such as the
nonsense uttered by Vlora Çitaku at the June meeting,
when she referred to decolonization, with no political
or moral foundation. Let me remind the Council that
Kosovo and Metohija have never once been mentioned
in any United Nations document in connection with
decolonization. That is an insult to all States that have
been victims of colonization and have had to go through
the process of decolonization.
Proof of a serious outbreak of the mendacity
epidemic in Kosovo and Metohija today is the big lie
proffered by Ms. Çitaku in these Council meetings that
Albanians in Serbia had no right to use the Albanian
language and script. The document I am now showing
the Council, which was issued by the Serbian authorities
in the 1990s, when Vlora Çitaku was 10 years old, is
evidence of that lie. It is a birth certificate issued in
Kosovo and Metohija at that time. It is written in two
languages, first in Albanian and then in Serbian, and
it says, “Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia” and
“birth certificate”. Would Ms. Çitaku like to see it? She
had one just like it, in Albanian and Serbian. How can
she not be ashamed of lying about being unable to use
Albanian in Serbia? Even Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija
had documents in both languages, first in Albanian and
then in Serbian.
With regard to documents, I would like to point
out that Ms. Çitaku is still a citizen of the Republic
of Serbia. Her name was entered in the Pristina birth
register for the year 1980 under the number 6194. If
Council members do not believe me, I can show them
the entry. Perhaps she will now say that while she never
asked to be released from her Serbian citizenship, her
Serbian citizenship is irrelevant to her. She should
discuss that with the representative of Germany in
the Chamber today, as his country requires every
Kosovo Albanian to submit a certificate of release from
Serbian citizenship.

19-344197/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

Pristina continues to spread misinformation and
manipulate facts, even here at the United Nations. Look
at how many people who work at the United Nations
with Serbian citizenship are actually Albanian. How
is it that when people want to get a job or claim their
rights, or when Serbia has to repay their loans, they
are Serbian? And yet while trying to fight for Kosovo,
Ms. Çitaku should have asked to be released from her
Serbian citizenship, but she has not, and she should
know that it is not good to speak as she does about her
own country.
Pristina claims that there have been 20,000 victims
of conflict-related sexual violence, but its numbers are
not supported even by its own commission set up to
establish the status of victims of violence. The total
number of applications received so far is 1,057, of
which 406 have been granted survivor status. Let me
point out once again that Serbia is firmly committed to
establishing the facts and to punishing the perpetrators
of these horrible crimes. I reiterate that we have
called constantly for justice for all victims and for the
depoliticization of the issue. The report before us shows
that the numbers are quite different from the 20,000
victims claimed.
The report states that the reparation process falls
short of being fully inclusive, needs a strengthened,
rights-based approach, and currently excludes cases
of sexual violence that occurred in the aftermath of
the conflict. Serbia firmly believes that every crime
should be punished, and we have cooperated with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia to that end. We hope that the Specialist
Chambers, which have already summonsed 110 former
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) members, will soon
issue their first indictments and that justice will finally
be served for all the victims of the conflict in Kosovo
and Metohija.
The review of the situation on the ground gives
us reason to believe that the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, KFOR and UNMIK, with
mandates as defined in resolution 1244 (1999), play
a key role in ensuring the physical safety and fate of
many in Kosovo and Metohija. As Under-SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs Miguel de Serpa Soares
pointed out in his briefing to the Council in June,
UNMIK’s legal framework continues to apply. We must
therefore continue to discuss Kosovo and Metohija in
the Security Council. The importance of the issue is
8/25

31/10/2019

evidenced by the fact that the United States appointed
two representatives to address it.
I know that Council members have prepared
statements, and some will say that we do not need
UNMIK anymore. Both sides will be called on to
resume the dialogue, and some will extol the democratic
achievements of so-called Kosovo. I would ask,
however, that instead we proceed to discuss the issue
of Kosovo and Metohija in a matter-of-fact manner.
We have not had such discussions in the Security
Council for years. But I have asked some very pertinent
questions in our meetings and I will ask them again. Is
it acceptable to the Council that democratic institutions
do not implement agreements and fail to abide by
their commitments? Will the international community
stand aside and allow the Brussels Agreement and the
community of Serb municipalities to truly remain a
dead letter, as Kurti keeps telling us? Can the Council
accept the daily intimidation of returnees, and attacks
and other forms of discrimination against members of
non-majority communities, as a normal state of affairs?
What is the Council’s response to the provocations,
incidents, assaults and injuries, the stoning of buses, the
destruction of clinics, the desecration of churches and
tombstones, hate speech and KLA graffiti on Serbian
houses? Does the return of 1.9 per cent of internally
displaced Serbs meet the threshold of respect for human
rights? Does it mean that the expulsion of 200,000 Serbs
is a closed chapter now, never to be reopened?
Could the Council please make an effort to answer
those very relevant questions? It is not I who am owed
the answers to them but the Serbian children in Kosovo
and Metohija whose future will most certainly be bereft
of fundamental human rights. The Council owes it to
them, to the Serbs living in enclaves, the internally
displaced and the Serbian Orthodox nuns living their
lives behind barbed wire. Serbia will continue to bring
the trials and tribulations of these people, as well as
violations of international law, to the attention of
the international community. However, we will also
continue to demonstrate in good faith our dedication to
peace and to the quest for a compromise solution with
a view to making the space where Serbs and Albanians
have lived together for centuries a better place to live in
the twenty-first century.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: It is a great honour to be in the
Security Council Chamber once again on behalf of the
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

youngest democracy in Europe, the Republic of Kosovo.
Nevertheless, I must admit that it is neither pleasurable
nor particularly productive to sit here and waste the
Council’s valuable time, listening to representatives of
our northern neighbour tell their same old tales of a
parallel universe. Therefore, as befits the importance of
this occasion, I will share with the Council, as I always
do, nothing but facts.
I must say that I appreciate my Serbian colleagues’
interest in Kosovar political figures, although I must
also say it borders on the obsessive. I am proud of my
heritage and my past. I am a proud ethnic Albanian and
citizen of Kosovo. I am not sure that the same can be
said about Mr. Dačić.
My presence here today is not a sign of crisis but
of confidence. While the long shadows of conflict
continue to chase us, we meet today in an atmosphere
of rising hope. On 6 October, Kosovo successfully held
its fourth parliamentary elections since it declared
independence. These elections were not extraordinary
for their organization alone but were special in many
ways. For the first time in our history, a new generation
of citizens — children who were born in freedom and
raised in an independent country, Kosovars who did not
know war — had a chance to cast their ballots and elect
their future representatives.
Twenty years ago, 18-year-old Kosovars were
refugees, subject to the most brutal of ethnic cleansing
campaigns. Today, 18-year-old Kosovars are proud
citizens of Kosovo and agents of change. To a large
extent, this paradigm shift is a product of the efforts of
the United Nations and its various agencies that helped
us rebuild our country from the ashes and devastation
of war. We will be forever grateful to all of them for
being our voice when we did not have one. We will
never forget the support that they lent us in our darkest
hour of need. They should indeed take pride in how far
Kosovo has come.
Democracy is not easy. But Kosovo has consistently
proved that it is up to the task. After a competitive and
cordial campaign characterized by robust debate and a
plurality of ideas, Kosovo held free and fair elections
with record-high participation from all communities. If
that is not a sufficient testament to the maturity of our
democracy, then the expeditious roll-out of the results
and the manner in which the candidates greeted them
should speak volumes. The humility of the winners’

S/PV. 8655

acceptance was paralleled only by the grace with which
the losers conceded, without drama or contestation.
During the electoral process, Kosovo’s Central
Election Commission took all the precautions
necessary to ensure that each ballot box was treated
with adequate care. However, the fact of the matter is
that six commissioners had to be hospitalized because
they exhibited worrisome symptoms after counting
votes from a specific set of ballot boxes. We are not
pointing fingers in any direction. However, considering
the difficulties that these circumstances present,
and especially given the complexity of the historical
context, the truth is that extraordinary measures had
to be taken. Nonetheless, Kosovo authorities made
absolutely sure that every last vote was counted, no
matter what.
I am not suggesting that there is cause for selfsatisfaction here, but there is cause for hope and faith
in our democracy. The parties that received the most
votes during the recent elections, Vetëvendosje and
the Democratic League of Kosovo, are currently in the
process of negotiating the formation of a new coalition
Government, which is on track to be concluded without
delay. Accordingly, the overall assessment is that the
climate of the electoral process was one of a healthy
competition of ideas, with one exception, the Serbian
citizens of Kosovo. Unfortunately, members of the
Serbian community were threatened, intimidated and
pressured to vote for one particular Serbian party.
These violations were documented and reported by
international observer missions. On 8 October, the
European Union Election Observation Mission warned
that the campaign had been marred by intimidation
targeting non-Srpska Lista candidates and supporters.
Needless to say, there is only one Government that
is perpetrating the disfranchisement of Serbs in Kosovo,
and that is the Government sitting in Belgrade. The
Government of Serbia is under the wrongful impression
that Serbs in Kosovo are an instrument of its jingoistic
foreign policy and not free citizens of Kosovo whose
rights they are infringing on. These intimidation tactics
are not a novelty. We see them being used every day on
Serbian members of the Kosovo Security Force (KSF),
who are constantly subjected to incredible levels of
pressure and harassment. Their houses are attacked
with grenades and their families are terrorized.
Just last month, two Serbian KSF officers were
unnecessarily detained for hours by Serbian authorities
while travelling in Serbia with their families. I would

19-344199/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

also like to remind the Council of what happened to
one local Serbian leader who dared to speak his mind
independently from Belgrade. Mr. Oliver Ivanović was
assassinated in January 2018. The Kosovo police has
since carried out a thorough investigation of his murder,
questioning over 100 suspects and arresting several
of them. Unfortunately, the main suspect remains in
hiding. Can anybody guess where? He is hiding in
Serbia. These kinds of practices must come to an end
once and for all.
I want to take this opportunity to shed light on a
topic that has been misinterpreted for far too long by
our Serbian colleagues, which is the number of Serbian
citizens living in Kosovo. For over two decades, we
have tolerated the creative accounting of the Serbian
State. Over and over again, we have heard its claims
that 200,000 Serbs fled Kosovo after the liberation in
1999. Now, allow me to do some basic math. According
to the 1981 census, 209,798 Serbs lived in Kosovo at
that time. I am using data from 1981 because it provides
the highest possible estimate of the size of the Serbian
community in Kosovo, since the census that Kosovo
conducted in 2011 was purposely boycotted by the
Serbian citizens of Kosovo, who were pressured to do
so by the Government in Belgrade. If, as Serbia claims,
200,000 Serbs have left Kosovo, that would mean
almost all of them. If that is the case, can anyone tell
me who the 60,000 Serbs are who voted in the general
elections in Kosovo two weeks ago? Where in the world
did they come from? I would like to point out that this
number refers to Kosovo Serbs who are over the age of
18 and who actually chose to vote in the elections.
Despite Serbia’s ambitions, we do not live in a posttruth world. We must stop using false data to concoct
false narratives that are beyond belief even for those
who propagate them. There is something fundamentally
wrong with a people so consumed by bitterness and
hatred from the past that they cannot find peace in
the present. It will take an act of will for them to escape
this vicious cycle. I long to see the day when Serbia
owns up to the brutal savagery that it perpetrated in the
Balkans and denounces the monsters who slaughtered
our women and children. One must know when enough
is enough and realize that the time has come to make
a reckoning.
The fact of the matter is that Kosovo will never
be deterred or dictated to by Serbia. But for a moment
let us reflect on the level of resources and energy that
Belgrade used for its smear campaign against Kosovo
10/25

31/10/2019

in order to prevent us from joining INTERPOL. It is
unfortunate that as a result of our current domestic
context we had to withdraw our bid for INTERPOL
membership this year, but the Council can rest assured
that we will be ready to apply again next year. Why would
anyone have anything against our police force joining
that organization? Who stands to win from Kosovo’s
absence from this police organization? The answer is
criminals, terrorists and organized crime. Serbia is
willingly adding itself to that list of beneficiaries.
This Chamber is not a courtroom for our politicians
or our political leaders. Mr. Kurti has won the elections
in Kosovo. He has stated several times very clearly
that he is committed to dialogue. I must say that I am
amused that my Serbian colleague is defending the
Kosovar flag. I want to assure the Council that there
will always be a Kosovar flag in the office of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo. My Serbian colleague failed to
mention one very important element of Mr. Kurti’s
biography, which is that he was a political prisoner in
Serbia when Mr. Dačić was a Cabinet minister.
Kosovo has already demonstrated its ability to make
a smooth transition from a consumer of security to a
contributor of it. Since its transformation, the Kosovo
Security Force has already made enormous strides in
capacity-building, modernization and harmonization
with NATO standards. We are an active member of the
Global Coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS). Our police and intelligence agencies
have been part of operations that prevented several
terrorist attacks, both in our region and beyond, and
we are ready to do more. I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the United States military
forces on the successful operation that killed the
notorious ISIS leader Al-Baghdadi. The world will be
a safer place without him. However, that does not mean
that our struggle against extremism is over.
In Kosovo, we fight hard to preserve the secular
nature of our State, Constitution and society, which
affords the same rights to adherents of all religious and
non-religious denominations. The religious tolerance
and harmony that we have cultivated for centuries is a
badge of honour that we wear proudly. In Kosovo there
are cities where a Catholic church, an Orthodox church
and a Muslim mosque all share the same backyard.
There is no hierarchy of religions in Kosovo, and that is
a value we cherish.
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

I must touch on an issue that was debated ad
nauseam the last time we gathered here (see S/PV.8541).
I will be concise this time. The Kosovo police acted with
the utmost professionalism when it decided to arrest an
employee of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) who willingly decided
to become a human shield for criminal gangs in the
northern part of Kosovo and thereby prevent lawenforcement institutions from carrying out their duty. I
asked the Council last time and will ask it again. What
would happen if any of us tried to prevent an ongoing
police operation against criminals here in New York
or Washington or in Berlin or Moscow or Paris or
anywhere else? The police operation was filmed and
made available to the public in its entirety. The footage
makes it clear that the UNMIK officers refused to show
identification or cooperate with the police. In addition,
we have information that the UNMIK leadership
provided prior notice to United Nations employees
in northern Kosovo about this operation and advised
them to avoid certain areas that day. This particular
employee nevertheless did the opposite. The question
that arises is this: was this individual in that spot on
that particular day on behalf of the United Nations or
someone else? Our police and judiciary are currently
in the process of conducting an investigation into the
matter. We will share the results with the Council as
soon as it is completed.
As we have stated many times before, we see no
purpose whatever in congregating this often in this
Chamber to discuss Kosovo. It is paradoxical that the
Council gathers here more often to discuss Kosovo than
it does to discuss Syria or other pressing issues that
need its attention. UNMIK’s mandate was overtaken
long ago. Valuable resources that could be put to much
better use elsewhere are being wasted to maintain
a mission totally devoid of purpose. The bottom line
is that Kosovo is a free, independent and sovereign
country. That will never, ever change. The only thing
that these meetings are accomplishing is enabling
Serbia to maintain its acute case of denial and reduce
reality to sensational headlines. Let me make it crystal
clear. Just because Serbia refuses to recognize us as a
State does not make us any less of a State. That simply
makes us a young republic that has to deal with an
obnoxious neighbour.
That is what makes dialogue with Serbia so
important. But dialogue does not happen in a vacuum.
How can we believe that Serbia is earnest in its

S/PV. 8655

intentions to participate in the process of reconciliation
leading to mutual recognition when so far all it has
done is fail to implement nearly everything that we
agreed on in Brussels? Dialogue is not about leaders
shaking hands in Brussels, Berlin or Paris. It is about
accepting each other as equals. Kosovo’s right to
exist as a State is not and never will be a subject for
discussion. Kosovo is not a temporary project. It is here
to stay. As the International Court of Justice has clearly
stated, Kosovo was within its rights when it declared
independence and did not break any international law
by doing so. And there is no Greater Albania. That is a
myth. There are ethnic Albanians who live in Kosovo,
in Albania and elsewhere in the Western Balkans.
At the risk of sounding like a broken record, I will
once again state that Kosovo’s independence was indeed
a product of decolonization. Serbia’s only interest in
Kosovo was to exploit our territory and resources while
treating our people as inherently inferior, second-class
citizens. If that is not colonization, I would like to know
what is. We want peace and we are prepared to continue
a dialogue, but not at the expense of the truth. We are
vigilant in defence of our hard-won freedom. It is an
ideal that we were prepared to die for and will fight
to preserve. Reconciliation must be both retrospective
and proactive. There can be no peace without justice,
and it is time to make justice a priority. We owe it to
the victims — those who made the ultimate sacrifice
and those who survived and have already suffered too
much. Most importantly, we owe it to our children.
We owe it to future generations to deliver peace not
just in our lifetime, but in all lifetimes to come. We
have to put an end to the culture of impunity. Is it too
much to ask that the perpetrators of systematic rape and
murder not remain at the helm of security institutions?
Resolution is not synonymous with absolution. Those
who committed these horrendous crimes must be
held accountable by the court of justice and the court
of conscience.
In our lifetime we have had to grapple with
moments of great crisis. Our lives have been marked by
debate on monumental issues, issues of war and peace
and prosperity and depression. But while we talk here
about the past, young Kosovars are writing the future.
They do not have time for pointless debates. They
are out there, working hard, often against the odds,
challenging the status quo and raising the bar for all of
us. Kosovar children are growing up with new heroes,
like the judoka Majlinda Kelmendi, who has raised our

19-3441911/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

flag on the highest podium and continues to bring home
an endless stream of gold medals. Thanks to athletes
like Majlinda Kelmendi, Nora Gjakova and Distria
Krasniqi, the phrase “fight like a girl” has acquired a
different meaning in Kosovo. We were overjoyed by
the international success of our fantastic soccer team.
Imagine — 20 years ago, English soldiers came to
Kosovo, like saints marching in, to liberate our country.
In November, we will be hosting Englishmen again, this
time for a soccer match, and hopefully beating them in
the European qualifiers.
We are driven and defined by the expectations
of our youth. Just last week, Open Data Kosovo
published a report that shows that the number of
information-technology companies in Kosovo has
increased by no less than 187 per cent during the past
10 years. That should come as no surprise, given the
quality of our workforce and our highly skilled young
people, who are eager to learn and compete in the
global market. We are emboldened by the grit of our
free media. Only days ago, three Kosovar journalists,
all of whom happen to be women, were presented with
awards by the European Union for their investigative
journalism and work in exposing and combating
corruption and crime. We are inspired by Fahrije Hoti
and the brave women of Velika Kruša, who used the
restorative power of freedom to turn misfortune into
hope and strength. After suffering so much loss, these
women rebuilt an entire village from the ashes of war.
When confronted with tragedy, resilience was the only
answer. These are the new heroes of our young republic.
They represent the best of us, and they will break the
cycle of fragility and violence. They will write the new
chapter of our history. It is because of them that I persist
in being hopeful for the future of my country.
The President: I now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Representative Tanin and his team
for his statement and for their continued commitment to
Kosovo’s development, as laid out in the comprehensive
report (S/2019/797) on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I would also like to thank Deputy Prime
Minister Ivica Dačić and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku for
their interventions this afternoon.
We welcome the focus in the report on the Government
of Kosovo’s commitment to respecting human rights,
12/25

31/10/2019

ensuring equal access for minority communities,
improving transparency and strengthening the rule of
law. We take note of the progress made in this reporting
period, including the reopening of the Special Chamber
of the Supreme Court, efforts to standardize judicial
practice across Kosovo, progress in the prosecution
of war crimes, the return of displaced persons and the
identification of missing persons, the adoption of child
protection legislation and the first report on respect for
human rights.
There is still more to do, however. We urge Kosovo
to redouble its efforts to address the high levels of
corruption and organized crime and to work to strengthen
its judicial system. We welcome the important work of
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo to that end. As regards the fight against
crime, we agree that it is legitimate and necessary for
the Kosovan police to operate across Kosovo, including
in the northern municipalities, in accordance with
the law. The Council should welcome the arrests of
individuals suspected of involvement in smuggling or
organized crime, whether Kosovo Albanian or Kosovo
Serb, as was the case during the recent Kosovo police
operation. However, noting the concern expressed by the
Special Representative about the arrest of two UNMIK
officials during this operation, it is also important that
international personnel carrying out their duties should
be treated in accordance with international law, just
as they must adhere to their missions’ mandates and
codes of conduct. I welcomed Mr. Tanin’s briefing this
afternoon on the outcome of UNMIK’s internal view of
the incident. We will consider those findings carefully.
We welcome the progress made by the Kosovo
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor’s
Office over the past few months. We urge Pristina,
Belgrade and the members of the Council to cooperate
fully in the interest of achieving justice for victims, and
we call on both Pristina and Belgrade to press ahead
with domestic prosecutions for historic crimes. The
interests of all victims and their families must be at the
centre of judicial proceedings, efforts to locate missing
persons and the provision of support to survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence, regardless of their
ethnicity. We particularly welcome the joint declaration
of representatives of religious groups in Kosovo in
support of survivors of sexual violence. The United
Kingdom is committed to supporting victims and
preventing sexual violence in all its forms as shown
during Her Royal Highness the Countess of Wessex’s
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

recent visit to Pristina, during which she focused on
support for survivors from all communities.
With regard to the Kosovo elections on 6 October,
we echo the statement of the European Union Election
Observation Mission. The elections were calm and well
administered, and the Central Election Commission
worked with dedication, professionalism and
transparency, although we continue to be concerned
about reports of pre-election intimidation in some
Kosovo-Serb areas. We have been following the reports
of staff suffering ill health at the national counting centre
and await the outcome of the investigation. We must not
allow this incident to sow suspicion and distrust.
Kosovo has voted for change. We call on the
party leaders to work diligently to form a new, stable
Government to tackle the pressing issues facing
the country. The United Kingdom expects the new
Government to uphold and strengthen the rule of law,
improve inclusivity in a multi-ethnic State and commit
to strengthening regional security. Dialogue with
Belgrade must be a priority. We call on both Belgrade
and Pristina to remove obstacles to its resumption.
Pristina must remove tariffs and Belgrade must stop
its de-recognition campaign. For dialogue to succeed,
both sides must refrain from provocative rhetoric and
actions. We welcome Kosovo’s completion of two
more common crossing points, but we regret that the
implementation of many other aspects of the Brussels
Agreement remains unaddressed by both parties. The
people of Serbia and Kosovo have much to gain from a
resumption of talks and a comprehensive, sustainable,
implementable deal to their mutual and lasting benefit.
The twentieth anniversary of the NATO intervention
fell during this reporting period. It was an important
moment for reflection. We remember the victims on
all sides of this conflict and remind ourselves of the
reasons for the intervention. We renew our commitment
to building good-neighbourly relations so that peace
can be safeguarded for future generations. The Kosovo
of today is almost unrecognizable from the Kosovo that
the media reported on across the world in 1999. We
thank the members of the Security Council, the staff of
UNMIK, the European Union, NATO, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo
Force, the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo, and
most importantly the Government and institutions of
Kosovo for their ongoing pursuit of Kosovo’s progress
and developments.

S/PV. 8655

In conclusion, the United Kingdom pays tribute to
the work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and his team, and we look forward to continuing
to support them in their endeavours.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as
Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Çitaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States, for their statements.
Respectfully, I would like to remind all members
that paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, on
the Council’s methods of work, recommends that
statements by invited speakers should last no longer
than five minutes. I also believe it is equally important
to ensure that our meetings are a place for constructive
rather than polemic exchanges, which is essential if we
want to work to overcome the traumas of the past — and
we know how profound those traumas are.
With regard to the situation described by Mr. Tanin,
I will briefly emphasize four points. First, I would
like to congratulate the authorities and the people of
Kosovo on the legislative elections held on 6 October,
which represent an important moment in their lives
as a democracy. As the European Union Election
Observation Mission highlighted, the elections
generally went well, despite attempts at intimidation in
some places. We hope to see a new Government formed
as soon as possible in order to enable it to implement
reforms, especially in the area of the rule of law, which
is the central criterion for the rapprochement of the
countries of the region with the European Union.
Secondly, I also want to commend the work of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK)in support of the promotion
of security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and the region. France especially commends
UNMIK’s activities aimed at bringing communities
closer together and promoting the women and peace
and security agenda, and in a way that complements
the initiatives of other regional and international actors,
particularly the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). The Special Representative informed
us about the initial findings in the internal investigation
of the incident involving two UNMIK personnel
in May. Excessive physical force and disrespecting
people’s personal spaces are unacceptable. The Kosovo
authorities must explain how something like this could

19-3441913/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

happen and that all parties put mechanisms in place that
can ensure that such incidents never happen again.
Thirdly, I would like to come back to the key issue
for which we should be mobilizing all of our efforts,
which is the normalization of relations between Pristina
and Belgrade in the context of the European Union-led
dialogue. We deplore the fact that the dialogue has been
interrupted for almost a year and hope that as soon as
the new Kosovo Government is formed it will make it a
priority and will find a committed partner in Belgrade.
During his visit to Belgrade on 15 and 16 July, President
Emmanuel Macron of France urged both parties to seek
a compromise. The first step is a resumption of talks,
and both parties should act quickly to take the necessary
measures. As it stated at the 29 April summit in Berlin,
France will continue its efforts in support of the work of
the European Union and to move the dialogue forward
with its European partners, particularly Germany.
Fourthly, I would like to reiterate that France
believes firmly in a European future for Serbia and
Kosovo. That involves making the necessary reforms
to consolidate the rule of law. EULEX is contributing
to that goal in Kosovo by focusing on the effectiveness,
ethics and multi-community nature of the Kosovo
judicial system. Beyond that, what is needed is a
full normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina, which is an essential condition of both
countries’ European future, which itself can only be a
shared future.
Finally, as this is the last Security Council meeting
under the presidency of South Africa, I would like to
commend the South African delegation for its leadership
of the productive work we have done this month.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his informative briefing
about the situation in the province. We welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and we share the
serious concerns he has expressed about the situation in
Kosovo. We have also taken note of Ms. Vlora Çitaku’s
participation in the meeting.
The situation in the Kosovo settlement is not
promising and does not inspire optimism. The dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina under the auspices of
14/25

31/10/2019

the European Union, which has long been in a state of
paralysis, now seems to be comatose. Nothing has been
done in that format for a very long time, and it exists
only on paper and in people’s statements. We hope that
the European Union will spring into action once the
new membership of the European Commission becomes
fully operational. We expect more productive efforts
and unbiased mediation from our European partners
in that regard. There must be an end to the damaging
practice of condoning Pristina’s provocations, which
led the dialogue to wither on the vine, and we would
like to point to Belgrade’s restraint in that regard.
We see no improvement in the situation in Kosovo
from the point of view of security and respect for the
rights of non-Albanian communities. And I should
point out to Ms. Çitaku that we are talking about
today, not yesterday. We continue to see new instances
of intimidation, seizure and vandalism of property,
cemeteries and Serbian Orthodox Church sites. It is
understandable that in such conditions there is no real
room to talk about the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The Kosovo-Albanian special
force’s incursions into Serb-populated communities on
false pretexts of fighting crime, with the most recent
incident on 16 October, are gradually bringing the
situation to a dangerous point where conflict could
erupt once again. The reluctance of the international
presence, especially the Kosovo Force, to do anything
to prevent such incidents is dispiriting. The indulgent
attitude of Western partners to Pristina is encouraging
increased aggression on the part of the authorities there
towards UNMIK. I noticed that Ms. Çitaku listened
to Deputy Prime Minister Dačić very carefully, but
she clearly was not listening to the Head of UNMIK,
or rather she preferred not to hear his statement and
the conclusions drawn by the commission specially
assigned to investigate the incident of 28 May. I can
remind her of what happened, so she should now listen
to me.
We agree with the findings of the United Nations
representatives regarding the incident in northern
Kosovo of the beating and detention on 28 May by a
Kosovo-Albanian special force of two UNMIK staff
members, Mikhail Krasnoshchekov, a Russian citizen,
and Dejan Dimovic, a Serbian citizen. The conclusions
accord with the results of the Russian investigative
committee. Our investigators established that the goal of
the Kosovo agents was to prevent Mr. Krasnoshchekov
from carrying out his lawful duties in full compliance
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

with the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). They
ignored his United Nations immunity despite the fact
that Mr. Krasnoshchekov showed his identification and
introduced himself in English, and despite the fact that
his car had United Nations plates, which meant that he
could not be subject to arrest or detention.
The details are shocking. The agents dragged him
out of his car by force, banged his head against the car
door, punched him numerous times and then brought
out their equipment and handcuffs. He was pushed into
the back of his own car, where they continued to beat
him up. They seized his identification and his United
Nation staff driver’s licence and broke his mobile phone.
As a result, he suffered multiple injuries, including a
concussion and a complex fracture of the jaw, not to
mention emotional trauma and post-traumatic stress.
The actions of the Kosovo agents showed a total
disregard for the norms of international law, including
the United Nations staff guarantees of immunity from
arrest and detention. Separately, I would like to point
out that the justifications we heard subsequently from
the Kosovo security force and today from Ms. Çitaku,
as well as the fabricated allegations against him, were
not confirmed and are in fact disproved, including by
video recordings of the events of 28 May.
That picture is evidence of the immaturity of the
Kosovo-Albanian security force and its despicable
culture. In that context, the idea of Kosovo joining
international organizations, including INTERPOL,
is mistaken and without foundation. We demand that
those responsible be prosecuted and punished. We
believe that the Security Council should definitively
condemn this crime against United Nations staff.
But that is not the main thing. What we are
witnessing is the Kosovo Albanian authorities’ desire
to force the United Nations Mission out of Kosovo.
There are no longer any UNMIK personnel in northern
Kosovo, and in general the Mission is having to
operate in the difficult conditions of a de facto boycott
by the Pristina authorities. Today Ms. Çitaku openly
confirmed that the Pristina authorities’ dream is to see
the United Nations leave Kosovo as soon as possible so
that there will be no one left to witness the lawlessness
that is going on there and that we are discussing today.
And of course Ms. Çitaku would prefer that the Security
Council not discuss the situation in Kosovo and waste
its valuable time, as she put it. The lawlessness we
are discussing somehow does not fit the image of the

S/PV. 8655

beautiful young democracy in Kosovo that Ms. Çitaku
described to us today.
The participation of the Kosovo security force in
the multinational military exercise Albanian Effort
19 was yet another gross violation of resolution 1244
(1999). The initiators of these military games openly
ignored the provision of the resolution that requires that
all Kosovo Albanian armed groups be demilitarized
and certainly does not permit their inclusion in military
manoeuvres or even their transformation into regular
armed forces. Together with the promotion of the socalled Greater Albania project, such activity poses a
serious threat to regional security.
Kosovo continues to be fertile ground for recruiting
various types of terrorists. The return to Kosovo of
former fighters for the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant is a threat to peace and stability in the region.
Terrorists who have been trained to kill and who are
spreading correspondingly radical ideas represent
a ticking time bomb for security in the region. It is
baffling that the architects of Kosovo’s independence
are attempting to ignore those problems. Nothing has
been done through the European Union in Brussels
either to resume full-fledged dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade and implement the key agreement on the
establishment of a community of Serb municipalities
in Kosovo or to abolish Pristina’s 100 per cent customs
tariff imposed on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The real work of the Specialist Chambers
in investigating the crimes of the Kosovo Liberation
Army has not yet begun, despite the fact that a third
prosecutor has already been appointed. We see all
of that as a desire to roll up the investigation of the
crimes uncovered by Dick Marty, the Council of
Europe rapporteur.
All those guilty of heinous crimes must be brought
to justice and duly punished. The slogans that we often
hear in the Security Council with regard to other crisis
situations should be translated into practical solutions.
To put it bluntly, we are simply stunned by the utter
helplessness of Pristina’s patrons. And not one of them
is capable of explaining what they are doing to restart
the political process and make the Kosovo authorities
see reason.
Russia’s position on Kosovo has been consistent.
We support enabling Belgrade and Pristina to arrive at
a viable and mutually acceptable solution on the basis
of resolution 1244 (1999). It should first and foremost

19-3441915/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

be in line with international law and approved by the
Security Council, because this is a matter of ensuring
international peace and security. In our view, forcing
any so-called final normalization between Belgrade
and Pristina tied to artificial deadlines is destructive.
All of this is testament to the fact that the problems
in Kosovo are piling up rather than being resolved.
In that context, we consider that the calls that we
have frequently heard in this Chamber for UNMIK’s
withdrawal or conducting a so-called strategic review
are baseless. We once again want to draw the attention
of the Secretariat to the importance of carefully
monitoring the developing situation, which, as the
facts have shown, requires vigilance on the part of
the international community. In the light of that, we
believe that the Security Council must react to the
current situation. We have prepared a draft presidential
statement that reflects the issues outlined in our
statement, and I ask the Secretariat to circulate the text
to the members of the Security Council. We hope that
the Council will be able to approve it.
Mr. Heusgen (Federal Republic of Germany): I
would first like to subscribe to what my French colleague
said earlier. Considering that our time is limited in
the Council, I find these long initial interventions
lasting 20 minutes or half an hour unacceptable. My
advice to future Presidents is that they either obtain a
commitment from the speakers limiting themselves to
five minutes or that they be asked to speak at the end,
after all Council members have spoken.
In terms of substance, I agree with what my
colleagues from the United Kingdom and France have
said previously, and I would like to highlight a few points,
starting with the elections. Of course I listened carefully
to what my Russian colleague had to say about the state
of affairs and democracy in the country. I just want to
say, and to point out, that in Kosovo the opposition was
actually able to conduct a campaign. No parties were
prevented from participating, there were free and fair
elections in most areas, and a change of Government
was possible. Therefore, in the words of my Russian
colleague, it is a young, beautiful democracy. The only
problems we witnessed were in the areas with a Kosovo
Serb majority, which were marred by the intimidation
and targeting of non-Serbian List candidates and their
supporters. Although the statement delivered by the
Serbian Foreign Minister was very long, I did not hear
him mention that part of the elections. Perhaps next
16/25

31/10/2019

time he could explain what happened in the Kosovo
Serb-majority areas.
I should like to reiterate that we need to ensure a
swift formation of Government. The new Government
will need to pursue reforms and abide by the rule of law.
We also need to ensure the continuation of dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia. In that regard, I subscribe
to what my Russian colleague said — dialogue has to
continue. I would not go as far as to say the dialogue
is in a coma, but I would say that it is urgent that
the dialogue continue. I am hopeful that with a
new European Commission in place, the European
Union-facilitated dialogue will continue and we may see
constructive negotiations; too much time has already
been lost in that regard. Both Serbia and Kosovo share
responsibilities, and I can only reiterate what we said
last time (see S/PV.8541). We call on the Government of
Kosovo to revoke the tariffs imposed on products from
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same time,
we urge the Serbian Government to end its efforts to
persuade other countries to withdraw their recognition
of Kosovo. I know the Serbian Foreign Minister likes
to travel to Pacific islands and the Caribbean, among
other destinations, but I think that Serbian taxpayers’
money can be put to better use than for travelling to
persuade other countries to withdraw their recognition
of Kosovo.
With regard to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), I would
like to thank Special Representative Tanin for his
briefing and work. Twenty years after UNMIK was
first mandated, we still believe that the Mission needs
to adapt to the new reality. The situation in Kosovo
has drastically changed, including the operating
environment. We therefore believe that it is time for a
formal transition of many of UNMIK’s tasks either to
Kosovar institutions or other international institutions
that have taken over UNMIK’s role. Having listened to
Mr. Tanin’s briefing, I note that he expressed support
for the launching of a Serbian-Albanian dictionary.
While that is fantastic, I believe that country embassies
or other organizations could do that — with all due
respect, we do not need UNMIK for that. With regard
to the Kosovar authorities, we need to keep working
with UNMIK on the ground in a spirit of trust and
collaboration regarding the incident on 28 May. We can
only repeat what our colleagues have said on the need
to ensure respect for international law. I heard the plea
of my Russian colleague and his call for respect for
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

international law. I listened very carefully to that, and
I hope our Russian colleague also insists on respect for
international humanitarian law.
I would like to make two further points. First, we
continue to support the efforts of Kosovo in its survivorcentred approach to addressing conflict-related sexual
violence. We welcome the ongoing work on the
Kosovo Government commission responsible for the
verification and recognition of the status of survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence. We note that 406
applicants have already been granted survivor status,
and we ask the Government to pursue that work in order
to empower women, enable them to overcome isolation,
contribute to the well-being of their families and
elevate their status and role within their communities.
I heard our colleague from Serbia mention that he
was requesting indictments against the perpetrators
of sexual crimes. Perhaps next time in his briefing he
could inform us of how many indictments have been
launched in Serbia for sexual crimes committed.
Let me conclude with a practical example of the
necessity and benefit of closer regional cooperation.
Together with our French partners, we have initiated a
regional road map for the Western Balkans with a view
to strengthening the control of small arms, which are all
too readily available in the region. We are encouraged
by the progress achieved so far, and we are working
towards a ministerial review conference in Berlin on
31 January 2020.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We are grateful for the convening of
this meeting and to Special Representative Tanin for
his briefing and the laudable work carried out by his
team on the ground. We also thank Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku for their briefings today.
The Dominican Republic would like to commend
the electoral authorities in Kosovo and the population
in general for the success of the parliamentary elections
held on 6 October. However, we note with concern the
apparent impasse in the process of normalizing relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. If that deadlock were
to endure, it could jeopardize the stability achieved so
far. We therefore urge the parties to pursue formal talks
in the current format, and we call on both parties to
reconsider all unilateral measures that are slowing the
return to dialogue.

S/PV. 8655

Measures aimed at building confidence among
the population play a decisive role in fostering the
aforementioned negotiations. The activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in promoting youth empowerment,
multilingualism, intercommunal dialogue and respect
for human rights are fundamental in that regard.
Similarly, the participation of women and young people
in the democratic process and in decision-making is
a necessary tool to advance towards a leadership that
contributes to achieving a peaceful society on the
path towards development and inclusion for future
generations. In that regard, the Dominican Republic
also welcomes the renewed work to search for missing
persons through, inter alia, the amendment made to
the Law on Missing Persons in Kosovo. In addition to
being a key element for reconciliation, we wish to recall
that families have a right to know the whereabouts of
their loved ones.
A final aspect that should be highlighted is the
importance of making headway in addressing the needs
of victims of sexual violence, who continue to be affected
after the conflict and are currently excluded from the
Government’s reparation plans. We believe that the
counting of victims should not stop upon the cessation
of conflict, especially when it comes to cases of sexual
violence. The harm done to victims must be assessed
and taken into account in any Government action on
that conflict-related scourge. We take this opportunity
to applaud the work carried out by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo through its monitoring
and operations pillars.
We hope that the outcome of the investigations being
carried out by the ad hoc investigation team regarding
the detention of two members of the Mission will be
able to provide a detailed explanation of the incident and
respond to the concerns of the international community
in relation to that confusing situation in order for the
necessary measures to be taken to correct any irregular
action. We reiterate our support for and recognition of
the work carried out in Kosovo by UNMIK, the Kosovo
Force, the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe with a view to
achieving sustainable peacebuilding. We call on the
parties to honour their commitments under the Brussels
Agreement and to comply with resolution 1244 (1999).
In conclusion, we take this opportunity to
congratulate the delegation of South Africa on the

19-3441917/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

extraordinary work carried out in the Council under
its presidency.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): Let me join
others in congratulating South Africa on its extremely
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month. We also thank each of the briefers, although that
may not be the appropriate word today.
The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) was established in 1999
to resolve what was then a grave humanitarian situation
in Kosovo. I was personally privileged to be there on
the ground that year as part of the team that set up
the United States Mission, which is now the United
States Embassy. At the time and over subsequent
years, we worked closely with other missions and
with the United Nations on the ground to carry out the
requirements of the mandate, including guaranteeing
public safety and providing an interim administration
for Kosovo, which is now the Government of Kosovo.
Twenty years later, every one of the goals enumerated
as a mandate obligation and a Security Council
resolution has either been substantially completed,
or become obsolete, as the sovereign, independent
Government of Kosovo has assumed responsibility for
them. It is high time for the United Nations and the
Security Council to acknowledge that fact. The simple
truth is that while the international community and the
United Nations can provide a useful supporting role in
Kosovo’s democratic development, it no longer needs
a peacekeeping mission to do that. Today, we reiterate
our call for a clear plan to reform or phase out UNMIK.
To further such efforts and move the parties towards
a stable peace, President Trump appointed Ambassador
Richard Grenell as the Special Presidential Envoy for
Serbia and Kosovo Peace Negotiations. Ambassador
Grenell has already visited the region to urge progress
towards an agreement. That is a clear demonstration of
the United States commitment. That appointment is not
about choosing sides but rather seeking a resolution.
For example, the tariffs imposed by Kosovo on Serbian
goods worsen the situation, while Serbia’s campaign
against the recognition of Kosovo’s independence fuels
unnecessary tensions. In addition, with respect to the
two countries, we encourage the leaders of Kosovo,
following its democratic October elections, to quickly
form a Government that is in favour of dialogue and
prepared to suspend tariffs on Serbian goods.
18/25

31/10/2019

Likewise, we urge Serbia to refrain from
provocations and cease its campaign against the
recognition of Kosovo. Serbia and Kosovo must both
accelerate reforms to strengthen the rule of law and
address corruption and organized crime. We also
encourage both countries to involve wide segments of
society in their political processes, including women,
the importance of whose meaningful participation we
have reiterated so many times this week. I would note
that we have heard a great deal today about the incident
on 28 May. I thank Special Representative Tanin for
sharing the results of the investigation, and we hope
to see them in written form. Like every country
represented here, the United States strongly supports
Kosovo’s efforts to combat smuggling, corruption and
organized crime throughout the territory of Kosovo.
The United States expresses serious concerns about
excessive police force against any United Nations staff
member and supports the safety and security of all
United Nations personnel. However, we continue to find
the presence of UNMIK staff at that police operation
troubling, as it risked, and ultimately resulted in, a
confrontation that could have been avoided. Incidents
such as that raise many questions from different
perspectives and underscore the need for a thorough
review of UNMIK’s mandate and standard operating
procedures in order to ensure that the Mission does not
inhibit Kosovo’s democratic development or obstruct
legitimate law enforcement efforts.
Today, we have heard a great deal of rhetoric, which
does not promote a peaceful resolution of this situation.
We all know exactly what is needed: Kosovo and Serbia
must together reach an agreement to comprehensively
normalize relations.
We, the international community, must work together
and separately to encourage both countries to recognize
that actions that work against the normalization of
relations are fruitless and counterproductive, hindering
their economic development, social progress and
integration with Europe and the West. They will never
lead to a resolution. If we take our mandate seriously,
it is progress towards the goal of a stable peace for
all citizens of Kosovo that needs our attention and
resources, not an outmoded mission whose goals have
already been achieved.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing today. I
would also like to thank Deputy Prime Minister Dačić
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

and Ambassador Çitaku for their statements before
the Council.
Let me start by congratulating Kosovo on the
conduct of the 6 October elections. We hope that the
change in the political spectrum will bring about an
effective Government able to continue the reforms.
Since this is not only the last meeting of the Council
on the situation in Kosovo this year, but also the last
such meeting with Poland in its seat, let me make some
brief general remarks to reinforce the messages that we
have been conveying over the past two years.
First, as concerns the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), let me
repeat the call for a strategic review of the Mission.
With each statement more time passes since the last
strategic review, and the need for a fresh assessment
of the Mission’s comparative advantage becomes even
more apparent.
The historical role of UNMIK cannot be overstated.
It played a crucial role in bringing a bloody conflict to
an end but since then, the situation on the ground has
changed beyond recognition, while other international
presences have overtaken substantial parts of the
Mission’s mandate. We express our deep appreciation
for UNMIK’s historical role and commend the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force for their efforts in fostering a safe
and secure environment and the rule of law.
Poland is vitally interested in the stability of the
Western Balkans. We continue to view the normalization
of relations between Belgrade and Pristina as the key
not only to unlocking the potential of both countries
on their way to European integration but also to the
stability of the whole region.

S/PV. 8655

In terms of our assessment of the overall picture
in Kosovo, while commending the progress towards
reforms and in strengthening the rule of law, we also
not that more remains to be done.
It is incumbent upon the political elites, regardless
of their affiliation, to continue their efforts to create a
just and inclusive environment and lay solid foundations
for the future prosperity of all citizens.
Let me conclude by saying that Poland regards
Kosovo as being fully capable of managing its own
future. We will continue to follow with interest and to
remain engaged in the developments in the country and
the region, ready to extend our assistance and share our
experiences, as we have done so far.
Since this is the last meeting under the auspices of
the South Africa presidency, allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your leadership and very
professional and efficient conduct of other work during
the month of October.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing. I also welcome
Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. and thank him for his
statement. I also listened carefully to the statement of
Ms. Çitaku.
Resolution 1244 (1999) sets an important legal
basis for the settlement of the Kosovo issue. China has
always maintained that the way to resolve the Kosovo
issue is for the parties concerned to reach a mutually
acceptable solution through dialogue and consultation
in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions.

We would like to see the meaningful resumption
of the European Union-facilitated dialogue and call
on both sides to show commitment towards reaching
a legally binding agreement on the comprehensive
normalization of relations.

China respects Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We understand its legitimate concerns with
regard to the Kosovo issue and commend its efforts
to find a political solution to it. We hope that Kosovo
will demonstrate the necessary political will, rescind
its unilateral tariff increases, commit to implementing
the Brussels Agreement and make efforts towards
resuming the dialogue between the two parties.

In that context, we encourage Kosovo to remove
punitive tariffs on goods from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that the new Parliament and its
Government will do that swiftly. We equally encourage
Serbia to desist in its actions aimed at undermining
Kosovo’s international position. We call on both sides
to show goodwill and openness.

Achieving inclusion, reconciliation and harmonious
coexistence across all ethnicities in Kosovo is in the
fundamental interests of peoples from all communities
and of meeting their development needs. China hopes
that all parties concerned will refrain from any rhetoric
or actions that could complicate or escalate the situation
and that they will create conditions for the proper

19-3441919/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

settlement of the Kosovo issue, so as to jointly safeguard
peace, stability and development in the Balkans.
It is important at this juncture for the Security
Council to remain seized of the Kosovo issue. China
commends Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tanin and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the
important role they are playing in bringing about a
definitive solution to the issue of Kosovo and firmly
supports the Mission in the diligent implementation of
its mandate and its important role.
China is gravely concerned about the obstruction
encountered by UNMIK personnel in the normal
course of mandate delivery. Relevant independent
investigations have shown that UNMIK personnel have
been threatened and the performance of their duties
obstructed. The Council should express grave concern
at incidents of that nature and call on the relevant
parties to fully respect the privileges and immunities of
United Nations personnel and effectively ensure their
safety and security, so as to create conditions conducive
to enabling UNMIK to implement its mandate within
agreed parameters. That will be conducive to upholding
the Council’s authority and, more importantly, to
bringing about a political settlement to the issue
of Kosovo.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Zahir Tanin, for
his briefing on the recent situation in Kosovo. I would
also like to welcome the presence of the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, His Excellency Ivica Dačić, in
New York.
We took note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/797) and would like to join others in expressing
our deep concern at the recent situation in the field.
Today I would like to bring the following three points
to the attention of the Council.
First, concerning the de-escalation in the region,
we call on both parties to actively engage in sincere
actions to de-escalate the tensions on the ground,
including urging all parties to refrain from vandalizing
any religious sites, as indicated in the report. Religious
sites are sacred sanctuaries aimed at creating a positive
spirit. We therefore condemn the vandalism and call
on law-enforcement institutions to ensure a swift
investigation and to bring those responsible to justice.
20/25

31/10/2019

We support the Secretary-General’s steadfast
commitment to the protection of religious sites, which
is also in line with the United Nations Plan of Action
to Safeguard Religious Sites. I call on all relevant
stakeholders from both parties to give priority to the
protection of religious sites.
Secondly, there is a need to resume dialogue.
Dialogue is the only feasible way to achieve a win-win
solution for both parties in the most peaceful possible
way. Both parties need to resume dialogue under the
auspices of the European Union, without further delay,
to bring unity back to the region. All stakeholders
should be involved in that dialogue. We regret that
no high-level meetings were held between Belgrade
and Pristina within the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue.
All obstacles to dialogue should be removed.
We welcome efforts aimed at ensuring the greater
involvement in the political process of wider segments
of society and encourage women to engage and lead in
the dialogue. We also second the Secretary-General’s
view that trust-building cannot be successful if the
rule of law is not strengthened and the judiciary is not
perceived as credible, independent and impartial.
My third point concerns the important role of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). Indonesia greatly appreciates
UNMIK’s multifaceted approach to engaging grassroots communities through various forums, conferences
and trust-building projects.
We are deeply saddened by the incident in Zubin
Potok involving the arrest of UNMIK staff by the
authorities in northern Kosovo. We welcome the
thorough internal investigation into the incident,
as presented by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. The incident clearly violated
international law and the immunities of international
United Nations staff members. We therefore urge an
immediate termination of the criminal proceedings
against the two staff members as well as the restoration
of their status, privileges and immunities.
We welcome the reintegration process that is being
monitored by UNMIK and international partners and
are pleased by the voluntary return by members of
non-majority communities who had been displaced.
The reintegration process is an important step
towards establishing a strong and stable community in
the region.
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

Ultimately, Indonesia recognizes that what people
want is happiness, not selfishness. What is most
important is peace, not hatred. These are important
building blocks in order for people to live side by side.
That is the goal whose achievement UNMIK must
ultimately support.
Finally, Sir, let me join others in congratulating
your delegation on having successfully presided over
the Council during the month of October.
Mr. Alsabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2019/797). We stress our full support for the Special
Representative and appreciate the vital role of the
United Nations throughout the past period in helping
Kosovo to build its institutions in line with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, notably resolution
1244 (1999).
I would also like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States in Washington, D.C., and I thank them
for their statements.
The State of Kuwait welcomes the parliamentary
elections held on 6 October. We believe that this is
an opportunity for the parties in Kosovo to uphold
democracy and encourage discussions and general
dialogue at all levels. This opportunity must be seized
in order to focus on socioeconomic priorities and to
strengthen the rule of law, good governance, justice and
accountability, as well as to resume the dialogue, under
the auspices of the European Union, between Belgrade
and Pristina. This dialogue remains the most suitable
framework for resolving the outstanding issues between
the two parties and the only way to reach solutions that
will lead to a comprehensive settlement.
We listened a while ago to the conclusions of the
team that investigated the two incidents relating to the
arrest and detention of two UNMIK staff members. We
reiterate the importance of respecting the diplomatic
immunity of United Nations staff pursuant to the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. It is also
important that the perpetrators of those violations of
and encroachments on diplomatic immunity be brought
to justice. We reiterate the importance of guaranteeing

S/PV. 8655

the neutrality of United Nations mission staff and to
ensure commitment to their mandate.
The report of the Secretary-General mentions the
forty-ninth meeting of the joint Working Group on
persons who are unaccounted for in connection with
events in Kosovo, during which the International
Committee of the Red Cross indicated that 1,653
persons out of 6,063 remained missing as of 18 May.
We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Working
Group in this regard and commend the amendment to
the Law on Missing Persons, which was promulgated
by the Government of Kosovo to provide protections
and rights to the families of the missing.
As set out in resolution 2474 (2019), it is important
to shed light on the fate of missing persons. It is one of
the most important humanitarian issues leading to longterm reconciliation and the creation of an environment
conducive to good-neighbourly relations.
We also welcome the continual work carried out
by UNMIK in cooperation with the United Nations
country team in Kosovo and in partnership with
local and international stakeholders to implement the
joint recommendations of the United Nations Kosovo
Trust-Building Forum, which was held in May 2018 to
provide support for trust-building among the various
communities. Such efforts cannot be successful
without strengthening the rule of law and a judiciary
with credibility, independence and integrity.
In conclusion, it is important for the international
community to continue making efforts to urge Pristina
and Belgrade to set aside their differences and reach
consensus-based solutions that would be fair, lasting and
accepted by both parties and would lay the foundations
for peace, security and stability in the region.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Primе Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku,
Ambassador of the Republic of Kosovo to the United
States of America, to today’s meeting on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We also commend Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNMIK, on his detailed briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the successful holding
of legislative elections on 6 October, which serve
to help entrench democracy and build the country’s

19-3441921/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

institutions. In order to strengthen that positive
momentum, my country calls on the political parties
that emerged victorious in the elections to make the
necessary compromises, with a view to forming a new
Government, which will have to provide lasting solutions
to the many challenges facing Kosovo, in particular the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia,
reconciliation among the various communities in
Kosovo and the country’s economic development.
With regard to the normalization of relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, my delegation notes with
satisfaction that the dialogue that has been facilitated
by the European Union since 2011 has resulted in the
signing of 32 agreements between the two parties.
However, it deplores the scant progress made in
implementing some of those agreements and the delays
in the process of normalizing relations between the
two countries.
With regard to reconciliation among the various
communities in Kosovo, Côte d’Ivoire urges the
country’s political authorities to work towards easing
the tense sociopolitical climate. In particular, it invites
them to take all necessary measures to eliminate the
obstacles to establishing an association or community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo. In addition, my
delegation calls for the early resumption of negotiations,
under the auspices of the European Union, in order to
build new momentum in the reconciliation process, the
promotion of human rights and on the path to settling
the issue of the full international recognition of Kosovo
and its participation in all international organizations.
With regard to that last point, my country would
like to reiterate its call for the total elimination of
customs duties on goods imported from Serbia and
Bosnia, in accordance with regulations applicable to
countries that have signed the Central European Free
Trade Agreement in recent years. Indeed, that tariff
barrier hinders not only efforts to reach an agreement
between Kosovo and Serbia but also initiatives aimed
at Kosovo becoming a member of the European Union.
An agreement between the two countries should also
allow Serbia to suspend its international campaign to
persuade countries that have recognized Kosovo as an
independent State to revoke such recognition.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
for the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and all the personnel of UNMIK
and the Kosovo Force, as well as the European Union.
22/25

31/10/2019

It calls on the international community to provide
significant support to the special trust fund in support
of the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities
in Kosovo.
I would like to end by congratulating, on behalf of
my delegation, the entire South African team, led by
Ambassador Jerry Matjila, on its excellent presidency
during the month of October.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Special Representative
Zahir Tanin for his briefing and welcome Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Primе Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora
Çitaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States
of America, to today’s meeting. However, following
in the footsteps of other colleagues, I would like to
respectfully encourage them to keep to their allotted
speaking time in future.
The recent elections in Kosovo were well organized
and demonstrated the political maturity of Kosovar
society. Nonetheless, we deplore the fact that, within
the Serbian Kosovar community, the elections were
marked by a climate of intimidation and limited choice
for voters. It is also important that the verification and
count process be completed in order to prevent the
election results from being contested. We hope that
the formation of the new Government will provide
an opportunity to ensure the active and meaningful
participation of women.
We encourage the next Government of Kosovo to
continue the reform process, in particular in the area
of the rule of law. We would like to acknowledge the
indispensable role of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo in that regard.
We deplore the fact that no progress has been
made in resuming the dialogue between the authorities
of Belgrade and Pristina, under the auspices of the
European Union. Both sides can only benefit from
maintaining regional stability, and a comprehensive
and legally binding agreement on the normalization
of relations is essential in that regard. It is important
that the parties honour all their commitments in order
to create a climate conducive to normalizing their
relations. Unilateral actions and declarations must give
way to a spirit of compromise. We call on the Kosovar
leadership and the Serbian leadership to demonstrate
responsibility and political will. In that context, we
reiterate our call on the Kosovar authorities to eliminate
19-34419

31/10/2019

Kosovo

customs duties on imports from Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina and call on both sides to make a greater
commitment to regional integration.
Reconciliation also requires justice. We call on
the Kosovar authorities to cooperate fully with the
Specialist Chambers. It requires also that greater
progress must be made with regard to missing persons.
We call on the parties to intensify their cooperation to
resolve this vital humanitarian issue.
The future of Kosovo, as a secure and stable
democracy, has been shaped, among other things, by
the efforts of the United Nations and the presence of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). We reiterate the importance of
respecting the immunities of United Nations personnel
on the ground, in accordance with the norms of
international law. We took note of the information
provided by the Special Representative in his briefing
with regard to the internal report compiled following
the incident that occurred on 28 May. The excessive
use of force against UNMIK personnel is unacceptable.
We call for a follow-up to the recommendations made
in the report. It is vital that UNMIK be able to safely
discharge its mandate. In conclusion, the international
community continues to invest in Kosovo and to
help create the conditions for the normalization of
relations between Serbia and Kosovo. However, it is
up to the parties to create such conditions and to reach
an agreement.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Let me begin by thanking Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his informative
briefing on the progress made in recent months in
Kosovo. I would also like to extend my thanks to
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States, for their statements.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea notes with
great concern the political impasse in the resumption
of talks between Belgrade and Pristina, as reflected in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/797) and
Mr. Tanin’s briefing. In addition to the lack of progress
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, we
deeply regret the inflammatory rhetoric and provocative
actions of the parties, which is having a negative effect

S/PV. 8655

on the situation on the ground and hampering initiatives
aimed at resuming a productive dialogue between the
parties. By the same token, we regret that no high-level
meetings were held between the parties during the
reporting period within the framework of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. Likewise, we regret that the
meeting scheduled to take place in Paris at the beginning
of July was cancelled. In this regard, we wish to remind
both parties that ensuring security and stability in
Kosovo requires the commitment of both in order for
the dialogue to continue. We therefore encourage them
to continue their efforts with the aim of achieving
stability on the ground, respecting the implementation
of the agreements reached. We also encourage them to
take advantage of the European Union-facilitated talks
with a view to normalizing relations.
In conclusion, we believe that all parties must
continue to act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and
the existing agreements, so that through dialogue they
may find a peaceful and lasting solution for the benefit
of all. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea once again
reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia
and appreciates its continued efforts to facilitate an
inclusive, peaceful and political solution to the situation.
We encourage UNMIK to continue to fulfil its
objectives and priorities in promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo. Similarly, we
commend the support it provides to all communities
in Kosovo and to all regional and international
stakeholders, and above all its efforts to empower
women in Kosovo in various areas of development.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for Mr. Zahir Tanin’s comprehensive briefing,
and we welcome the presence among us of Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and
Ambassador Vlora Çitaku.
Peru is closely following the situation in Kosovo,
and despite the progress made, we are concerned
about the progressive deterioration of the process of
normalizing relations between Belgrade and Pristina,
which we believe is fundamental to consolidating
peace, stability and prosperity, both in Kosovo and the
region. In this respect, we regret that it will soon be
one year since the European Union-facilitated dialogue

19-3441923/25

S/PV.8655

Kosovo

between the parties was suspended. We support the
efforts of the international community in this regard
but emphasize that the responsibility for resuming
the process lies primarily with Belgrade and Pristina.
Accordingly, we echo the call of the Secretary-General
to remove all obstacles to dialogue. We believe that the
tariff on imports and the continuing exacerbation of
confrontational rhetoric, particularly from the political
class, do not contribute to achieving this goal.
Given that the parliamentary elections have now
been completed, we await the swift formation of a
Government that, in a constructive manner and in good
faith, will undertake the necessary measures to resume
the dialogue. We recall the commitment of the parties
under the Brussels Agreement and resolution 1244
(1999). With regard to this process, we wish to reiterate
the importance of involving the citizens of both parties,
particularly women and young people. We welcome
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in promoting the women
and peace and security and the youth and peace and
security agendas with a view to contributing to their
full and substantive implementation. These efforts
contribute to the reconciliation process, which is
indispensable to overcoming the divisions of the past.
It also entails the recognition of cultural diversity,
respect for the rights of ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities and the protection of historical and
cultural heritage.
In that regard, it is essential to continue
strengthening institutions and the rule of law, and
we recognize the role of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Specialist Chambers
in supporting this complex task. In the same vein,
we also wish to recognize the initiatives undertaken
by UNMIK, in coordination with the entities of the
United Nations system, in promoting human rights, the
protection of children, intercommunal dialogue, the
safe and dignified return of internally displaced persons
and the provision of assistance to victims of sexual
violence. Also in this context, we wish to highlight the
importance of initiatives aimed at combating corruption
and organized crime, in accordance with the law, human
rights and international agreements and standards. We
regret the incident stemming from a 28 May police
action involving United Nations staff members. Peru
reaffirms the responsibility of Governments to respect
the immunity of United Nations officials, and that
24/25

31/10/2019

those officials themselves have a responsibility to be
impartial in carrying out their duties.
We wish to conclude by reiterating our recognition
of the work of UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and all other international organizations
committed to our shared task of consolidating
sustainable peace in Kosovo.
We commend the South African presidency of the
Council for the efficient and professional work carried
out during the month of October.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.
At the outset, we thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. Allow me to also
welcome the presence among us of the representatives
of Serbia and Kosovo, respectively, who have joined us
for today’s meeting.
South Africa reiterates its support for the important
work of UNMIK in creating an environment conducive to
compromise, reconciliation and stability. We commend
UNMIK’s continued engagement with all stakeholders
in pursuit of building trust among communities through
dialogue and through initiatives aimed at empowering
youth and women. My delegation expresses its concern
at the arrest of UNMIK personnel, and we welcome the
conclusion of the investigation team and the submission
of its report.
The continued stalemate in the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina is of concern, and we call on
the two sides to refrain from actions or rhetoric that
may increase tensions and further entrench divisions
between the two parties. Such actions create instability
on the ground and jeopardize the gains that have
already been made through dialogue. Through its
own history, South Africa can attest to the fact that
pursuing the path to achieving long-term solutions to
what seem like intractable situations may not be easy
but is vital to peace and security in the region. South
Africa’s own experience has shown us that we would
not have succeeded if we had not engaged in sincere
and constructive dialogue.
In conclusion, South Africa encourages all parties
to show flexibility and take the necessary steps to
actively pursue the resumption of dialogue, with the aim
19-34419

31/10/2019

S/PV. 8655

Kosovo

of working towards a viable and mutually acceptable
solution and the normalization of relations between
the two sides. This approach is important not only to
stability in Belgrade and Pristina but to the security of
the wider region in its entirety.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
October, I would like, on behalf of the delegation of
South Africa, to express our sincere appreciation to
the members of the Council and the Security Council

Affairs Division team for all the support they have
given us. It has indeed been a busy month in which
we rallied to consensus on several important issues
within our purview. We could not have done that
alone or without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat, including the conference service
officers, interpreters, verbatim reporters and security
staff. We also appreciate the kind words expressed by
various delegations at this meeting with regard to our
presidency of the Council. As we end our presidency, I
know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the
delegation of the United Kingdom good luck for the
month of November.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

19-3441925/25
