50

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

December 1971, 2965 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972,
3091 (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3239 (XXIX)
of 29 November 1974 and 3457 (XXX) of 10 December 1975,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations12 and the report
submitted to the Special Committee by its Working
Group,18
Conscious that there is urgent need for an early
agreement on guidelines that would govern United
Nations peace-keeping operations and strengthen the
capability of the United Nations to respond to future
peace-keeping needs in an effective manner,
Noting that limited progress has been made towards
the completion of agreed guidelines for conducting
peace-keeping operations in conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations,
Considering that a demonstration of political will and
greater conciliation remain necessary for an early completion of such agreed guidelines,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations;
2. Requests the Special Committee and its Working Group to renew efforts and to intensify negotiations
for an early completion of agreed guidelines for peacekeeping operations, in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations, before the thirty-second session of
the General Assembly;
3. Urges members of the Special Committee and
its Working Group, including the permanent members
of the Security Council represented therein, to demonstrate political will and a spirit of conciliation during
the negotiations to be held in 1977;
4. Requests the Special Committee to give further
attention to the consideration of specific questions related to the practical implementation of peace-keeping
operations;
5. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
100th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

31/106.

Report of the Special Committee to
Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting
the Human Rights of the Population of
the Occupied Territories

A

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity,
Bearing in mind the rules of international law concerning occupation, in particular the provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,14
1. Strongly deplores the measures taken by Israel
in the Arab territories occupied since 1967 that alter
their demographic composition or geographical nature,
and particularly the establishment of settlements;
12 Ibid., agenda item 54, document A/31/337.
13 Jbid., annex.
1 4 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973,

p. 287.

2. Declares that such measures have no legal validity and cannot prejudice the outcome of the search for
the establishment of peace, and considers that such
measures constitute an obstacle to the achievement of
a just and lasting peace in the area;
3. Declares further that all legislative and administrative measures taken by Israel, including the expropriation of land and properties thereon and the transfer
of populations, which purport to change the legal status
of Jerusalem are invalid and cannot change that status;
4. Urgently calls once more upon Israel to rescind
all those measures and to desist forthwith from taking
any further measures which tend to change the demographic composition, geographical nature or status of
the occupied Arab territories or any part thereof, including Jerusalem.
101st plenary meeting
16 December 1976

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3092 A (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3240 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974
and 3525 B (XXX) of 15 December 1975,
Considering that the promotion of respect for the
obligations arising from the Charter of the United
Nations and other instruments and rules of international
law is among the basic purposes and principles of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,15
Noting that Israel and those Arab States whose territories have been occupied by Israel since June 1967
are parties to that Convention,
Taking into account that ·States parties to that Convention undertake, in accordance with article 1 thereof,
not only to respect but also to ensure respect for the
Convention in all circumstances,
1. Reaffirms that the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949, is applicable to all the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
2. Deplores the failure of Israel to acknowledge the
applicability of that Convention to the territories it has
occupied since 1967;
3. Calls again upon Israel to acknowledge and to
comply with the provisions of that Convention in all
the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem;
4. Urges once more all States parties to that Convention to exert all efforts in order to ensure respect for
and compliance with the provisions thereof in all the
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem.
10 I st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
C

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as the principles and provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
15 Ibid.

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,16 as well as of other
relevant conventions and regulations,
Recalling its resolutions on the subject, as well as
those adopted by the Security Council, the Commission
on Human Rights and other United Nations bodies
concerned and by specialized agencies,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, 17 which contains, inter alia, public statements
made by leaders of the Government of Israel,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories for its efforts in
performing the tasks assigned to it by the General Assembly;
2. Deplores the continued refusal by Israel to allow
the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
3. Calls again upon Israel to allow the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
4. Deplores the continued and persistent violation
by Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, and other applicable international instru-

ments;
5. Condemns, in particular, the following Israeli
policies and practices:
(a) The annexation of parts of the occupied territories;
( b) The establishment of Israeli settlements therein
and the transfer of an alien population thereto;
( c) The evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories, and the denial of their right to return;
( d) The confiscation and expropriation of Arab
property in the occupied territories and all other transactions for the acquisition of land involving the Israeli
authorities, institutions or nationals on the one hand,
and the inhabitants or institutions of the occupied territories on the other;
(e) The destruction and demolition of Arab houses;
(f) Mass arrests, administrative detention and illtreatment of the Arab population;
(g) The ill-treatment of persons under detention;
(h) The pillaging of archaeological and cultural
property;
(i) The interference with religious freedoms and
practices, particularly as manifested most recently in
Al-Khalil, as well as family rights and customs;
(j) The illegal exploitation of the natural wealth,
resources and population of the occupied territories;
6. Reaffirms that all measures taken by Israel to
change the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the occupied
territories, or any part thereof, including Jerusalem,
are null and void, and that Israel's policy of settling
parts of its population and new immigrants in the occupied territories constitutes a flagrant violation of the
16 Ibid.
1 1 A/31/218.

51

Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and of the relevant United
Nations resolutions;
7. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from the
policies and practices referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6
above;
8. Reiterates its call upon all States, international
organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize
any changes carried out by Israel in the occupied territories and to avoid actions, including those in the field
of aid, which might be used by Israel in its pursuit of
the policies of annexation and colonization or any of
the other policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;
9. Requests the Special Committee, pending the
early termination of the Israeli occupation, to continue
to investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, to consult, as
appropriate, with the International Committee of the
Red Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of the
welfare and human rights of the population of the occupied territories, and to report to the Secretary-General
as soon as possible and whenever the need arises thereafter;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To render all necessary facilities to the Special
Committee, including those required for its visits to
the occupied territories, with a view to investigating the
Israeli policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;
(b) To continue to make available additional staff
as may be necessary to assist the Special Committee
in the performance of its tasks;
( c) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports
of the Special Committee, and of information regarding
its activities and findings, by all means available through
the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat and,
where necessary, to reprint those reports of the Special
Committee which are no longer available;
(d) To report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session on the tasks entrusted to him in the
present paragraph;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories".
JO 1st plenary meeting
16 December 1976

D
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3240 C (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 and 3525 C (XXX) of 15 December
1975,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, 18
in particular section V thereof, entitled "Quneitra", and
annex III thereto, a report entitled "Quneitra: report
on nature, extent and value of damage", submitted by
a Swiss expert engaged by the Special Committee,
1s Ibid.

52

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

1. Expresses its appreciation of the thoroughness
and impartiality with which the expert engaged by the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
Territories discharged the tasks entrusted to him;
2. Condemns the massive, deliberate destruction of
Quneitra perpetrated during the Israeli occupation and
prior to the withdrawal of Israeli forces from that city
in 1974;
3. Recognizes that the Syrian Arab Republic is
entitled to full and adequate compensation, under international law and in equity, for the massive damage
and deliberate destruction perpetrated in Quneitra while
it was under Israeli occupation, and to all other legal
remedies in accordance with applicable international
law and practice;
4. Takes note of the statements made by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic before the

Special Political Committee, to the effect that his Government reserves all rights to full compensation in regard to all damages resulting from Israel's deliberate
destruction of Quneitra, including those not covered
by the expert's above-mentioned report or not falling
within the scope of his assignment;

5. Requests the Special Committee to complete its
survey on all the aspects referred to in paragraph 4
above and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all the facilities required for
the completion of the tasks referred to in the previous
paragraphs.

101st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
