UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/35
9 July 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3796th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 July 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Afghanistan of 16 June 1997
(S/1997/482).
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the continued
escalation of military confrontation in Afghanistan. It calls for an
immediate end to the fighting.
"The Security Council calls upon all Afghan parties to return to the
negotiating table immediately and to work together towards the formation of
a broad-based, fully representative government that will protect the rights
of all Afghans and abide by Afghanistan's international obligations.
"The Security Council, taking into account risks of regional
destabilization, believes that peace and stability in Afghanistan can best
be attained through intra-Afghan political negotiations under United
Nations auspices with the active and coordinated assistance of all
countries concerned. It urges the Afghan parties and countries concerned
to abide by the provisions of relevant resolutions on Afghanistan adopted
by the Security Council and the General Assembly.
"The Security Council stresses that all external interference in
Afghan affairs must cease, and, in this context, it calls upon all States
to end immediately the supply of arms and ammunition to all parties to the
conflict in Afghanistan.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the continuing
discrimination against girls and women and other violations of human
rights, as well as at violations of international humanitarian law.
"The Security Council reiterates that the continuation of the conflict
in Afghanistan provides a fertile ground for terrorism and illegal drug
97-18913 (E)

090797

/...

S/PRST/1997/35
English
Page 2

production and trafficking which destabilize the region and beyond, and
calls upon the leaders of the Afghan parties to halt such activities.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the worsening of the
humanitarian situation, including the displacement of the civilian
population. In this regard, it calls upon Member States to respond
generously to the 1997 United Nations Consolidated Appeal for Emergency
Humanitarian Assistance for Afghanistan.
"The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the efforts of
the United Nations in Afghanistan, in particular the activities of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA). It requests the
Secretary-General to continue to keep it regularly informed of the
situation and his efforts, as well as those of UNSMA.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
