United Nations

S/PV.4188

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4188

th meeting
Tuesday, 15 August 2000, 10:30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hasmy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Malaysia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Martinsen
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Angell
Mr. Chen Xu
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Ward
Mr. Kasse
Mr. Uanivi
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Kuchynski
Mr. Eldon
Ms. Soderberg

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-60762 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4188

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The President: In the absence of objection, I
shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Bernard Miyet, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Miyet to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Miyet, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations. I give him the floor.
Mr. Miyet: We appreciate your request, Mr.
President, for a briefing on the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), since this
gives us the opportunity to provide Council members
with a progress report on this Mission, as was
suggested by Council members during the last round of
consultations on UNMIBH in June.
Council members will recall that the SecretaryGeneral, in his last report on UNMIBH, which has
been circulated as document S/2000/529, identified
police restructuring, police reform and strengthening of
the common institutions in the police sector as the
main priorities for UNMIBH. I will therefore focus my
briefing on these issues.
In the context of police restructuring, the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) Commissioner
has reduced the allowed maximum police strength in
the Federation by about 1,000, to 10,600, because of
the introduction of the State Border Service and
reduced needs in some of the smaller Federation
cantons. Meanwhile, registrations of police officers
continue, and since 2 June 2000 more than 2,800
additional officers have been registered. The Mission is
on track to conclude the full registration process by

2

mid-December 2000, resulting in the first transparent
and comprehensive Law Enforcement Personnel
Registry in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In parallel to the registration of the current police
officers, UNMIBH continues to assist local authorities
in fulfilling their obligations to ensure adequate
minority representation in their police forces. This is
being done by means of, first, the recruitment of
minority cadets for the police academies; secondly, the
voluntary redeployment of existing minority officers
between entities; and, thirdly, encouragement for
displaced and refugee former police officers to return
to their pre-war homes and rejoin local police forces. In
total, nearly 450 minority officers are currently
attending or have graduated from the two academies,
and 130 minority officers have been identified for
redeployment across entity lines.
To promote police reform, UNMIBH has
continued its efforts to establish police commissioners
in the Federation police, in order to create a
professional, non-partisan, civil-service type of
leadership for the police and insulate it from the direct
political influence of the Ministries of the Interior. In
canton 9 (Sarajevo), which was selected as a pilot
project, the appropriate laws have now been adopted,
and in canton 6 (Central Bosnia), canton 2 (Posavina),
and the Federation and the Republika Srpska Ministries
of the Interior, preparatory work has commenced.
With regard to inter-entity police cooperation and
the strengthening of the common institutions, a major
initiative was taken on 27 June with the establishment
of Joint Entity Task Forces on Illegal Immigration and
Organized Crime through the Ministerial Consultative
Meeting on Police Matters. In practical terms, the
Doboj Public Security Centre in the Republika Srpska
and the canton 2 (Posavina) Ministry of the Interior in
the Federation cooperated to break up a group involved
in drug smuggling and the production of counterfeit
deutsche marks. In the Federation, Croat and Bosniac
officers started to cooperate in the formerly divided
Mostar police in carrying out the joint investigation
and subsequent arrest of a group producing counterfeit
passports.
Inter-entity police cooperation was admirably
demonstrated at the commemoration of the 1995
Srebrenica massacre. Weeks of preparation, led by
UNMIBH and closely coordinated with the
Stabilization Force (SFOR), ensured a peaceful event

S/PV.4188

that was attended by more than 3,000 people. The
Zvornik Public Security Centre in the Republika
Srpska and the canton 3 (Tuzla) Ministry of the Interior
in the Federation had drafted and implemented detailed
security plans, and during the event the IPTF
monitored more than 700 Republika Srpska police
officers who were deployed to the area and were
deemed particularly effective.
(spoke in French)
A visible and significant step towards building
State institutions was the inauguration of the State
Border Service entry point at the Sarajevo airport on 6
June. Similarly, in late July and early August this same,
new Border Service opened three additional crossing
points at Doljani/Metkovic, in an area that was
formerly controlled by Croatian police; at Izacic, which
was formerly controlled by Bosniac police; and at
Zvornik, which was formerly controlled by Serb police.
There are now 358 officers assigned to the State Border
Service. Of this total, 176, or 49 per cent, are Bosniacs;
114, or 32 per cent, are Serbs; 67, or 19 per cent, are
Croats; and there is one “other”. The opening of the
Border Service has enabled the authorities and
UNMIBH to gather reliable data on movements
through the Sarajevo airport and, in particular, on the
apparent organized use of the airport as a point of entry
for illegal immigration into Europe.
Meanwhile,
UNMIBH’s
judicial
system
assessment programme is finalizing its work. It has
concentrated on drafting a set of laws relating to the
police and the courts for the Brcko District. Some of
these laws have already been adopted. Similarly, the
programme has continued with its work to design a
methodology for nominating judges and prosecutors by
means of the newly established Judicial Review
Commissions. This work is being done in close
coordination with the Office of the High
Representative, which, as Council members know, is
expected to assume most of the judicial assessment
functions when UNMIBH’s mandate in this area
expires in the fall of this year.
Finally, it can be reported that the returns of
minority refugees and displaced persons continue to
show progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These
include, in particular, returns to areas that were
formerly considered hard-line in the Republika Srpska,
with 300 Bosnian families having returned to the
Prijedor, Doboj, Visegrad and Foca municipalities. All

in all, over the last six months, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has registered over 19,500 minority internally
displaced persons and refugees returning to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, compared to just over 2,000 returns
registered in the same period last year. Thus, the
increase is very marked here — from 2,000 last year to
more than 19,500 this year. Some Governments, in
particular those of the United States and Germany,
have provided additional resources to encourage and
sustain this return movement.
For its part, in order to facilitate this movement,
UNMIBH continues to advise the local police on
setting up security plans and at the same time monitors
the implementation of these plans, which is generally
considered to be satisfactory thus far. UNMIBH is also
working very closely within the Republika Srpska and
the cantonal Ministries of the Interior to identify and
resolve cases of illegal double activities of police
officers.
In short, and by way of assessment, it can be
noted that UNMIBH continues to move ahead
positively in the implementation of its mandate. There
has been progress in all areas, including inter-entity
law enforcement arrangements and growing day-to-day
cooperation between the Ministers of the Interior of the
Federation and of the Republika Srpska. State
institutions such as the State Border Service are
beginning to function, judicial reform is slowly gaining
ground and restructuring continues in all the entity
police forces. However, although UNMIBH has
instituted mechanisms for minority recruitment of
police officers, still more needs to be done by the local
authorities to ensure that adequate levels of minority
representation are achieved in local police forces, in
line with existing agreements.
The President: I thank Under-Secretary-General
Miyet for his succinct, yet comprehensive, briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I
would like to express our appreciation for this open
meeting on a subject in which the Council and my
country have been deeply engaged over the years.
Before turning to the issue at hand, I would like
to say a word on another subject, on behalf of
Ambassador Holbrooke, who is in Brazil; I would like

3

S/PV.4188

to make just a brief comment on the outcome of the 14
August Lusaka summit on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. While we are disappointed in some aspects,
we are encouraged that there was consensus among the
non-Congolese signatories on concrete measures that
could be taken to further the disengagement of
belligerent forces, hasten the withdrawal of foreign
forces and implement the national dialogue.
There was broad consensus on a number of key
issues, including the restoration of a full and effective
ceasefire; full support for the continuation of Sir
Ketumile Masire as the facilitator of the interCongolese dialogue, with an appeal to the Kinshasa
Government to reconsider its opposition; reaffirmation
of the Kampala ceasefire agreement; a call for the
restoration of the 5 April ceasefire line and for the
completion and implementation of the disengagement
plan; strong support for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) from all belligerent parties,
except the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and also
the Southern African Development Community States’
full endorsement of the need for MONUC to be able to
operate freely and without hindrance and to deploy as
required.
Unfortunately, there was not consensus on these
important points, although I would argue that there is
broad consensus in the international community for
them. We are disappointed that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was not a part of
the consensus on this document and continues to
oppose full implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
The United States calls on the Government in
Kinshasa to honour the agreement it has signed and
will join with all the other parties to the conflict in a
cooperative resolution to the Congolese conflict.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo must lend its full support to the Lusaka
process and desist from its efforts to hinder the work of
former President Masire and the implementation of the
national dialogue. It must provide the requisite security
guarantees, access and cooperation that will enable the
United Nations to deploy its peacekeepers.
The United States remains committed to assisting
in the Lusaka process. The Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement is the most viable means for bringing an
end to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the United States strongly supports it. We

4

strongly support MONUC deployment, once adequate
conditions of security, cooperation and access have
been ensured, and we intend to remain fully engaged
on this important issue.
I appreciate the indulgence of my colleagues on
that issue, but it is one that is of great importance and
one that we will be discussing in the Council later this
week.
Now let me turn briefly to the subject at hand, the
open briefing that we have just had from Mr. Miyet.
We appreciate the update.
Five weeks ago, the Council met to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for another 12 months and to
call for a clear strategy for completing the Mission by
December 2002. As the Secretary-General makes clear
in his latest report, this is a realistic objective that can
be reached if we provide UNMIBH with the resources
it needs to get the job done.
We welcome this briefing on UNMIBH’s progress
since June, and the additional opportunity to discuss
the Secretary-General’s report, which, in our view, did
not get adequate coverage in June.
My Government supports UNMIBH and the
international community’s important priorities: refugee
returns, economic reform and the strengthening of
State institutions. The United States has set aside
significant resources for work in these areas, including
$67.2 million to support minority refugee returns and
close to $2 million for the new State Border Service.
We will also continue our significant contribution,
currently more than 10 per cent of the total force, to the
International Police Task Force (IPTF).
We also commend the work of UNMIBH’s
judicial system assessment program over the last two
years. It has highlighted critical problems in the
judicial system of Bosnia and made important
recommendations.
We welcome the agreement by the Office of the
High Representative to establish an independent
judicial commission, which will closely monitor and
intervene in the upcoming re-vetting process for judges
and prosecutors in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
provide oversight for the Bosnian councils which are
responsible for their appointment and discipline. We
are looking forward to more details as to how and when
the handover from the judicial system assessment

S/PV.4188

programme to the new Commission will occur, as well
as further information on how the programme will be
implemented.
We are encouraged by the positive developments
referred to in the Secretary-General’s report. It is
inspiring to see the dramatic increase in refugee
returns, even of minority groups, to areas that saw
some of the most dramatic violence during the war. We
are seeing slow but continuing progress in setting up
the State Border Service, a key element of the New
York Declaration agreed to by members of the Joint
Presidency during their appearance in the Council last
November.
We need to continue our common efforts to
ensure that all of Bosnia’s joint institutions are
vigorous and effective.
We are encouraged by signs that the nationalism
and hatred of the past are slowly giving way to new
respect for democracy and the rule of law.
There is also good news from Croatia, where the
new, democratic, Mesić-Račan Government has had a
positive impact on the Croat community in Bosnia. We
particularly applaud the strong message of support to
Croatian moderates delivered by Prime Minister Racan
during his recent visit to Bosnia.
But we cannot tolerate continued obstructionism.
In that regard, my delegation fully supports aggressive
use in Bosnia by the High Representative and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
of the mandates provided by the international
community. We applaud efforts to remove or restrain
all those standing in the way of Dayton’s full
implementation: the war criminals remaining at large,
the organized criminals and the nationalist extremists.
Of course, the greatest obstacle to progress in
Bosnia, as in the rest of the region, remains in
Belgrade. The Belgrade authorities continue to obstruct
progress in Bosnia, repress their own people and
threaten democracy in Montenegro. The international
community’s efforts to bring the Balkans into Europe
will never fully succeed until the current regime is
gone.
Despite these obstacles, Bosnia is beginning to
knit together. Much work remains to be done. We
reaffirm our commitment, together with our colleagues
in the international community, to see the task through.

Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Our thanks go to
Under-Secretary-General Bernard Miyet for his
briefing and update on the current situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We recall the last briefing on
developments there, given in an open meeting of the
Council by Special Representative Jacques Paul Klein
on 13 June. In May, we also had an occasion to hear
from High Representative Wolfgang Petritsch. We
found all these briefings very useful and worthwhile.
The Council has extended the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) until 21 June 2001, against the backdrop of
visible and encouraging signs of peace taking root in
that country. We note that the security situation has
stabilized, the return of refugees and displaced persons
is accelerating and political pluralism is gaining
strength. All this indicates steady progress towards
peace and stability. In this context, we would like to
focus on the following four points.
I turn first to the State Border Service. Following
the establishment of the first State Border Service entry
point, on 6 June at the Sarajevo airport, the State
Border Service has been established at a number of
other points. This is an appreciable sign of progress.
We believe this process will be further accelerated by
the adoption of the law on the border service by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament. The authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina should, in coordination with
UNMIBH, work to further accelerate the deployment
of the State Border Service.
Secondly, with regard to an effective judiciary, an
independent and impartial judiciary is a prerequisite for
the establishment of the rule of law. Progress in the
area of judicial reform must be accelerated. In this
context, we consider the strengthening of the
Constitutional Court and the establishment of a State
court to be among the major priorities. The entity
institutions of the country should implement legislation
to remove all political influence from the judicial
branch. UNMIBH has a key role in the area of
consolidating the judicial system, as well as in police
restructuring. We are encouraged by the information
that Under-Secretary-General Miyet shared with us
today on progress in the area of police reform,
particularly as regards the involvement of minorities in
the police force.
Thirdly, the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons remains a real test of commitment to

5

S/PV.4188

the peace process. Some significant progress has been
made recently — and we have also heard from Mr.
Miyet about this — particularly in rural areas, although
the will of citizens to return to their pre-war homes has
not been matched by the actions of authorities at all
levels. The progress in urban return is slower. This
indicates a necessity to implement property legislation
and to enforce the legal rights of all citizens. We
encourage the Bosnian authorities to concentrate
further on these areas.

We believe that it is important for the local
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be more
responsible, which is something the international
community continues to work towards. Five years after
the signing of the Dayton Agreements, the authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina must take charge of the
future of their country. Moreover, the approach taken
by UNMIBH is appropriate: its support is of a
transitional nature and is not meant to continue
indefinitely.

Fourthly, with regard to economic reconstruction,
some large-scale post-war reconstruction—particularly
in the infrastructural sector—has been taking place in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is expected to drive
economic growth. In order to achieve the objective of
self-sustaining growth, efforts should be concentrated
on encouraging private-sector-led development and on
creating conditions for a single economic space in the
country. The donors should continue their support for
achieving these objectives.

Allow me to recall the contribution of France to
the International Police Task Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. With 106 policemen, we are the fourthlargest contributor. The European Union is overall the
major aid contributor to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
having contributed 2.5 billion euros since 1991. I
would also note that the French Presidency of the
European Union is now making preparations for a
summit to be held next fall among countries of the
European Union and all the countries of the western
Balkans, beginning of course with Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We note that some important initiatives have been
launched and that some gains have been achieved. But
much of the progress will depend on overcoming
obstruction and delays. We hope that with the
willingness and commitment of all parties concerned
and the continued efforts of UNMIBH, considerable
progress will be possible in achieving peace and
development objectives in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Bernard Miyet for his briefing
on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The areas he has covered
are indeed the priority issues that emerged during the
last Peace Implementation Conference, held at Brussels
on 23 and 24 May 2000, namely, speeding up the return
of refugees and displaced persons and strengthening
common institutions. France would like to express it
full support for the work of the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).
The existence of other regional crises must not
cause us to distance ourselves from the issues
pertaining to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We must remain
very attentive to what is happening there, and we must
ensure that the necessary resources continue to be
devoted to it. In particular, work in the area of police is
essential if we wish — and it is both our wish and that
of the international community — to establish a State
of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina, or even just a State.

6

Mr. Bernard Miyet has already answered most of
the questions I wanted to ask, but I have a few left. My
first question has to do with the assessment of the
judicial system. Mr. Miyet has told us that after the
programme’s anticipated end in December 2000, it will
be the responsibility of the High Representative. It is
important that the experience gained by the 18 experts
in the area of judicial system assessment not be lost. It
is therefore very important that the programme
continue after December 2000. I just have a question as
to how financing will be made available to the
programme after December 2000. I understand that the
High Representative will be responsible for the
programme, but how will its work be carried out? What
activities are envisaged by the United Nations
Development Programme and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in this area?
My second question relates to refugees and
displaced persons. Mr. Miyet gave us some very
interesting figures on the marked increase in the
number of returns. He also said that the returns are now
taking place even in the most sensitive areas,
particularly in the Republika Srpska. Can he give us a
general breakdown of the returns by entity and by
ethnic origin?

S/PV.4188

Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): We would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Miyet for his very
informative, comprehensive and encouraging briefing.
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 1247
(1999), the progress achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in furthering the implementation of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement has in fact been
substantive. We think that a significant contribution to
the overall success reached so far by the international
community has been made through the strenuous
efforts of the United Nations system organizations,
headed and coordinated by the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). My delegation
feels that UNMIBH and the International Police Task
Force (IPTF), as its core component, continue to play a
crucial role in the implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Peace Agreement, in particular in
establishing the mechanisms for the rule of law.
Ukraine commends the activities carried out by
UNMIBH in the fields of police restructuring and
reform, building common institutions, establishing a
judicial system and ensuring respect for human rights.
We acknowledge the professionalism of the IPTF,
which carried out the mandate in difficult conditions of
reduced authorized strength, mainly because of the
additional requirements for Kosovo.
At the same time, we think that much has yet to
be done in the field of police minority recruitment in
both entities, as well as in providing security to the
minority returnees. We also believe that more attention
should be paid to accelerating the process of crossborder refugee return to Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its neighbouring countries. In our view, one of the
major tasks today is to ensure that the leaders and the
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina are totally
committed to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in full, while realizing that the future of
their country is mainly their responsibility. In this
regard, we share certain misgivings expressed at the
latest meeting of the Peace Implementation Council in
Brussels on the current insufficient level of
commitment demonstrated by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to the peace process.
It is obvious that there is still a long way to go to
make the process of peace, reconciliation, stability and
democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina irreversible. In
this regard, we believe that the Security Council should
continue to give its solid support to the activities of
UNMIBH and strongly encourage the Bosnia and

Herzegovina authorities to demonstrate their firm
commitment to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in full cooperation with UNMIBH.
I would like to reiterate Ukraine’s determination,
as a contributor to the IPTF, to continue its
participation. In conclusion, let me wish further
success to all the staff of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in pursuit of our common
strategy aimed at restoring lasting peace and stability
in that part of the Balkans.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Thank you, Mr.
President, for arranging this meeting, and thanks to
Under-Secretary-General Miyet for another extremely
useful briefing.
It is clear that Bosnia is heading towards a busy
autumn, or perhaps I should say fall. General elections
will be held in November. The Constitutional Court
ruling on the constituent people’s issue and the recently
passed and amended law on the Izetbegović succession
will continue to generate strong political debate. The
Stabilization Force and the Office of the High
Representative are actively working with local leaders
on taking forward defence restructuring, and, as UnderSecretary-General Miyet has said, refugee returns are
continuing apace and with spontaneous returns in
particular raising the temperature locally, although of
course it is extremely welcome that the numbers of
people returning are going up.
Against this background, the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and
the International Police Task Force (IPTF) are to be
particularly commended for their sustained effort. It is
very clear that Special Representative Klein and his
team deserve our thanks and compliments for a very
well-executed programme. Particular congratulations
are due for the operational successes they have had,
such as the recent opening of more State Border
Service posts, to which Under-Secretary-General Miyet
and others around the table have referred. But it will be
particularly vital for UNMIBH to maintain its pressure
on the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to make real
progress in tackling the problems of smuggling,
organized crime and illegal immigration. As
Ambassador Chowdhury said, progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina often depends on overcoming problems
and overcoming delays, and sustained pressure in that
area will continue to be vital.

7

S/PV.4188

It is also clear from the complex number of issues
going on at the moment in Bosnia and Herzegovina
that close cooperation and coordination between
UNMIBH and the other international organizations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be crucial as the reform
agenda moves forward, and I am sure that we can count
on Special Representative Klein and his staff to ensure
that that cooperation and coordination take place.
Finally, when Special Representative Klein
briefed the Council in June, he indicated that UNMIBH
had started work on an exit strategy for the Mission, a
point to which Ambassador Soderberg also referred.
We would welcome more details from UnderSecretary-General Miyet of how this work is
progressing, and it would be helpful at an appropriate
stage to have sight of a written plan. It is clear that the
financial and personnel implications of the exit strategy
will need to be carefully considered by the United
Kingdom and other contributing countries as early as
possible. As work progresses, I should also stress the
importance of tying the exit strategy to the
achievement of specific objectives. Here again the
coordination with other international organizations
working in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be crucial.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Miyet for his
informative briefing.
Five years after Dayton, there is progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the progress is slow and
much remains to be done. One field of rather
spectacular progress this year has been that of refugee
return to minority areas. This year witnessed the return
of three times as many internally displaced persons as
the year before. We consider this a very positive
development. As refugee return is a sort of yardstick
for the assessment of the situation in the minds of
displaced persons, this sharp rise testifies to progress
achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Unfortunately,
we also hear reports on growing tension in the
Republika Srpska on the issue of returnees. In this light
we reiterate our call on all parties to work towards a
democratic and multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Netherlands is concerned about the
relationship between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
financial institutions, especially the World Bank. A
review is due on 30 November, and it seems that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will have the greatest
difficulty in meeting the conditions for further

8

disbursements. The budgets of both the Federation and
the Republika Srpska show considerable gaps,
amounting to almost 30 per cent of the total. Measures
must be taken to address this situation.
We are aware that these budget gaps are partly
caused by revenues being much lower than estimated.
There may be several reasons for that, but two seem to
stand out. One is the weakness of the system of duty
and tax collection. There is a clear need for more
vigorous enforcement here, but this will be feasible
only once the institutional structures of law
enforcement and of an effective judicial system are in
place. We know that these structures are being set up,
but this is a field where progress is slow.
Another reason for the budget deficits is
corruption and crime. It has been estimated that every
year $500 million of domestic revenue is lost due to
smuggling, particularly of cigarettes. Without this loss
of revenue there would be no budget deficit.
Smuggling on such a huge scale implies that high-level
Government officials must be involved.
My delegation is aware of Bosnian efforts to curb
corruption and crime, but we feel that much more
needs to be done. It is obvious that crime and
corruption risk impeding the successful implementation
of the Dayton and Paris Peace Agreements. In this
connection, it has been pointed out that the country is
going through many simultaneous transitions. We grant
this, but the conclusion can only be that the Bosnian
authorities must redouble their efforts to stamp out
crime and corruption. They must be aware that foreign
aid is not an infinite commodity.
Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation joins
colleagues in thanking Mr. Bernard Miyet for updating
us on the latest developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We recognize the important work being
carried out by the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
(UNMIBH)
in
establishing
mechanisms for the rule of law and in implementing
the peace process. We note in particular the efforts of
UNMIBH in the area of police reform and
restructuring. Of equal importance is the assessment
and restructuring of the judicial system. Effective local
police and judicial institutions are critical elements in
efforts at creating self-sustaining peace. It is therefore
important that judicial reform continue to be a priority.
We are encouraged by the briefing we received
today. While we recognize that there are still many

S/PV.4188

challenges, we believe that these incremental steps
forward demonstrate that progress is possible even
under very difficult circumstances. The acceptance of
accountability and responsibility by local leaders is
crucial to the process, and the ultimate success of
UNMIBH’s work will depend on the continued
cooperation of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
During the past few weeks we have had
encouraging reports of increasing numbers of refugee
returns. We are concerned, however, about reports that
local authorities have been slow to act on the illegal
occupancy of homes of returnees. It has been reported
that illegal occupancy is the biggest single barrier to
returns. My delegation would like to hear from Mr.
Miyet about what steps, if any, are being taken or are
contemplated to correct this situation.
Mr. Martinsen (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by echoing the thanks conveyed by
earlier speakers to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Bernard Miyet, for the
briefing he just gave us on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and on the activities of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).
At present, certain events and facts permit some
optimism about the consolidation of political
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina with a view to
building a modern democratic State, five years after the
conclusion of the Dayton Accords. Those events
include the opening of some State Border Service
posts, as mentioned by Mr. Miyet, at Sarajevo, Izacic
and other locations. We think this is a particularly
significant step in the fight against smuggling and
illegal migration.
Another positive fact is that the Council of
Ministers has approved the amendment of passport
legislation to make possible a single Bosnia and
Herzegovina passport. That helps meet one of the
commitments made to the Security Council last year by
the three members of the Joint Presidency.
My delegation is particularly pleased at Mr.
Miyet’s comments on the increased rate of return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to their
homes, in particular in areas where there had been the
greatest difficulties in this regard.
A matter for regret was that the High
Representative felt obliged to remove the Minister of
Agriculture, Water Resources and Forestry of the

Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Director
of the Federation Tax Administration from their posts
in view of their obstructive behaviour, which was
hampering the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. The Council and the international
community as a whole should lend full support to the
High Representative as he works to build and
consolidate joint democratic participatory institutions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
wish first of all to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Miyet, for his
briefing. The Chinese delegation notes that there have
been some improvements in the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the last time the Security Council
met on this item. The United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and its
International Police Task Force (IPTF) have made
important contributions in that regard. We welcome the
progress that UNMIBH has made in reforming and
training the police force, and the Mission’s efforts to
strengthen the country’s legal structures. At the same
time, we note that the situation with regard to the
recruitment of police officers from among minority
groups is not yet satisfactory; it is our hope that
UNMIBH’s efforts in that regard will continue.
The overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains to be stable, and the Dayton Peace Agreement
is being implemented. This is a source of satisfaction
for us, as these developments are due to the political
will and cooperation demonstrated by the peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, progress in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement is taking place at a far slower pace
than the international community had expected,
especially with respect to capacity-building in the area
of self-government; reconciliation and harmony among
the different ethnic groups; post-war reconstruction;
and the return of minority refugees. Indeed, a great
deal of work remains to be done by the parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We have always believed that a comprehensive
and thorough settlement of the question of Bosnia and
Herzegovina lies ultimately with the people
themselves.
The
international
community,
in
participating in the reconstruction process, must abide
by the principle that the people themselves should play
the primary role. It must also respect their will and

9

S/PV.4188

focus its work on helping them to achieve selfgovernment and gradually to reduce their dependency
on foreign aid, so as to prevent the re-emergence of
social and political problems once international
assistance is reduced.
I should like to take this opportunity to emphasize
that the achievement of national reconciliation is the
fundamental prerequisite for the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be able to live peacefully and in
harmony. There is still a long way to go before this
goal can be achieved, as extremist and radical elements
continue to exist in all of the parties.
The international community, including the
United Nations, must make greater efforts to promote
national reconciliation among all ethnic groups in
Bosnia and Herzegovina so as to ultimately build a
unified, democratic, multi-ethnic and economically
self-reliant Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We have listened with great interest to
the very comprehensive briefing by Mr. Miyet, and we
thank him for the information he has provided the
Council on the situation.
We share the view that significant progress has
been made in the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also
believe, however, that its pace is too slow. Indeed,
efforts should be consolidated and made speedier so as
to ensure that the peace process can proceed of its own
momentum.
We believe that the efforts of the international
community and the sacrifices made by the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will succeed in bringing about
a lasting peace, in particular following the commitment
made by the Joint Presidency in the New York
Declaration.
The participation of all parties in the
establishment of a multi-ethnic society on the basis of
democratic institutions will ensure the success of this
undertaking. That is why we deem it necessary to work
to reduce the continued resistance to change, which is
hampering the full implementation of the Dayton
Agreement.
We believe that the State should address the
activities of the extremist nationalist groups, inter alia

10

by promoting a culture of peace and tolerance and by
engaging in a common political process in which all
Bosnian citizens can participate fully, without
discrimination.
We commend the continuing reform, restructuring
and change in the mono-ethnic character of the police
forces, which should ultimately lead to the appropriate
representation of minorities within the police system in
the Federation. It is up to the police at this crucial stage
to promote social peace and to prohibit any actions
based on ethnic considerations alone.
The judicial system assessment programme must
be translated into concrete actions emphasizing reform
so as to ensure the independence, impartiality and
effectiveness of the system.
As concerns the return of refugees and displaced
persons, we welcome the return of a large number of
refugees. It is of paramount importance to continue
efforts to ensure the full implementation of this
process. Conditions conducive to their return must be
created, in particular as concerns the minorities, so as
to help build a multi-ethnic society in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute once
again to the members of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the Stabilization Force
for their commendable and dedicated work in
implementing the mandate entrusted to them.
Mr. Angell (Canada): My delegation joins others
who have spoken in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Miyet for his very informative briefing. My own
comments will be very brief.
Canada supports High Representative Petritsch’s
decision to amend the law on filling a vacant position
of a Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This decision will strengthen the
conformity of the law with the spirit of the Constitution
and will help to ensure the efficiency of the election
process.
We believe that a coherent and integrated strategy
is essential if the development of the rule of law in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is to be sustained. In this
regard, Canada commends the work and achievements
of the judicial system assessment programme under the
auspices of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

S/PV.4188

We are encouraged by the fact that progress is
being made in changing the composition of police
forces to better reflect the multi-ethnic character of
their communities, and we welcome the details
provided by Mr. Miyet in this regard. We encourage the
Bosnian authorities to cooperate fully with UNMIBH
in establishing professional and accountable multiethnic police forces.
The return of refugees and displaced persons to
their pre-war homes is a top priority. The Bosnian
authorities must implement fully measures likely to
foster returns, such as the property law, and must cease
to obstruct legal evictions. Progress on this front is
critical in measuring the real commitment of Bosnia’s
authorities to a lasting peace within the Dayton
framework.
We must also keep the pressure on Croatia and
the Republika Srpska to ensure that they follow
through on their commitments and take the appropriate
actions to fully implement the agreement they signed
last March on two-way refugee return.
Canada will assume command of Multinational
Division (South-west) this October on a rotational
basis with the United Kingdom and the Netherlands.
We are determined to play a strong role within our
sector of command, particularly with regard to refugee
returns and the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Miyet for his
informative briefing on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that regular reports to the
Council, pursuant to Security Council resolutions on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, help to ensure
a closer monitoring of the operations of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH).
We also deem it important to ensure that the
settlement process is stable and irreversible in order to
strengthen the multi-ethnic statehood of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the basis of democratic changes and
respect for the rights of all peoples of that country.
As is well known, the key to success here is full
and consistent respect for the Dayton Peace
Agreement. However, the basic responsibility for the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina lies with the
Bosnians themselves. We hope that the new generation

of Bosnian politicians, who will take charge of the
country following the elections this fall, will be able to
energetically begin resolving the remaining tasks.
There are quite a lot of such tasks.
Unfortunately, we must say that implementation
of the provisions of the Dayton Agreement is
proceeding slowly. The common governmental
institutions in Bosnia are operating ineffectively.
Political change in the country is being hindered by
nationalist forces. Social tension is still growing, and
there has been no decline in inter-ethnic confrontation.
Recently, problems regarding the return of
refugees to Bosnia and Herzegovina have appeared to
be exacerbated. There have been a series of incidents
involving acts of violence. This disorder has shown
that there is an acute problem in providing alternative
housing for Bosnians returning to their homes. We
believe that a solution to this problem must be allencompassing.
We note that the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is taking steps to
normalize the socio-political processes for developing
Bosnian statehood. Russia continues to support the
work of the United Nations Mission and of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR), as important elements in
the international effort to move the Bosnian settlement
forward. The United Nations Mission plays an
important role in coordinating the activities of all the
international organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Thanks to its contribution, law and order is being
strengthened and the local police are becoming
increasingly professional and are being reorganized on
an inter-ethnic basis. The judicial system is being
reformed, and attempts are being made to combat
organized crime and corruption. A single multi-ethnic
border service has now been established and is
gradually taking over the control of all the entry points
on the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same
time, UNMIBH still has to do a lot to neutralize the
taking of narrow ethnic approaches and also to combat
illegal activities in the police and judicial areas.
We believe that raising questions about the
establishment of a single defence system in Bosnia and
Herzegovina — and even more, of a single, common
Bosnian army — runs counter to the provisions of the
Dayton Agreement. Under that document, questions
involving defence lie exclusively within the
competence of the entities and can be shifted to

11

S/PV.4188

common Bosnian institutions only with the consent of
the entities.
We also confirm our position that having SFOR
contingents arresting persons indicted by the Tribunal
runs counter to SFOR’s mandate. Unfortunately, it has
still not been possible to rid the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia of all elements of
politicization or to bring its activities into accordance
with its statute and the decisions of the Security
Council.
We would also like to confirm our deep
conviction that attempts under any pretext whatsoever
to isolate the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from the
Balkan settlement processes are counterproductive.
They simply provoke new crises in the region, and they
run counter to the spirit of the Dayton Agreements, one
of the signatories to which is Yugoslavia.
Russia, for its part, will continue to make an
active and constructive contribution to developing the
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis
of the strict implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreements. We believe that the work of UNMIBH
should continue to be directed towards this end.
Mr. Uanivi (Namibia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting on the
implementation of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Miyet for his valuable briefing on
the current developments in the country.
We note with appreciation the overall improved
situation within which the programme on police reform
and restructuring continues to make incremental
progress. In this regard, Namibia acknowledges the
activities of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in assisting local authorities
with meeting their obligations, inter alia, to institute a
common Border Service, to increase minority police
recruitment and/or transfer minority police officers to
various locations throughout the country; and to attract
displaced and former police officers to return to their
pre-war homes and rejoin the local police forces there.
In addition there is the ongoing registration programme
geared towards establishing a personnel data bank of
authorized police officers in country.
We appreciate also the rate of return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to the pre-war areas;
however, we take serious note of the open

12

obstructionism and lack of political will on the part of
local authorities with respect to the implementation of
the property laws.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to commend
all the personnel of the various international
institutions, including the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the International Police
Task Force, who have dedicated their lives and their
time to a good cause: to help the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina reconstruct their lives and build a multiethnic society.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Malaysia.
My delegation, too, would like to thank UnderSecretary-General
Bernard
Miyet
for
his
comprehensive and useful briefing on the latest
developments and the ongoing work of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH).
We are gratified by the progress that has been
made in the implementation of the 1995 Dayton Peace
Agreement. UNMIBH, under the leadership of Special
Representative Jacques Klein, continues to solidify the
establishment of the rule of law through the
restructuring and strengthening of the local police and
judicial system. Equally important are efforts by High
Representative Wolfgang Petritsch and his Office, and
by the Stabilization Force (SFOR) and other
international organizations, to further consolidate the
path towards peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
fully support these efforts and appreciate the
achievements made so far.
We nonetheless recognize that progress in the
peace process has thus far been slow and has fallen
short of expectations. Much remains to be done and
many challenges remain to be overcome before Bosnia
can enjoy self-sustaining peace and security. Further
determined efforts should therefore be made with a
view to tackling effectively the core issues or
challenges that continue to impede the building of a
democratic, unified and multi-ethnic Bosnia and
Herzegovina, within its internationally recognized
borders.
One of the main challenges that remains is the
need to strengthen Bosnian State institutions. These
institutions must be able to carry out their functions
and responsibilities effectively. We are concerned by

S/PV.4188

the continuing obstacles to the smooth functioning of
these joint institutions, in particular the Joint
Presidency and the State Parliament, which are
necessary if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to be viable as
a State. The leaders of Bosnia must exercise their
political will to work together for the common good of
the country, and not for their sectarian and other shortterm interests.
This underlines the urgent need for much stronger
commitment and cooperation on the part of the Bosnian
leadership and people at every level, in order to match
the commitment and contributions of the international
community to the peace process. Ultimately, the main
responsibility
for
achieving
peace,
national
reconciliation and nation-building lies with the people
of Bosnia themselves.
We are pleased with the progress made in
consolidating the Bosnian State Border Service. We
welcome the recent steps to further strengthen the
Service by deploying it at additional entry points.
The State Border Service not only is a vital
political symbol of Bosnian statehood, but also is
essential in the fight against trafficking and transborder
organized crime. We strongly support the efforts being
made at restructuring and integrating the military
forces of the two Bosnian entities. A unified Bosnia
cannot afford to have two separate armies.
The return of refugees and displaced persons is
another major challenge; nearly every problem in
Bosnia today stems from this core problem. The safe
return of all refugees and displaced persons to their
homes is an important ingredient for lasting peace in
that country. We have been encouraged to learn of an
increase in the number of returns in recent months.
However, the return process overall has been slow.
Well over 1 million refugees and internally displaced
persons are still not able to return to their pre-war
homes. The situation is much worse in the case of the
so-called minority returns and the return to urban areas.
The overall return process to the Republika Srpska is
still much slower, compared to other areas in the
Federation. Political and administrative obstructions
still impede the return process. So do return-related
violence and intimidation. Clearly, further effective
measures should be taken to effectively address these
problems.
On 13 July 2000, the Council issued a
commemorative statement on the anniversary of the

tragic event at Srebenica. We recalled the horrors of
ethnic cleansing and gross violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights that characterized
the Bosnian conflict. Reconciliation after that conflict
will obviously require a long time for healing, as well
as the meting out of justice for the perpetrators of those
heinous crimes. In this regard, we wish to underline
once again the important role of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and to emphasize that the necessary support should be
extended to it so as to enable it to fully carry out its
mandate. We reiterate our call for more serious efforts
to be made to bring those indicted by the ICTY to
justice, especially the major figures, such as Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, who continue to enjoy
freedom and impunity.
This also contributes to the climate of insecurity
that limits refugee returns, particularly in minority
areas. The arrest and prosecution of war criminals is
not only an issue of justice, but also one that will have
important and long-lasting effects on Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s ability to form a democratic State,
institute
market reform and effect national
reconciliation among the ethnic groups. In this regard,
we would encourage the Office of the High
Representative and the Stabilization Force to work
more closely with the Tribunal.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Bernard Miyet to
respond to the comments and questions addressed to
him.
Mr. Miyet (spoke in French): I will endeavour to
respond to the various points and questions addressed
to me. Let me begin with the two questions posed by
the representative of France.
First of all, on the future of the judicial system
assessment programme, its means of financing and its
coordination with other programmes, let me say that
this particular programme has always been and will
continue to be part of a broader programme covering
the whole of the judicial and system and involving
various regional organizations — the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as well as
the Council of Europe, which bears some responsibility
in this regard. All of this falls under the coordination
and authority of the High Representative. Of course, it
will be for the High Representative himself, following

13

S/PV.4188

consultations with the parties and international
organizations, to determine how to pursue the
assessment programme that was undertaken initially by
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). The Special Representative and his team
have
constantly
cooperated
with
the
High
Representative and continue to do so. Mr. Jacques
Klein recently travelled with the High Representative
to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg to discuss
matters relating to the follow-up of the implementation
of the programme from the standpoint of a transfer of
activities.

I would also note that this movement of displaced
persons has expanded since the time it became, in fact,
more spontaneous. There had been a lot more
resistance on the part of the receiving populations,
communities or municipalities when the international
community tried to organize, as the case dictated, a
rather strong-armed approach to the return of refugees.
But it seems now that families are returning
spontaneously to their original communities, and this is
taking place in a way that appears to be more
acceptable and more flexible. I think this is a lesson for
the international community and the Mission to learn.

With respect to the means of financing, it is clear
that that responsibility will no longer be a United
Nations responsibility; it will no longer be an activity
financed from the UNMIBH peacekeeping budget. It
will be up to donor countries and the High
Representative to determine how this activity will be
funded in future. This no longer falls within the
responsibility and jurisdiction of the Secretariat, and I
am convinced that, in the framework of the follow-up
conferences to the Dayton Agreements, this matter,
upon the initiative of the High Representative, can be
discussed. For our part, we will provide the whole set
of documents that have been prepared and will make
the necessary proposals so that the staff who have
worked for UNMIBH can, depending on their own
personal wishes, be transferred on negotiated terms to
the High Representative’s Office.

(spoke in English)

The second question raised was a more specific
one concerning the returns of refugees and internally
displaced persons. I do not have with me specific
figures, canton by canton, or community by
community. I will ask our Mission on the ground and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), as well as the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), to provide more
specific figures; but what is clear is that there are
returns of Serb families to areas with a majority of
Croat or Bosniac families, as well as returns of Bosniac
families to majority Serb or Croat areas. This is
actually not really the case for Croats, who so far are
not moving from one area to another. Despite the
agreement
established
between
the
Croatian
Government and that of Bosnia and Herzegovina, there
has been no Croat movement across the border in order
to return to Bosnia and Herzegovina. So, essentially,
for the time being, two of the communities are
benefiting from these movements, but not the other.

14

There was also a serious question raised by
Jamaica on the question of illegal occupancy. It is clear
that the return of refugees and how one tries to promote
it are key problems.
As has been said, on the more general matter, we
can record about 30 or 50 evictions — I would say,
forced evictions — a week in order to vacate
accommodations that are illegally occupied. But this is
done when the eviction is backed up by the capacity to
find new accommodations for the families that we want
to leave the apartment. So I would say the difficulty is
more closely linked to the availability of
accommodations and trying to move people as
humanely as possible.
As concerns more assertive measures in a very
particular area, we are right now, as I have said, trying
to promote the process of registering police officers. In
particular, we are trying to promote the redeployment
of police officers to the locations where they are from
in order to push the policemen themselves to try and
respect the law.
With regard to where we are now in the process
of registration, we are identifying police officers who
are “double occupants”. They are given two choices:
either to leave the police force or to vacate their
apartments. In a way, I would say that, at least for these
institutions, we are trying to promote a situation in
which we create the conditions for the policemen
themselves to see to it that these laws are respected.
Through the International Police Task Force, we
are also following very carefully what the local police
forces are doing with regard to the issue of double
occupancy in order to determine whether decisions are
followed up once they are taken.

S/PV.4188

The OSCE is also employing a similar measure
during the registration process of persons wishing to be
candidates in elections. Persons who are double
occupants also have two choices: either to be struck
from the list of candidates or to vacate their illegally
occupied apartments.
So I would say that this is a way to try to have a
policy at all levels that is also respectful of the social
and human problems. But at least those persons who
have an official role or image to uphold try to respect
this rule.
The last question was raised by Ambassador
Eldon and pertained to what he called an exit strategy,
although I myself would not use that term. I would use
the term “implementation strategy”. I would say that
this is more of a tentative date than it is a formal one,
and it is a way to try to see how we can achieve the
objectives and determine the desired end. This is what
was discussed at the retreat of Security Council
members, and we have tried to keep it in mind. So it is
a way to try to anticipate and determine what might be
the objectives and the benchmarks.
On this first point, it is clear that for us the
objectives and the benchmarks are linked to the
mandate of UNMIBH and its specific mandates relating
to the police. I will not go into detail, but I think this
would be linked to the status of registrations and to the
professionalization of the police to ensure that every
officer has been trained and equipped and that he has
behaved in the right manner, as well at to ensure in
particular that everyone has been checked in
connection with war crimes.
In terms of benchmarks, one also wants to have
the mechanisms necessary to ensure that a level of
minority recruitment is reached that is acceptable to the
international community. More generally, I would say
that one would also want to have in hand the elements
that will allow for a minimum level of transparency
and accountability mechanisms within local police
forces. We will also have all the sectoral plans and
know how the police forces in each entity and the
common policy institutions are functioning. So I think
all these elements will have to be in place. I am sure
that the Council will have the other elements when a
new report is presented at the end of December.
The second aspect that Ambassador Eldon
referred to has to do with the fact that the achievement
of the objectives of UNMIBH cannot be seen in

isolation from the efforts made in other areas. Here he
referred to cooperation with other organizations
involved in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In our minds it is
clear — and in this regard we always refer to our
colleagues in the Stabilization Force — that there is a
link between civilian and military activities. As the
Council knows, at some point we also wondered what
the exit strategy might be for the military component
and what the impact of that would be on the civilian
component. So what we do on our side must be closely
linked to, and we must have close cooperation and
discussions with, the military component.
As was referred to in the questions pertaining to
the judicial system, we will also have to interact with
civilian regional organizations that are dealing with
elements closely connected to what we do. This is
clearly the case with the Council of Europe, the
European Union and the OSCE. A benchmark here
might be similar to our achievement in Eastern
Slavonia, where we transferred ultimate responsibility
for the police to another organization. I would say that
the exemplary transfer of responsibility that took place
in that case might, at some point, also be something
that could be envisioned if necessary. I do not know
what the situation will be.
There is just one more point that will also have to
be taken into account. It is clear that what we will have
to do in Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be seen in
isolation from what happens in the region. It is clear to
everyone that the situation and developments in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have a real impact on
the pace of reform and on the constitution of the
Bosnian State. I would say that this may either
facilitate that process or create hurdles for it. So we
will also have to try to keep this point in mind. I am
sure that the members of the Council will follow those
developments with great interest.
In conclusion, I would just like to praise Mr.
Jacques Klein and his team for the excellent work that
they are doing in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would say
that the stamina and energy demonstrated by Jacques
Klein since he has been there is impressive. I would
also like to praise his creativity in what has been a
success story. I believe it is a very good move that he is
now trying to put together a mixed contingent of
peacekeepers made up of policemen from Bosnia and
Herzegovina to go to East Timor. I think this is due to
his forceful nature. I was there in July to spend a day at
the Mission. It is true that when one goes to different

15

S/PV.4188

missions one can feel each one’s atmosphere. I have
found in Bosnia and Herzegovina the same kind of
cohesiveness, energy and enthusiasm that I experienced
with him in Eastern Slavonia.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The President: I thank Under-Secretary-General
Miyet for the clarifications and answers he has
provided.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

16
