UV1TE.D NATIONS

THIRTY-THIRD

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2062) . , . , . . . . . . , . , . . . . . , . . . . . . , . , . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Upper Volta to the United Nations addressed.to the President
of the Security Council (S/l 2578) , , . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . .

1

f=--

m-.----m-

*

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly

Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2062nd MEETING
I-I&I in New York

on Tuesday,

President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union bf Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2062)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the ChargC d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Upper
Volta to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12578)
l%e meeting was culled to order ut 4.1.5 p.m.

7 March 1978, at 3.30 p.m.
3. In view of the limited number of pIaces at the Council
table, I invite the representative of Kenya to take the place
reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber on the
ususl understanding that he will be invited to take a place
at the Council table whenever he wishes to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maina (Ken,va)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received a letter dated 7 March from the
representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria, This letter
has been distributed as document S/12585 and reads as
follows:
‘&We, the undersigced members of the Security Council,
kave the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to consideration of the ‘Question concerning the
situation in Southern Rhodesia’, the Council extend
invitations under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Robert G. Mugabe and Mr. Joshua M.
Nkomo, Co-leaders of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe.”

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Chargh d’llffaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of the Upper Volta to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12578)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at its 2061st meeting, I invite the
representatives of Angola, Benin, Mozambique, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia to
participate in the debate without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr, Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Lobo (Mozambique), Mr. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania),
I%&.Bamba (Upper Volta) and Miss Konie (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that a letter has been received from the
representative of Kenya in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with Article 3 1 of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

5. As there is no objection to the request, I intend, at the
appropriate moment, to invite Mr. Mugabe and Mr. Nkomo
to make their statements.
It was so decided.
6. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have before
them the text of a letter dated 6 March from the ChargB
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Algeria to the
United Nations [S/12-783] transmitting the text of a letter
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria.
7. The first speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
8. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique): Mr. President, on speaking
for the first time at this series of meetings of the Council, I
should like first of all to pay my tribute to you personally
and, through you, to all the members of the Council and
the people they represent. To you, I want to reaffirm the
total support of the People’s Republic of Mozambique in
your search for a just settlement of the particular issue in
question, namely, a settlement in Southern Rhodesia,
which for a long time now has been a concern of the
international community.
9. Once more we find ourselves debating in the Council
the question of the British colony of Southern Rhodesia,
where the illegal racist regime still defies the opinion and

will of the international community and has for the last
decade systematically ignored the resolutions of this august
body.
10. Ever since Ian Smith illegally occupied that Territory,
every attempt to reach a peaceful solution of the problem
has not only failed but has been received by the minority
and the illegal regime at Salisbury with a clearcut answer of
total challenge, expressed in various ways ranging from
simple disregard of the public opinion expressed by the
United Nations to acts of aggression and violations of the
territory of neighbouring sovereign States, where Smith has
been committing some of the most barbaric massacres ever
known to mankind. And now he has assumed the dual role
of rebel slAbordinate and administering Power, unilaterally
exercising the prerogatives rightfully belonging to the
colonial Power. Or should we assume that this carries the
blessing of that same colonial Power?

two Territories within South Africa’s sphere of influenceinasmuch as South Africa would support them economically, politically and materially-would
be enabled to
proceed with its policy of bantustanization of South Africa,
and henceforth would be supported by the puppet govemments of independent Zimbabwe and Namibia, to the
detriment of Africa.
16. Once again, the international community should not
remain indifferent to this further affront and challenge
from the illegal regime at Salisbury. It must stop this action
because, if it fails to adopt proper measures to block the
so-called internal settlement, such failure will put the entire
United Nations in a position of contradiction, since the
Organization has designated Lieutenant-General Prem
Chand as its representative in Rhodesia during the transi.
tional period.

11. Only today, a fresh report of another aggressive raid
hy Smith’s racist forces has come over the foreign news
wires. Reuters reported that Rhodesian security forces had
struck into neighbouring Zambia killing at least 38 Zim.
babweans and many Zambians and causing new and costly
damage to property.

17. My country considers that the Anglo-American proposals provide some basic elements for the negotiations ta
be carried out with the Patriotic Front, the legitimate
representative of the people of Zimbabwe, with a view to’
finding a negotiable solution to the problem, as was said by
my President, Mr. Samora MoisCs Machel, in his statement
before the General Assembly on 3 October 1977.1

12. To this moment, Smith has exhibited all this arrogance
apparently towards the United Kingdom, the administering
Power of the Southern Rhodesian colony, and towards the
international community. One is tempted to ask where all
this force exhibited by Smith comes from, Who is behind
him, causing him to behave in such a bold way from 11
November 1965 to this latest manoeuvre of the so-called
internal settlement? It is evident that, without the support
which Smith gets from his Western allies, the racist and
illegal Smith r4&rne would not have survived all the
measures adopted by the United Nations, although those
measures unfortunately have not been honoured by some
of the Members which have not complied with the action
initiated by the international community.

18. To ignore the Patriotic Front and not to proceed with
the negotiations on the basis of the Anglo-American
proposals will not contribute in any way to a peaceful
solution of the Rhodcsian problem, because the people 0.f
Zimbabwe and Africa are as one in not tolerating that
situation. The people of Zimbabwe, under the legitimate
leadership of the Patriotic Front, will continue to intensify
the armed struggle and the People’s Republic of Mozambique, together with other front-line States, will redouble
their support in every way they can until the people of
Zimbabwe win dignified, complete and total independence.
Not to consider the Patriotic Front a valid interlocutor is to
ignore the realities of Zimbabwe.

13. We know that all these ideas and plans could not be
master-minded entirely by Smith himself and his direct
collaborators, Plans of this nature arc part of the imperialist
global strategy to prevent the creation of progressive
rCgimes which are contrary to the interests of imperialism,
in Africa in general and particularly in that area.

19. The present situation demands that we should face our
responsibilities. By assuming them we do not imply that the
international community should serve as a substitute for
the Zimbabwean people in their national liberation struggle,
but that we must firmly and decisively support them in
their effort to reach a just settlement which can guarantee
peace in the country.

14. We know too that the plan which has been conceived
and which is now being implemented by Smith and those
who support him, overtly or covertly, was meant to create a
group of puppets for the prevention of the solution to the
problem which might be reached through the dialogue
taking place between the Patriotic Front and the AngloAmerican group, and that the purpose was to protect
certain interests in the area. We are afraid, however, that
once again the wrong approach has been adopted by Smith
and his friends.
IS. It should be clear that the establishment of a puppet
government in Zimbabwe would encourage South Africa to
go ahead with its plans to install a similar system in
Namibia. Those two objectives would serve the intentions
of the Vorster regime which, by strategically setting up the

20. We must isolate and completely liquidate Ian Smith,
together with his settlement and his puppets who, in order
to satisfy their own personal interests, have revealed the.ir
true character as traitors to Africa in the Iine of Moi’se
TshornbB, Ojuko, Holden Roberto and Savimbi, who
shamelessly betrayed their own people and the people of
Africa as a whole. Africa is ashamed of those who have
betrayed Zimbabweans who gave their lives in action, of
those who betrayed all the refugees who were murdered jn
cowardly and merciless fashion in Chimoio, Nyazonia and
the Smith prisons. Africa is ashamed of those betraying a.11
the young Zimbabweans who have had to give up all
prospect of a normal life in order to risk their lives for a
1 See official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtwecof~d
Session, Plenary Meerings, 17th meeting.

meaningful freedom for their motherland. Those detestable
characters have not only betrayed both dead and living
Zimbabweans, but have gone to the extent of betraying
even those not yet born. By the time the future generation
comes into this world, those poor innocent children will
find themselves in a world of discrimination where each will
be either a black Zimbabwean, or a white Zimbabwean with
dual citizenship-in other words, a colonialist but never just
a Zimbabwean who happens to be white.

community should be concerned with the latest Smith
manoeuvres in order to avoid a fait accompli on this
n!!astidn. The Salisbury rkgime, conspiringwith the puppet
JOUPS of Muzorewa, Sithole and Chirau, is stagingthe
macabre manoeuvreof a so-calledinternal solution, with
the end in view of setting up a neo-colonialistregimewhich
will wait for the action of the racist regimein South Africa
to increasethe already existing tension in the area.
25. The People’s Republic of Mozambique vigorously
condemnsthe Smith manoeuvre.The immediateremovalof
Ian Smith, the leader of the racist minority rebel Govern
ment, is the first condition that is required for any effort to
solve this problem to be successfuland to beimplemented
in the right manner. Ian Smith has been the author of all
the drama of Rhodesia,and it is still the sameIan Smith
who has actedasthe main protagonist, causingthefailure
of every legitimate attempt at negotiation to resolvethe
Rhodesianproblem throughout the 13 years of his racist
rebellion.

21. We ask: is the Security Council going to permit the
legalization of discrimination and the perpetuation of the
state of tension in Zimbabwe? How will Africa explain to
the young Zimbabwean some”years from now the whole
political tragedy and frustration with which he will find
himtelf surrounded, and how will that young Zimbabwean
react? The idea that he will not mind or that he will
tolerate such a fate can only occur to someone who either
is not serious and realistic or is somehow suffering from a
racist complex, perhaps even without being aware of it.
22. Smith should not be given another opportunity to
degrade humanity. The Security Council should stop him.
The dignity of Africa must be preserved and we cannot
preserve it by allowing the kind of settlement that is signed
by men who are traitors to and renegades of the liberation
cause of an entire people, men who have opted for an
alliance with a racist and Fascist regime in order to
perpetuate the racial discrimination, humiliation and exploitation that haye so long been endured by the people of
Zimbabwe. The people of Zimbabwe have suffered more
than enough. The fact is that the newly concocted plan of
deceit and deprivation will add further strength to their
united desire to continue fighting for their just cause. The
denial of their representation by the Patriotic Front will
inevitably invite their most militant opposition and will
intensify the armed struggle. It is extremely regrettable that
a few turncoats who have chosen to satisfy selfish ambitions at the expense of swallowing self-respect and dignity,
including love for their country and compatriots, have
further sparked and aggravated violent repercussions.

26. We believe that the effectiveness of the proposals
submitted dependsto a large extent upon the determination and sincerity shownby your Government,Mr. President, by the Government of the United Statesand by the
international community in general.
27. We havecome to the Security Council to pledgeanew
our faith in its proven capability and strengthto meethead
on even greaterthreats to international peaceand security.
It is with this sameconviction that we rally the Council to
take its turn and act effectively to copewith the worsening
danger to the peace-lovingmembersof the international
community who havejointly expressedtheir condemnation
and rejection of the attempts to deceiveZimbabweandits
people and the rest of the world.
28. My country, the People’sRepublic of Mozambique,
born out of the sacrifices of the best sons of the
Mozambican people, will continue to fulfil its responsibilities in supportingthe people of Zimbabwe,through the
Patriotic Front, until they achieve their final victory: a
dignified, total and completeindependence.

23. While our desire is to achieve peace and not to
internationalize the conflict, an end to the current clashes
can be attained only through the honest and truthful
resolution of the conflict. The kind of settlement maliciously arranged under the terms reported in the press will
never work out. Wemust assurea genuinetransfer of power
from the minority rBgime to majority rule. The international community must channel all the necessaryefforts to
ensurereal independencefor Zimbabwe.

29. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Angola. I invite him to take a placeat the Council
table and to makehis statement.
30. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO (Angola): Mr. President,in view
of the agreementestablishingdiplomatic relationsbetween
our two countriesthat we signedhere in New York not too
long ago, allow me to convey to you and to your
Government the best wishesof my Government andmyself
and our hope for ties of friendshipand co-operationto our
mutual benefit.

24. We wish in particular to addressan appeal to the
representativesof the United Kingdom and the United
States, who took astheir responsibility the elaborationof
proposalswhichhave beenthe basisof negotiationswith the
Patriotic Front. The time has come to back up their
proposals.We should also like to addressan appealto all
the WesternPowersthat are in one way or another seriously
involved in the question of Zimbabwe. We shouldlike to
seethem make an earnest effort and, if necessary,take
energetic steps to persuadeand influence Ian Smith to
desistfrom going aheadwith his macabreplans,which can
only lead to regrettable consequences.The international

31. Furthermore, it is fitting indeed that the present
Security Council debate should take pIace under the
presidency of the United Kingdom, which, first as a
colonial Power and later as the administeringPower, has
been more intricately involved in the affairs of Zimbabwe
than any other country in the world.
32. For its part, the People’sRepublic of Angola is a
front&e Statewhich has alwaysbeendeeply committedto
3

sionsare to be remittableoutsidethe country, enablingthe
former racist colonialiststo continue to be subsidizedby
and exploit Zimbabwean labour, people and products;
citizens who are at presententitled to dual citizenship are
to retain that privilege, and so people will be subsidised
who may have no stakeat all in the future of Zimbabwe.

the liberation of southern Africa, to the eradication of
racism, apartheid, minority rule and the denial of fundamental freedoms to the majority inhabitants of any
country. We are participating in the debate today for the
purpose of restating our position, reiterating our support
for the Patriotic Front in its struggle to liberate Zimbabwe
from the stranglehold of a racist minority regime and to
renew our pledge to all the freedom fighters of southern
Africa to establish majority rule and a just and equitable
society.

37. Other details of the agreementreveal that the Smith
clique will maintain the status quo for 10 years, plus the
transitional period. After the transitional period, the
“parliament” will be ableto enact “ordinary” legislationby
a simplemajority, but the administrationof that legislation
and the governingof the country will remain in the hands
of the existing civil service;the police force and judiciary
and the armedforcessupportingthe Governmentwill retain
their present composition.Are we being askedto accept
that as“freedom” for the Zimbabweanpeople?

33. We in southern Africa are tired of war. For generations
we have been battling all over Africa to achieveindepcndence. Much blood has been shed. The lives of countless
generations have been sacrificed so that we might win
freedom. But if southern Africa requiresof us further and
even greater sacrifices, we are willing to serve, so that
ultimately our oppressedbrethren in that areawill achieve
OUT common destiny andour common dream: freedom and
complete independence.

38. At this very moment the Fascist, racist troops Or
Smith and those who signedthe so-calledinternal settlement are attacking the independentnation of Zambia.

34. There are many forms of imperialismand colonialism
today. Peace will not come to the area as long as any
settlement achieved by the illegal racist Smith rigime
continues to ignore the genuineliberation movement: the
Patriotic Front. The negotiations that have been taking
place between Smith and certain elements within Zimbabwe and the agreementthat has recently beensignedare
all a farce, a mockery of justice, a deception of the greatest
magnitude. We view it with horror becauseit will merely
prolong the state of war that exists in Zimbabwetoday and
that will continue unabated as long as the people,led by
their vanguard movement the Patriotic Front, do not get
their full rights, We also view with sorrow the fact that
certain elementsin Zimbabwe have allowed Smith to pull
the wool over their eyes and are unwittingly, or deliberately, carrying out the designsof imperialist Powers.

39. I wonder how many of usin this chamberreally know
the full extent of the racism,oppression,exploitation and
inequality that engulf the lives of native black Zimbabweans. The strict censorshipimposed by the Smith
re’gimehas effectively shut off from the world the abysscrf
horror and deprivation in which black Zimbabweanslive,
while white Rhodesiansare free to migrate. For exam:ple,
Smith’s troops have orders to shoot any Zimbabwean
children who wander outside their “protected” villages.
That news was revealedin the course of parliamentary
debatesat Salisbury and escapedcensorshipbecauseof a
loophole permitting the reporting of statementsmade by
legislators. Those “protected” villages are fenced and
patrolled hamlets-almost concentration camps-in wllietl
blacks have beenforcibly regrouped, and they Were IFirst
introduced in 1973. There are at present over 200 sucll
protected villages,mainly in the north-east and south-east
of the country, with new onesbeing establisheddaily in the
north-west aswell.

35. That so-calledinternal settlement can only damage
chancesfor a just solution to the conflict; it can delay true
liberation, but it cannot prevent it. The revolutionary
militants of the People’sRepublic of Angola throw their
fit11weight behind the efforts of the Patriotic Front; and we
state baldly and clearly that, unlessthat internal settlement
is rejected and condemnedand unlessnegotiationswith the
Patriotic Front are againeffectively put in motion, the only
course left open to the people of Zimbabwe will be armed
struggle.

40. There are over 580,000 blacks who have been cumpulsorily removedto thosevillages,which are overcrowded.
lack sanitary facilities, cleanwater and sufficient food; a11d
the blacks who have beenforced to move into them have
not been compensated
for the property they were forced trl
abandon when they were transported into thosecamps. ‘I*<)
force them to move, their black settlementswere btn:nu<l
down. It is interestingto note that the “protected villngc”
system was devisedby the British in Malaya in the 195%
and tried by the United States and the puppet Saigon
rCgimein the Viet-Namwar.

36. The MPLA Working Party and the Governmentof the
People’s Republic of Angola condemn the internal settlement, whose sole purposeis the retention and legitimization of the ruling racist clique. We reject this insult to our
intelligence and our integrity. We are askedto believe that
Smith has agreedto one-man,one-vote majority rule and
freedom for the Zimbabwean people. And yet, consider
some of the provisions of the settlement: although the
electoral roll is describedas a common roll, in practice it
works out to separateracial rolls for white and black voters;
it provides for the retention and perpetuation of Smith’s
public services,Smith’s police force, Smith’s defenceforce,
Smith’s prison serviceand Smith’sjudiciary-all those ~110
have been victims of colonialismknow that thejudiciary is
an essential element of a minority administration-pen-

41. Reports of the Catholic Commissionfor Justice and
Peacein Rhodesiaand of Amnesty International tell talcs
of torture and electric-shocktreatment metedout to blacks
at the hands of Smith’s 30,000~strongsecurity forces. The
Commission’sreport statesthat “the practice of torture has
become a commonevent in the lives of people in the rtirai
areas” at the handsof Government security forces, whost
brutality has succeededin driving many peopleinto joiniI?g
the guerrillas.
4

thought that the racist apurthcid rdgime at Pretoria will be
encouragedto duplicate the processin Namibia and that
southern Africa will remainat war for many Inore years.

42. The administering Power, for various reasons, has
made no attempt to denounce the settlement, although
Mr. Owen stated at the thirty-second session of the General
Assembly,2 not too long ago, that only negotiated settlements which were internationally acceptable and which had
the full support of the United Nations would end the
violence and achieve stable majority rule. Now we hear
cautiously worded statements coming out of London, as
well as Washington, implying acceptance of Smith’s farcical
settlement. And then the Western world wonders at our
“phobia” of imperialism and neo-colonialism and finds our
alliances with our genuine friends inexplicable and “dangerous”.

48. Smith and his allies, both inside and outside Zimbabwe-both inside and outside Africa-are hoping to
perpetuate their rule. Setting up a form of token majority
rule is sheercamouflageto prevent the genuine forces of
liberation from taking over and dealing a death.! !,)lv to
imperialismand neo-colonialism.Parallel to this, v&it the
struggle continues, as it surely will, Smith and his cohorts
will cry “genocide” and charge the supporters of the
Patriotic Front with hostility to a black Government in
Zimbabwe.

43. We reiterate our stand that any settlement of the
Zimbabwe question has to include the Patriotic Front and
that power has to be handed eves to the legitimate
representatives of the people of Zimbabwe. We have every
reason to doubt Smith’s motives; we are fully justified in
harbouring deep suspicions about his nefarious plans.
Consider some of the following facts.

49. It is not only power that grows out of the barrel of a
gun: it can also be freedom, peaceand genuine independence.To that end all progressiveforcesin southern Africa
have committed themselves.Until final victory the struggle
continues.
SO. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Benin, whom I invite to take a placeat the Council
table and to makehis statement.

44. There was a 300 per cent increase in the defence
budget of the Smith r6gimc between 1972 and 1976, with a
26 per cent increase predicted for 1977-1978. Between
March 1976 and 1977, there were 143 attacks by the Smith
forces against Mozambique alone. Zimbabwe has a population of 6.3 million, of which the white minority forms only
250,000. Yet there are 85,406 registered white voters while
only about 10,000 blacks so far have the franchise -less
than two-hundredths
of one per cent. Military spending is
taking up 27 per cent of the budget, or almost $1 million
per day.

51. Mr. NOUNGAVOU [Benin) (inferprcYation
,fiom
Fresh):
Sir, my delegationthanksyou most sincerely for

allowing us to participate in this important debate on the
question of Southern Rhodesia. I congratulate you pcrsonally on your accessionto the presidencyof the Council
at this historic time. Weknow you are a very experienced
and skilled diplomat. At this time you are assumingan
awesomeresponsibility for the proper conduct of ihe
present debate. As President, you are master of the
CounciI’sprocedure, and procedure, aswe all know, can be
usedfor all ends,good or bad. I do not doubt your personal
honesty; I wishyou courageand success.

45. A very pertinent question at this point-one that is
linked to this so-called settlement, and to the efforts now
being made to win recognition for the settlement-is how
the Smith r6gime could have lasted all these years if it were
not for the direct and indirect help afforded to the racist
regime from abroad, most noticeably, of course, from
Pretoria, with the connivance of the imperialist Powers. The
reports of the Committee on Sanctions,3 of the Committee
of 244 and of other United Nations organs show quite
clearly that Smith could afford to ignore United Nations
decisions because of the overt and covert support which he
has been receiving from his allies. Who are Smith’s allies?

52. My delegationwishesto avail itself of this opportunity
to express its gratitude to Comrade AmbassadorTroyanovsky
of the Soviet Union for the skill and the senseof
responsibility with which he guided the Council’swork last
montl1.

53. The unswerving support of my country, the People’s
Republic of Benin, for the cause of the liberation of
peoples from foreign domination and exploitation, imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialismand racism is part of
our national political programme.
The PeopIc’sRepublicof
Benin,
a revolutionary
country, its vanguard
party, the
Party of the People’sRevolution of Benin, and its valiant
I‘eople arc well aware that the only guarantee
of their
freedom, peaceand security residesin the total liberation
of African -that is to say, principally, the systematic
elimination of the illegal, minority racist rCgimesof Pretoria
and Salisbury.

46. We are not debating the issue of sanctions; yet the
issue of vital supplies, such as petroleum, is fundamental to
the existence of the Smith r&ime. Even by the most
conservative estimates, the r6gime has 5,000 armed soldiers,
1,200 air force men, 80 combat aircraft and 4,,000 reservists
and 6,400 paramilitary men with 28,500 reservists, as well
as innumerable armed white civilians. Where does Smith get
arms and fuel for his forces?
47. Another aspect of the internal settlement causes us
trcmcnduus concern: we are legitimately outraged at the

54. That iswhy, in order to give concreteexpressionto our
total commitment to the cause of peoples struggling to
recover their human dignity and win self-determinationand
independence,and to commemoratethe first anniversaryof
the defeat, by the peopleof Benin. of the armedimperialist
aggressionof 16 January 1977, a Week of Solidarity with
Peoplesand Countries Struggling for their National Libera-

3 Sccurity Council Conuni

ttcc catablishcd
in pursuance 0T rcsoluthe question of Soutlrcrn Rhodesia.
4 SpecialCornmittco on the Sitmtion with regard lo the Implenmhtion
of tlic Dcclmftior~
on the :;untin~;
of Indcpcndcncc
to
Colonial Countries
and 1%20plc~.

don 253 (1968)

concerning

5

tion and an International Conference on Mercenaries were
organized at Cotonou from 9 to 16 January 1978 on the
initiative of our party. Those events, the results of which
have been published in document S/I2557 of 13 February
1978, brought together delegations from more than 40
democratic countries, parties and organizations throughout
the world, and the results of those events, particularly the
historic Declaration of Cotonou, carry considerable conviction. I shall read out a few passages of that Declaration
concerning precisely the tactics and strategy of the imperialist Powers in Africa at this time:

so doing, the imperialists think that they can call in
question the authority of SWAP0 . . .; they are seeking to
destroy the unity of the Patriotic Front of Zimba.bwe in
order to despoil the people of Zimbabwe of the fruits of
their struggle and sacrifices . . .“.
55. These are the fundamental characteristics of the
strategy and tactics of the imperialist Powers in southern
Africa, as was so well emphasized in the historic &Clara.
tion of Cotonou. Given these tactics and strategy, motivated by bloodthirsty violence, the only response for us is
armed struggle and recourse to the historical right of
self-defence.

“The great defeat suffered by American imperialism in
South-East Asia, the collapse of the colonial system under
the hammer blows of the peoples of Africa and the
intensification of the struggles waged by the constantly
expanding non-aligned movement caused international
imperialism, seriously shaken, to redirect its strategy of
domination and exploitation and to focus its aggressiveness and most of its designs on Africa, , . .

56. The people of Benin has never believed in the so-callctl
peaceful settlement plans dreamed up in imperialist offices.
Even before they began, our country denounced the
Geneva talks on Southern Rhodesia as a crude delaying
tactic. The lamentable results they produced and the
continued abdication of responsibility by the British
colonial Power, which has constantly refused to pu.t down
the rebellion of that rogue, Ian Smith, are proof that wc
were right and that we shall always be ri&t in our
rigorously objective analysis of the situation in southern
Africa. Our scepticism with regard to these Western plans,
whether British or Anglo-American, for the peaceful settlcment of the problems of southern Africa-Namibia
and
Zimbabwe-is more than justified.

“The new imperialist strategy of domination and
exploitation is developing in two main directions, one
based primarily on policies of intimidation and force and
the other on methods that are more pernicious but no less
harmful and dangerous.
“This strategy is clearly part of a carefully elaborated
global plan, carried out in a climate of disorder and
calculated confusion in an attempt to disorient and
outwit the progressive forces and to create artificial rifts,
the better to accomplish their work of undermining and
demolition.

57. There is one plan, and only one, for the peaceful
settlement without bloodshed of the Rhodesian question.
The framework and the broad lines of that plan have
already been laid down in resolutions of the United Nations
and OAU. That plan has two basic objectives: the peaceful
surrender of Smith and the transfer of power to the
authentic representatives of the people of Zimbabqfe under
the banner of the Patriotic Front. Any plan that sidesteps
these two clearly defined objectives is nothing but a vile
imperialist and neo-colonialist machination and plot. TIE
countries and peoples of Africa and all the peoples of tl~
world that love peace and justice are determined vigorously
to counter such plots and to work for their failure.

“These roles of the various imperialist Powers are
distributed and made to overlap in such a way that it is
not easy to reveal their complicity in the criminal
activities, This tactic reflects the concern of the imperialists to avoid appearing openly behind one and the
same mask, so as not to be perceived as a single bloc,
which would lead to their undoing and their total
isolation. Duplicity, like amalgamation and diversion, has
always formed part of the arsenal of imperialism.

58. The main objective of the various plans, and in
particular of the so-called agreement signed on 3 Mar&
1978, is to set up in Southern Rhodesia a servile IICOcolonial r&me committed to the defence of the strategic,
economic and political interests of the Western Powers, tllat
is to say a r6gime totally devoted to the preservation of
interests radically opposed to those of the labouring,
exploited and oppressed masses of Zimbabwe. That is why
we consider these to be merely machinations, imperialist
manoeuvres or simply plots.

...
“The sudden resurgence of the Western Powers’ interest
in Africa , . . is instructive in this connexion. It is not
reflected solely in the compassion which the Western
Powers, the traditional supporters of the racist rCgimes of
southern Africa”-in
Salisbury and in Pretoria-“have
suddenly displayed for the oppressed peoples of Namibia,
Zimbabwe and South Africa . . and the poorest African
countries. It is reflected above all in interference, in an
increasing number of subversive activities, . . .

59. It is in this way that we must describe the so-caltell
internal agreement signed on 3 March. It is in fact tfw
outcome of a carefully prepared process, instigated 31ld
maintained by the strategists of imperialist and neo-colonialist policies of domination in their London and ‘Washington offices,

“In southern Africa, the imperialists, acting through
Pretoria and Salisbury, are working relentlessly against
the front-line States, especially Angola and Mozambique _
At the same time, in groups of five or two, they are
hatching plans and initiatives clearly designed to render
devoid of substance the independence which the international community is demanding with particular insistence for the people of Namibia [and of Zimbabwe]. In

GO. The Smith agreement only differs from the other
plans, published or not, in the directness of its tertns. Smith
lacks the diplomatic finesse of the strategists of London
6

and Washington, that subtlety of words and of expressions
intended to distract our vigilance and to launch us on a
suicidal course. Ian Smith, the son of a butcher, does not
bother himself with all these subtleties, As proof of his
nai’vety, his lack of finesse, and his extraordinary clnmsinags, I need only quote from a passage from John Burns’
article, published in The New York Timef of 4 March last,
in which the entire Salisbury agreement was also published.
It reads as follows:

the bonds that have increasinglybeen choking him. To that
end, he must at all costsobtain the lifting of the economic
sanctionswhich afflict the Smith regimeand the disbanding
of the patriotic forceswhich each day increasethe scopeof
their operations and strike devastating blows againstthe
adversary.
65. This is proof that the Smith plan and the other plans,
both public and secret,have one and the sameobjective,
that is, an objective that is totally contrary to the interests
of Africa.

“Mr. Smith, and most whites, appear to hope that life
under a black Government”-that
is to say, within the
framework of the agreement-“will not be much different
from what it is now. Government officials seemed to be
expressing this in symbolic form by arranging to have the
portrait of Rhodes, who gave the country his name,
transported specially from Mr. Smith’s, office to the
signing ceremony, where it was the only adornment on
the wall.“5

66. Having said this, we may ask who is Smith and who
are the so-calledinternal leaders?A handful of agentswho
have imperialist patents. It is pointless then for us to give
too much importanceto thesesorry creatures,for whatever
importance we give them they are still only a front for the
sameenemy of African peoples:imperialism.
67. It is for all thesereasonsthat the African peoplesin
general, and the people of Zimbabwe in particular, condemn and categoricallyreject this interna agreementand
call on the Security Council to do likewise,This is a serious
moment. The Internal agreementbearswithin it the seeds
of war in all its forms;it aggravatesthe generalinsecurity of
the region and threatens increased violence against the
front-line States. The administeringPower and all Western
States will bear full responsibility for any new bloodshed
imposedon a peacefulpeople that wants its freedom.

The African peoples of the region in general and the
Zimbabwe people will pass on from generation to generation the sorry memories and the indelible traces left by
Cecil Rhodes, a notorious British settler who made of white
domination and supremacy a political doctrine in the
British colony of Southern Rhodesia. It is precisely this
white supremacy that Smith’s internal agreement seeks to
preserve.
61. I shall now quote another passage from Mr. Burns’
ar title :

68. Benin, for its part, will continue, aswill all progressive
States, to lend its moral, political, diplomatic and material
support to the Patriotic Front, which is the only genuine
representativeof thepeople of Zimbabwe.

“The transitiona administration will take over at an
unspecified point in the coming weeks. . , . Under complex arrangements that divide power between whites and
blacks, Mr. Smith will retain the title of Prime Minister.

69. The PRESIDENT: The r!ext speakeris the representative of Kenya. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to makehisstatement.

“ ‘We are all equals now’, he said, referring to the four
leaders who signed the agreement, The four will make up
the Executive Council, the controlling body in the
transitional administration, with each of the leaders
acting as chairman for unspecified periods in rotation.
The Council will operate by consensus, giving Mr. Smith
the power to block decisions”5

70. Mr, MAINA (Kenya): Mr. President, I thank you and
the other membersfor making it possiblefor me to address
the Council on the question of Southern Rhodesia.I am
particularly pleasedto seeyou presiding over these meetings because your country, more than any other, is
concerned with the problem of Southern Rhodesia.YOU
have personally beeninvolved in one of the many efforts
that your country has undertaken to solve this problem,
and you are thereforeintimately involved and familiar with
the issuesunder discussion.
No doubt the deepinvolvement
of your country andyour own personalinvolvement in the
situation in Southern Rhodesiamay lead to uncomfortable
situations for you asPresidentof the Council, but, knowing
your outstandingqualitiesasa lawyer, parliamentarianand
diplomat, I have confidence that you will acquit yourself
well and guide the discussionof this problem in the Council
to a successfulconclusion.

62. Here Mr. Smith, who is responsible for the present
situation, is invested.with a right of veto! Thus that same
white supremacy taken to extremes during the transition
period will remain substantially unchanged after 3 1 December 1978, when the so-called black majority institutions
will be set up.
63. The clauses safeguarding the interests of the white
racist minority are many and they include the right of veto
of the 28 whites in Parliament, which comprises 100
members. Ultimately, as Ian Smith believes-and here we
agree with him-nothing will change. Life will go on as
before, namely, with the exploitation of the Zimbabwean
people.

71. This meeting hasbeencalled to review the situation in
Southern Rhodesiabecauseone more in a seriesof many
manoeuvresthat the illegal regime of Southern Khodesia
had undertaken since1965 is creating someconfusion and
64. It is also symptomatic that the objective of the
internal agreement prepared by Smith is above all to ~OOSCYY giving an opportunity to the supportersof the illegal regime
to mount a campaignfor the recognition of that illegal
regime, This manoeuvreis particularly dangerousin the
5 Quoted in English by the speaker.
7

United Nations mandatory sanctions--anaction which is
naively taken for granted-and, secondly, bringing to an
end the armed conflict being waged by the freedom
fighters. Ending the armedconflict would becomethe task
of the so-callednew government, which doesnot include
either those who aredoingthe fighting or their leaders.The
third important problem, natnely, the securingof legality
for the illegal regimefrom the administeringPower,hasnlot
been dealt with at all, unlesswe take the setting of a date
for independenceto imply that the British Governmentwill
confer legalinstrumentsfor that supposedindependenceon
3 1 December 1978. The three fundamental issues-the
lifting of sanctionsagainstSouthern Rhodesia,the termination of armed conflict inside Southern Rhodesiaand the
granting of legal independenceby the administeringPow.
er-have not beendealt with adequately.

current situation because it is being advertised under a
beautiful label known as “majority rule”. It is fraudulent,
as any careful observer who has been following the
situation will quickly see. It is therefore the duty of the
international community to review the situation and clearly
understand the issues and what is at stake in order to avoid
being party to the tragedy which is continuing to be
enacted in Southern Rhodesia.
72. It is necessary that the Council should address itself to
the issues so that clear thoughts and understanding may
lead to reasonable decisions and actions. The illegal r8gime
of Southern Rhodesia seized independence illegally in
1965. The administering Power-your
country, Mr. President-denounced that action of the illegal minority rCgime
and came to the Council to request it to impose mandatory
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. Despite gross violations of these sanctions, they are still in force, although
they are producing but a fraction of the intended effects.
That rBgime has received no official recognition from any
country. Like those sanctions, the tnany years of patient
waiting for peaceful means to change the situation in
Southern Rhodesia-meanswhich have included high-level
negotiations between the British Government and the
leaders of the regime over the years and, more recently,
between the leaders of the regime and the British and
United States Governments-have produced no result.
Thesepeaceful approacheshave not achievedthe removal
of the illegal racist minority regimeand the creation in that
unhappy Territory of a lawful government representingall
the peoples of Southern Rhodesia.As we all know, the
prolonged frustrations led to the formation of forces of
freedom fighters nearly six years ago.The freedom fighters’
efforts, together with the sanctions imposed by the
Council, are a part of the situation in Southern Rhodesia
which no one can ignore. The illegal r&ime hastherefore
addresseditself to the question of how to eliminate these
two factors from the situation.

75. Is it seriouslybeing proposedthat, becausethe illegal
regime has securedthe co-operation of a new set of blal:k
faces who may in the past have representedsignificant
sectionsof the peoplesof Southern Rhodesia,the face of
the illegal rCgimeis now acceptable’?We say, no. Right
from the beginning, when the racist rdgime illegally
declaredindependence,there has always been a sufficient
number of Africans who have agreedto give their co-operation to the racist r&me. Indeed, even though the African
people rejected the 15 seatsallocated to thetn in the racist
parliament, thoseseatshaveat all timesbeenoccupiedby a
number of men picked by the racist rdgime.Furthermore,
not so many months ago,the rdgimeset about recruiting a
few of thosepeople,who wereappointed and giventhe tiltle
of ministersin an attempt to paint the face of the racist
rdgime with somecolour representativeof the peoplesOf
Southern Rhodesia.No one has seriously suggestedth.it,
becauseIan Smith securedthesehalf dozen mento join his
ranks, the regimeceasedto be either illegal or racist. The
fact that two of the so-calledAfrican leadershaveenjoyed a
position of leadershipin the past is supposedto give them
credentialsthat would makethem acceptableto the outside
world if not inside Rhodesia.The most significant fact
which tendsto exposethis fraud is that one of theseleaders
has in the past insistedon testing the acceptanceby the
African people of suchproposals,while this time there is 110
mention whatsoeverof any move to test the acceptanceby
the peoplesof Southern Rhodesiaof the so-calledinternal
settlement proposals.The credentialswhich theseAfrican
leadersmay have enjoyed in the past are subjectto serious
question now, and their acceptance of the fraudulent
proposals, which will evidently not lead to any genuine
majority rule, providesthe bestevidenceof that.

73. Last year, the British Government, in conjunction
with the Government of the United States, put forward
proposals.as a basisfor negotiations between the British
Government, assistedby the United States Government,
and the illegal r&&e of Ian Smith, with the participation
of the peoples of Southern Rhodesiarepresentedby the
freedom fighters. Although there were many reservations
regarding those Anglo-American proposals, they were
accepted in principle as a basis for negotiations. The
Council was persuadedat the time to appoint a United
Nations representativewho would be in a position to assist
in a solution of the problem. Those Anglo-American
proposalsare still on the table for discussion,asevidenced
by the recent meeting held in Europe. The peoples of
Southern Rhodesia, representedby the freedom fighters,
can be said to be still pursuing a path for a negotiated
settlement with the only authority in a position to convert
the illegal rCgime in Southern Rhodesia into the legal
government of that colony. We know, however, that the
ilIega1regime has rejected the Anglo-American proposals
and planned to stageits own so-calledinternal settlement,
which can assumethe mantle of legality only if that mantle
is granted by the British Government,

76. NO doubt in the next few weeksor months there will
be plenty of talk of interference by outside forces in
internal affairs of Southern Rhodesia.This is nothing new,
as the illegal r&ime has maintained that complaint all
along. What is important is to recognize that a peaceful
solution of the problem of Southern Rhodesia is the
concern of us all. That problem has been a threat to
international peace and security from the beginning. FOE
this threat to be removed, it is important that a genuihc
effort should be madeto solve the problem peacefully. AS
we have stated, there arethree main issuesto be tackled for
a peaceful solution of the problem-natnely, steps to be
taken in order to bring an end to armed conflict in

74, The so-called internal settlement provisions address
themselves to resolving two issues: first, the lifting of
8

Rhodesia, steps to be taken to enable the administering
Power to grant legal independence to Southern Rhodesia
and steps to be taken to enable the Security Council to lift
mandatory sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.

African people. Although that might appearto be so, the
truth is that if peaceis to return to SouthernRhodesiathe
freedom fighters must be involved in any genuinesettlement proposals.It is for that reasonthat we urge that a
conferenceincluding all thoseinvolved in the problem of
Southern Rhodesia,among them the Patriotic Front,
shouldbe convenedin order to hammerout proposalsthat
will bring genuinemajority rule in SouthernRhodesia,The
so-calledinternalsettlementproposals
cannot bringgenuine
non-racistmajority rule in SouthernRhodesia.Since they
do not addressthemselvesto the basic issuesof the
problem,they cannotprovidea solutionandtherefore they
shouldbe rejected.We call on thoseresponsiblefor their
formulation to think againand to take the route provided
by the Anglo-Americanproposals,which form a goodbasis
for negotiationsfor the settlement of the problem of
SouthernRhodesia.

77. Ending the armed conflict requires that the illegal
regime and the freedom fighters be engaged in discussions
so that settlement proposals acceptable to both may be
agreed upon.
Recruiting a group of leaders within Rhodesia
who do not represent the freedom fighters-who,
as we all
know, enjoy the full support of the peoples of Southern
Rhodesia-is engaging in self-deception, That can only lead
to continued armed conflict, when armed conflict ought to
be ended as soon as possible. For settlement proposals to be
acceptable to the administering Power-and
no doubt the
representatives of the administering Power can best speak
for it-they must lead to genuine majority rule within
Rhodesia, The proposals put forward at present, we believe,
fall far short of the desired goals of majority rule-and this
has been stated by representatives of the administering
Power. Indeed, any careful study of those proposals will
indicate that they provide no settlement at all. They only
make provision for an unlikely or unrealistic form of
government in the interim period, leaving the difficult
issues facing a majority government to be settled by the
non-government of the interim period. Those proposals also
codify the racism which is the basic cause of the problem of
Southern Rhodesia. No one would fail to note the racism
and fraud contained in the electoral roll fraudulently called
“common”. No one but the blind and deaf would fail to be
struck by the fact that, apart from the so-called leaders of
the African people, the only section of the Rhodesian
society that will be consulted is the present white electorate, or would fail to note that the body that is supposed
to approve the constitutional proposals for majority rule is
the sameparliament-a parliament made up of the racists
who seizedpower in 196.5.The racist regimeand thoseWh
have joined handswith that illegal regimemust therefore be
nayve in the extreme or must assumethat everyone outside
their group hasno common sense.

79. For that reason,we urgethe Councilto take a position
that will lead to an end to the problem createdby the
illegal racist regimein Southern Rhodesia.This position
shouldbe that the United Nationswill continueto enforce
the existing mandatory sanctions against Southern
Rhodesiauntil the problemis finally solved.There can be
no short cut to genuinemajority rule which doesnot
codify, in a permanentsettlement,the racismandapartheid
that areevident in the current so-called
internal settlement
proposals, We believe that the people of Southern
Rhodesia,freed from the terrorismimposedby the illegal
regimeand given a chanceto choosefreely, would reject
such proposals;indeed,somesix years ago, they rejected
similarproposals
that wereput beforethem. Unfortunately,
even leaderscan go wrong;but the failure to recognizethe
obviousfraud containedin the proposalsmustbe puzzling
to many.
80. Mr. President, we have full confidence that the
Council, under your leadership,will arrive at the correct
readingof the situationso that it may continue to assume
its responsibilitywith regardto the problemof Southern
Rhodesia,

78. As we have slated, we arelikely to hearplenty of talk
about the support the outside world is giving the Patriotic
Front as opposedto those who claim to be leadersof the

Themeetingroseat 5.30p.m.

9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite4
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
h : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

I’UBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, SecciBn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y cssas distria su librero
o dirijnse a: Naciones

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

7%70005-January

1980--2,200
