S/PV.9248

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9248th meeting

Wednesday, 25 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Issahaku
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-02368 (E)
*2302368*

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria; and
Ms. Ghada Eltahir Mudawi, Deputy Director of the
Office for the Coordination on Humanitarian Affairs.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: As we move into 2023, the Syrian
people remain trapped in a profound humanitarian,
political, military, security, economic and human rights
crisis of great complexity and almost unimaginable
scale. Syrians remain deeply divided over their future.
Despite our best efforts, no substantive progress is
being made to build a common political vision for that
future via a genuine political process. Equally, many of
the issues in the conflict have for several years now not
been solely in Syrian hands. The country remains de
facto divided into several parts, with five foreign armies,
multiple Syrian armed groups and Security Councillisted terrorists all active on the ground. Serious abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights continue across Syria.
More than a decade of destruction, war and
conflict, corruption and mismanagement, sanctions,
the Lebanese financial crisis, the coronavirus disease
pandemic and its aftermath and now the war in
Ukraine have contributed to a twin humanitarian and
economic crisis of epic proportions. Roughly half the
pre-war population remains displaced — the largest
displacement crisis in the world and one of the largest
since the Second World War. The situation is not only a
source of tragedy for Syrians but a driver of instability
across the region, including against a backdrop of
growing reports of an illicit drug trade.
2/21

25/01/2023

The conflict needs a comprehensive political
solution; nothing else can work. That solution is sadly
not imminent. But we continue to focus on concrete
actions that could build some trust and bring into
being a real process to implement Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015). To that end, I continue to
engage the Syrian parties to the conflict. I will return
to Damascus in February for meetings with Syrian
Foreign Minister Fayssal Mekdad and the Governmentnominated co-Chair of the Constitutional Committee,
Ahmad Kuzbari. I saw the President of the Syrian
Negotiations Commission, Badr Jamous, and the
Commission-nominated co-Chair of the Constitutional
Committee, Hadi Al-Bahra, in Geneva earlier this week.
In parallel, I am engaging widely with key
international players. Last week I met with the Turkish
Foreign Minister, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, and the Saudi
Foreign Minister, Faisal bin Farhan. Yesterday I met
together the Syria Special Envoys of France, Germany,
the United States and United Kingdom. I have engaged
with representatives of the Russian Federation and the
European External Action Service, and the Deputy
Special Envoy, Najat Rochdi, met representatives of
European Union (EU) member States and EU officials
last week. We look forward to engaging widely with the
full range of regional and international actors as part of
the continuing consultations. The Syrian and Turkish
authorities have held security and military contacts
in recent months. The Syrian and Turkish Defence
Ministers met with the Russian Defence Minister in
Moscow on 28 December. I continue to closely follow
developments in that regard.
In all our engagements, our goal is to facilitate
progress on several priorities in line with Security
Council resolution 2254 (2015), and we urge all actors to
work together in support of a United Nations-facilitated
political process. Last month, I flagged six priority
areas to the Council in my briefing (see S/PV.9230).
Let me update members on them today.
The first priority I identified was the need to step
back from escalation and restore calm. A nationwide
ceasefire remains essential to resolving the conflict.
Last year, we saw periods of relative calm and periods
of escalation. Over the past month, the picture has
been equally mixed. We have seen fewer air strikes
in the north-west in recent months, and the intense
military escalation in the north-east that we witnessed
late last year has diminished, but in other ways the
picture remains as dire as ever. Shelling, rocket fire
23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

and intermittent clashes have continued along all
contact lines, involving a wide spectrum of actors,
including the Government, the armed opposition, the
Syrian Democratic Forces and the Security Councillisted terrorist group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, which
launched several cross-line attacks this month. Turkish
drone strikes were reported in the north-east, and
Israeli strikes were reported in rural Damascus and
the Damascus airport. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant remains active, with sleeper cells killing
military personnel and civilians. We continue to relay to
the members of the ceasefire task force the importance
of preserving and deepening calm, protecting civilians
and consolidating the patchwork of existing agreements
and arrangements into a nationwide ceasefire. Of course,
that will require a parallel effort to find a cooperative
approach towards countering listed terrorist groups
that is in line with international law and ensures the
protection of civilians.
The second priority I stressed was to renew the
framework in the Council on the humanitarian front. I
thank members for the unanimous adoption of resolution
2672 (2023) earlier this month (see S/PV.9237). That
allowed for the continuation of life-saving cross-border
humanitarian assistance for millions of people in
Syria — albeit for six months — while also expressing
support for cross-line operations and early-recovery
projects. The scale of needs inside Syria is at the worst
level since the conflict began, with record levels of
poverty and food insecurity, basic services breaking
down and a burgeoning economic crisis. Needs in
displacement camps remain the most urgent. Meanwhile,
infrastructure remains on the brink, with frequent
power outages against a backdrop of dwindling fuel
supplies, resulting in knock-on effects across society.
We will hear more on that from our briefer from the
Office for the Coordination on Humanitarian Affairs.
The third priority remains to see the Constitutional
Committee resume its meetings and make more
substantive progress in Geneva. The Constitutional
Committee could be a door-opener and help to advance
a key component of resolution 2254 (2015), thereby
contributing to the wider political process. I am keen
to reconvene the meetings of the small body of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva without delay.
However, there is nothing new to report to date,
including on Russia’s position on the venue. The issues
that had been raised previously were comprehensively
addressed, and I thank the Swiss authorities for their

S/PV.9248

receptivity. Further issues have meanwhile been raised,
some of which are not in Swiss hands but on which
good offices are nevertheless being extended. The
Government-nominated co-Chair has yet to respond to
my letter of last June on improving the Committee’s
working methods. I will continue my efforts to resume
the meetings of the Committee and to work with its
co-Chairs on finding ways to improve its substance
and working methods, while keeping the Middle Third
apprised of any developments.
The fourth priority is that we must keep pushing the
file of detainees and disappeared and missing persons.
I look forward to progress in establishing a missing
persons’ institution, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral, to be created as a pathway towards achieving
tangible progress on that aspect of the file. Meanwhile,
we continue to remind our interlocutors at every
opportunity that arbitrary detainees must be released
and substantive steps taken to ensure the protection and
rights of detainees. There has been no improvement on
the ground this month. Arbitrary arrests have reportedly
continued, with many of the individuals arrested not
being informed of the reasons for their detention and
their families not being informed of their whereabouts.
Let us also not forget that those protection issues are
among the core factors that refugees have cited to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees when explaining their decision not to return
to Syria within the next 12 months, in addition to the
situation with respect to security, livelihoods, basic
services, housing and military service. A wide range of
actions on all of those fronts will be essential to creating
a safe, calm and neutral environment, including for the
safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and
internally displaced persons.
The fifth priority is to bring about initial stepfor-step confidence-building measures. It is important
to identify some precise, concrete, reciprocal and
verifiable steps that could have a positive impact on
the lives of Syrians, build some trust and confidence
among the parties and move us towards a safe, calm and
neutral environment along the path of implementing
resolution 2254 (2015). I appreciate that the dialogue
has deepened with all parties on those issues and stress
that it is important for engagement to further deepen
during February.
My sixth priority is to engage with Syrians across
the board. The Syrian Women’s Advisory Board
continues to advise me and Deputy Special Envoy

23-023683/21

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

Rochdi. Members of the Women’s Advisory Board
have, in turn, continued their own conversations with
their fellow Syrians to ensure that their perspectives,
including those of women, are heard. We also continue
to engage with Syrian civil society activists on a
broad range of issues related to the political process
and ongoing protection concerns. Participants in the
thematic working groups of the Civil Society Support
Room pursued their regular discussions through
digital means on the issues of local governance,
decentralization and protection priorities for Syrians,
and how those can be addressed through a political
process in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The Syrian
women and men with whom we engage remain hopeful
that the conflict will come to an end in a manner that
enables individuals to live in dignity.
Ultimately, a diplomatic effort requires the
inclusion of all relevant Syrian and international
actors, whose stake and influence are necessary to
resolving the tragic conflict. It requires a common
effort to unite behind a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
process facilitated by the United Nations, as mandated
in resolution 2254 (2015). Such a process is the only
way to address the core drivers of the conflict; meet the
needs and legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people;
restore Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity; and safeguard regional stability
and security concerns.
It is in that spirit in which I continue to engage all
players and appeal for their continued support for the
United Nations effort to facilitate the political process.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mudawi.

25/01/2023

cholera outbreak. In the north-west alone, 1.8 million
people live in camps or overcrowded sites in tents and
below-zero temperatures, with limited or no access to
water, health services or electricity. For many families,
this is their twelfth winter in displacement. Some
have been uprooted multiple times, while others have
lived in the same tents for more than a decade. In such
a dire context, humanitarian efforts to help face and
adapt to the winter in north-west Syria remain 78 per
cent underfunded. Throughout Syria, the response
for winterization is equally poorly funded at 29 per
cent. With the available resources, only 1.4 million
individuals had been reached as of the end of December,
leaving 2.8 million vulnerable people without adequate
emergency shelter or non-food items to protect against
harsh-winter conditions. In other words, we need more
donor support, more support for the winterization
efforts and more support for the overall humanitarian
response in Syria.
Let me recall that the 2022 humanitarian response
plan has only been 47.2 per cent funded — its lowestever level of funding. The cholera outbreak continues to
spread across the country, with suspected cases in all 14
governorates. Thanks to donors’ generosity, 2 million
doses of oral cholera vaccines have arrived in Syria,
and 1.7 million in north-west Syria. Immunizations
have wrapped up in Deir-ez-Zor, Raqqa and Aleppo and
will shortly wrap up in Al-Hasakah. The vaccination
campaign will start imminently in north-west Syria. I
call for the strong support to the cholera response to
continue, including the funding of health facilities,
as several of them in north-west Syria have closed in
recent weeks due to funding cuts. Adequate investment
also needs to be made in water and sanitation to address
the root causes of the outbreak.

Ms. Mudawi: In January, it is tradition that we
wish one another a happy and prosperous new year.
We wish joy and peace for everyone. And this is what
the people of Syria need more than at any other time
since the conflict began. No one deserves it more, and
they rightfully expect the support of the international
community to make their wish come true. People
have endured 12 years of conflict and humanitarian
crises. As 2023 begins, they face their worst year yet;
15.3 million people, or nearly 70 per cent of Syria’s
population, are in need of humanitarian assistance. It is
hard to imagine such levels of distress.

There can be no prosperity for the vast majority
of people in Syria in the current socioeconomic
context. In December 2022, the sharp drop in the value
of the Syrian pound led to skyrocketing prices for
basic commodities. Life is increasingly unaffordable.
Twelve million people are food insecure, and families’
resilience to withstand shocks continues to erode. In
Aleppo governorate, the average price of rice surged
60 per cent between November and December 2022.
In rural Damascus, the prices of vegetables, fruit and
other commodities have climbed by 20 to 50 per cent
since the beginning of this month.

People are facing a harsh winter, with rain,
flooding and frigid temperatures, and an ongoing

Moreover, every aspect of life in Syria has been
impacted by severe fuel shortages and reduced access to

4/21

23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

electricity, making the already-dire economic situation
even worse. The acute fuel crisis is also affecting
humanitarian operations, leading to fewer field
missions and more project delays. Sectors that impact
life-saving efforts — such as water, sanitation, health
and shelter — are among the most severely impacted.
Electricity blackouts and the lack of fuel for generators
have severely limited the operations of water-pumping
stations. Critical maintenance work has been put on
hold as authorities struggle to secure transportation
for technicians and equipment. The economic decline
and the fuel crisis make it even harder for the most
vulnerable and marginalized people to access essential
services. Another example of the impact of the fuel
crisis is the suspension of mobile team operations
and the reduction of protection services by some of
our protection partners. That will ultimately result in
heightened vulnerability for women and girls.
The hostilities on the front lines and in pockets of
the country leave people in fear of attacks and at risk
of new displacement. In Idleb and western Aleppo, air
strikes, shelling and unexploded ordnance continue to
kill and injure civilians, including women and children.
Last year, in north-west Syria alone, the Office for the
Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs reported at
least 145 civilian deaths, including 58 children, and
249 civilian injuries, including 97 children. Shelling
and drone and air strikes have continued sporadically
throughout northern Syria, with sadly predictable
results — civilian casualties, damage to civilian
infrastructure, displacement, the temporary suspension
of humanitarian activities and the suspension of schools
and health and other services.
Landmines and unexploded ordnance pose
an additional threat to communities. Funding for
mine action programmes, especially clearance, and
increasing the number of operators in country able
to carry out clearance work are critical. I am glad
to report that progress has been made on that front.
For example, 1 million square metres of agricultural
land were cleared in rural Damascus last year. But
much more needs to be done, as that work is critical
to our ability to implement other projects, especially
early-recovery ones. International humanitarian law
requires that parties to conflict take constant care to
spare civilians and civilian objects, including homes
and essential infrastructure, throughout the duration of
their military operations. I urge all parties to respect
that fundamental obligation.

S/PV.9248

The extension of the Security Council’s
authorization for United Nations cross-border
humanitarian operations earlier this month was
indispensable. Cross-border aid is a matter of life
and death for millions of people in north-west Syria.
I want to welcome Brazil and Switzerland as the new
co-penholders. We will continue to do everything in
our power to facilitate progress in all areas covered
by resolution 2672 (2023). That includes enhanced
cross-line operations throughout Syria and earlyrecovery programming, building on the work over the
past years. Humanitarian relief to civilians in need
should be allowed and facilitated through all available
routes, in line with international humanitarian law.
However, I want to be clear that a six-month extension
poses challenges to our operations and funding and
disruptions to humanitarian logistics and procurement.
I say it regularly: Syria is one of the most complex
humanitarian and protection emergencies in the
world. More people are in need of aid than at any
other time since 2011. We need renewed commitment
from all parties. We need better access. We need
sustained donor generosity and rapid, substantial and
unearmarked pledges. Such investments will be critical
to expand life-saving and early-recovery programming.
I sincerely hope that 2023 will not be another bleak year
for the people in Syria. I hope that the spirit of unity in
the Council that resulted in the unanimous decision to
extend the cross-border authorization will prevail and
that it will uphold its moral duty to support the people
in Syria. I hope that joy, prosperity and peace will visit
all Syrians.
The President: I thank Ms. Mudawi for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I deliver this statement
on behalf of Switzerland and Brazil, the co-penholders
of the Syrian humanitarian file.
First of all, we thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen and Acting Director Ghada Mudawi for their
comprehensive updates.
The humanitarian situation on the ground in Syria
remains very concerning. With 15.3 million people
in need of assistance, humanitarian needs are at their
highest level since the beginning of the conflict. In
the middle of the winter, against the backdrop of fuel

23-023685/21

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

and energy shortages, the situation is becoming even
more dramatic.
Meanwhile, the protection needs of the civilian
population remain high across the country, as violations
of international humanitarian law continue, particularly
along conflict lines. We must always keep in mind that
behind the numbers and statistics of civilian fatalities
there are human beings who should have been spared
the consequences of the hostilities. We welcome, in this
regard, the unanimous adoption by the Security Council
on 9 January of resolution 2672 (2023), which reiterates
the importance of continuous humanitarian assistance
to Syria through all modalities, as we face serious
challenges. Let me name just a few of these challenges.
First, the cholera outbreak, which affects all 14
governorates, continues to spread. On a positive note,
however, we welcome the ongoing vaccination campaign.
Secondly, food insecurity reached alarming levels
in 2022 and continues to be on the rise. Today 15 million
people, or 68 per cent of the total population, need food
and agricultural assistance.
Thirdly, 2.4 million children in Syria do not have
access to education. In the north of the country, 60 per
cent of the 1,400 camps do not have primary schools at
all. Not only are children suffering from psychological
distress, but negative coping mechanisms, such as child
labour, child recruitment and early marriage, are on
the rise.
Fourthly, gender-based violence, which still often
remains overlooked, is a serious concern. According to
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), 8.5 million people need assistance for genderbased violence, which is an increase of 1.2 million
compared to 2022.
Another issue of concern is the chronic underfunding
of the United Nations response plan. As all clusters
remain underfunded, we risk putting lives at risk in the
middle of winter and during a cholera outbreak. The
fact that operational costs of humanitarian efforts are
increasing due to the fuel crises and other operational
challenges makes this situation even more serious.
When it comes to delivering life-saving aid to people
in need across Syria, all channels of access should be
consistently available. As co-penholders, Switzerland
and Brazil support the use of all modalities to ensure
rapid, unimpeded and sustainable humanitarian access
to all people in need in Syria. In that regard, we look
6/21

25/01/2023

forward to working with all Council members in the
coming months to address the humanitarian needs on
the ground and the operational demands of the United
Nations agencies and their partners.
We believe that, at the moment, the cross-border
mechanism remains indispensable, as it allows the
delivery of life-saving humanitarian assistance to
millions of persons in north-west Syria. The crossborder authorization allows more direct access to
this affected population through operations closely
monitored by the United Nations. In relation to crossline operations, we appreciate the efforts in place aimed
at expanding the number of deliveries and welcome, in
this regard, the news of an updated operational plan.
Early-recovery projects have also proven central
in our collective endeavour to alleviate the suffering
of the people in Syria, as these projects go beyond
life-saving humanitarian aid and help strengthen the
resilience of communities and support the sustainability
of humanitarian activities. We welcome the continuous
updates on the impact of their implementation and the
ongoing work aimed at their expansion.
Finally, as co-penholders on the Syrian
humanitarian file, we commend OCHA and all other
United Nations agencies for their tireless work and
reiterate the commitment to always upholding the
needs and rights of the people living in Syria, who
should not be left unassisted at this time of difficulty
and suffering.
I will now address the political situation on behalf
of Brazil.
Brazil thanks Special Envoy Pedersen once more for
his ongoing engagement with a wide array of stakeholders
in a unstinting effort to foster confidence among the
parties. We reiterate our support for Mr. Pedersen’s
important initiative on step-for-step building measures
and efforts to reconvene the Constitutional Committee.
We agree with his assessment that we need more than
formal meetings of the Committee: we need renewed
political will to move the process forward.
The continuous hostilities on the ground in
Syria, particularly given the constant tensions in the
north, remain deeply worrisome. Brazil echoes the
Secretary-General’s repeated calls on all parties to
exercise maximum restraint, maintain the ceasefires
agreed upon and respect Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. All attacks against civilians and
23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

civilian infrastructure must also immediately cease in
accordance with international humanitarian law, and
that applies to counter-terrorism activities as well.
Brazil remains very concerned about the plight of
those detained and missing in Syria. In this regard, we
welcome all efforts in place aimed at trying to bring
answers to the suffering of tens of thousands of families
left without any knowledge of their loved ones.
Finally, Brazil reaffirms its commitment to a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process as a means of
ensuring a political resolution of this long-lasting
conflict. The implementation of resolution 2254 (2015)
remains central to the main objective of the Security
Council, namely, to contribute to bringing the conflict
to an end by peaceful means.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Mudawi for
their briefings.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2672 (2023)
confirming the continued authorization of the crossborder humanitarian assistance delivery mechanism
was, as we have just heard from Ms. Mudawi, a necessary
step to aid the Syrian people and reduce suffering. We
now join Ms. Mudawi in calling on States to contribute
generously to the United Nations-Syrian humanitarian
response plan so that humanitarian actors can continue
to provide life-saving food, water, medicine, shelter and
early-recovery programmes, among other aid, across all
of Syria. We similarly urge donors to increase support
for Syrian refugees and their host communities. We
particularly thank Türkiye, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and
Egypt for continuing to welcome these Syrians in need.
We encourage the United Nations to continue
strengthening its oversight of and due diligence with
respect to procurement in Syria, even as it expands
cross-line aid deliveries. Given the alarming record
of human rights violations and abuses in Syria and
the well-documented cases of corruption, vigilance
is important.
We remain deeply concerned by the dire need for
assistance in Rukban, and we call on the Al-Assad
regime, which has at times refused outright to
approve cross-line deliveries, to allow United Nations
agencies and the Red Crescent to help the people who
are suffering there. The fact that no aid has reached
Rukban from Damascus since 2019 is unconscionable,
and it puts the lie to regime rhetoric that cross-line aid

S/PV.9248

can be relied upon. The United States supports crossline aid to all areas of Syria, including the north-west,
the north-east and Rukban.Several Council members
that profess support for cross-line aid refuse to
acknowledge that the primary impediment to increased
cross-line deliveries is the insecurity created by the
Al-Assad regime’s relentless conflict. In that context,
we call on the Al-Assad regime to cease its assault on
the Syrian people. It is imperative that all sides agree to
a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire.
We are eager to see results from the resumed
meetings of the ceasefire task force in Geneva. We
are also eager to see the resumption of Constitutional
Committee meetings in Geneva, provided that Russia
abandons its arbitrary demands on unrelated issues. It
is incumbent upon the Al-Assad regime to stop stalling
and cooperate with Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts
to convene good-faith discussions towards a political
solution to the conflict, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). That resolution remains the only viable solution
to the conflict, and we encourage all parties to engage
fully under that framework and coordinate all efforts
through the United Nations Special Envoy.
After 12 years of brutal war on the Syrian people,
we have yet to see the Al-Assad regime take any
meaningful steps towards a political solution. In fact,
we continue to hear the regime casting blame on others
for the war that it started and has maintained. We will
hear more of that today, I am sure, in the Chamber.
Given that obstinance, the United States opposes any
measure of normalization with the Al-Assad regime.
States contemplating rapprochement should carefully
consider what the Al-Assad regime has done to earn
such an opportunity. Indeed, the regime continues to
behave as it long has — behaviour that rightly caused
the international community to recoil in horror and
reject any dealings with Al-Assad.
We share the concerns raised by many about the
situation in the displacement camps and detention
facilities in north-eastern Syria. We call on States to
repatriate their nationals from north-eastern Syria,
reintegrate them and, where appropriate, prosecute
them for any atrocities they may have committed.
The continued presence of thousands of third-country
nationals further complicates the humanitarian,
human rights and security situation in Syria and must
be addressed.

23-023687/21

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

The Al-Assad regime can begin to demonstrate its
commitment to good-faith discussions by confirming
the fate and whereabouts of the 132,000 missing or
arbitrarily detained persons. While we acknowledge
that last year’s so-called amnesty decree appears to
have resulted in the release of approximately 500
people, we call on the regime to release everyone that
it has arbitrarily detained. Furthermore, we call on the
Al-Assad regime to conduct all detainee releases in an
organized and humane manner, including by releasing
the list of individuals and the locations where they will
be released and providing proper services to support
detainees during their transition from detention. For
all those who remain in detention, the regime should
inform family members of their condition and location
and the reason for their detention, and should conduct
fair and transparent trials for those accused of crimes.
The regime should allow immediate, unhindered access
to third-party prison monitors and medical services for
all detainees.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Ms. Ghada Mudawi for their briefings on the political
and humanitarian aspects of the situation in Syria.
The situation in the country remains tense. The
main challenges on the ground continue to be the illegal
foreign military presence in the north-east and the
south of the Republic, the continuing threat of another
military operation in the north, and the increasing
number of random attacks carried out by the Israeli
Air Force on Damascus and its neighbourhoods. Those
tensions have led to a resurgence of terrorist activity by
the Security Council-listed Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham.
We are also concerned about terrorist activities
in the south of the country. Terrorists use the cover of
the so-called security zone near Al-Tanf, which was
arbitrarily established by Washington. We believe that
the goals of ensuring the national security of Syria’s
neighbours must not be met at the expense of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. In that regard, in
practical terms we are in favour of the full and effective
implementation of the Astana format in Idlib and the
Trans-Euphrates. Together with our Astana format
partners, Iran and Türkiye, we will continue to help to
achieve sustainable and long-term normalization in and
around Syria.
8/21

25/01/2023

We still see no alternative to advancing a Syrian
political settlement process that is Syrian-led, Syrianowned and facilitated by the United Nations, in strict
compliance with resolution 2254 (2015). At the same
time, we believe that the modalities of international
mediation should be based on respect for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic. Syrians themselves, without
external pressure and the imposition of ready-made
formulas, should reach an agreement on all outstanding
issues on the future organization of their country.
In that context, we welcome Mr. Pedersen’s recent
contact with the Syrian parties, in accordance with the
mandate entrusted to him in resolution 2254 (2015). It
is important to ensure that we do not divert our efforts
to other initiatives that do not have clear modalities or
specific value added.
We are surprised and disappointed about the fact that
the Special Envoy mentioned that five foreign armies
and terrorist groups are equally contributing to the
violence in the country, without making any distinction
among their statuses. He also links that to the crisis
in Ukraine as a humanitarian factor. The humanitarian
situation in Syria is indeed swiftly deteriorating,
which has nothing to do with the action or inaction
of the Syrian authorities or the crisis in Ukraine. The
Syrian authorities attempt to do all they can for their
nationals, but the main obstacles are the unilateral
sanctions imposed by Western States on Syria. Their
nefarious effect was highlighted in the December 2022
United Nations humanitarian needs overview for Syria,
which clearly states that economic sanctions led to an
increase in the number of those in need and that their
consequences affected the accessibility and cost of
basic goods, including fuel. The record hike in the price
of food, especially for agricultural products, was also
noted. Overall, approximately 68 per cent of the Syrian
population needs food assistance, which means that
everyone, including donors, must take immediate steps
to rectify the situation and help the agricultural sector
in Syria, including by facilitating fertilizer supplies.
Our country stands ready to send a shipment of
fertilizer to Damascus free of charge. Fertilizer is
being blocked by European Union countries because of
anti-Russian sanctions. However, as is becoming clear,
because of the United States Caesar Act it is impossible
to bring fertilizer into Syria, given its so-called dual
purpose. That is an issue to which we and our Syrian
colleagues have already tried to draw the attention of
23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the Secretary-General, including at one of the rounds of
the informal interactive dialogue. We expect to receive
clear information from the United Nations on what is
being done to resolve that situation. If our colleagues
in the Security Council continue to try to ignore the
obvious ramifications of Western sanctions, then all
talk in the Chamber about how important it is to help
ordinary Syrians will appear even more deceitful and
cynical. Such cynicism can also be clearly seen against
the backdrop of Washington’s continued plundering
of grain and oil resources in the Trans-Euphrates.
On 14 January, for example, the United States moved
53 cisterns of stolen oil from Al-Hasakah into Iraq.
According to Syrian information, approximately 80 per
cent of all Syrian oil was removed from the country
by the occupying Powers in the first half of 2022.
Comment is unnecessary here.
We would also like to draw the Council’s attention
to Washington’s recent decision to impose additional
restrictions on the sale of medication, equipment and
its components, as well as on services and support to a
number of State-owned or private medical facilities in
Syria. As members can see, that decision is far from being
humanitarian in nature. We also note that resolution
2664 (2022), on humanitarian exemptions, which was
actively promoted by the United States delegation,
has nothing to do with the overall Syrian context. It
concerns only the work of humanitarian workers in
Idlib, where international terrorists, sponsored by the
United States of America, are in control. It is them
that Washington cares about. It does not care about the
suffering of the Syrian people. Syrians no longer have
have any illusions about that.
In that context, the decision by the United Nations
country team in the Syrian Arab Republic to prepare a
report on the impact of the anti-Syrian sanctions on the
humanitarian situation in the country deserves support
and is timely. We expect it to be available by the end of
January, as the Secretariat promised us. We trust that
those and other issues that we mentioned will be fully
reflected in it and not obscured, as some would wish.
Next year marks the tenth anniversary of the crossborder humanitarian aid mechanism, which currently
provides humanitarian assistance to north-western
Syria in violation of generally accepted humanitarian
norms. We will not repeat our well-known position on
that matter. I should just point out that, in its present
form, the mechanism has little chance of surviving not
only to its anniversary, but even to the next extension in

S/PV.9248

July this year. If our Western colleagues really want to
maintain the possibility of providing aid to the people
of Idlib not through Damascus, they must immediately
start preparing with us for its thorough change.
Idlib, where the United Nations continues not to
have a presence on the ground, remains a grey area.
First, we need to agree that humanitarian deliveries
to that region should be undertaken with the consent
of, and not a notification to, Damascus and in close
coordination with the legitimate Government. We call
on the United Nations not to stop its efforts to increase
cross-border deliveries to the area and on Western
delegations not to turn a blind eye to terrorist denials
of humanitarian aid to that area with regard to sending
humanitarian convoys from government territory.
We are also dissatisfied by the juggling of figures
on early-recovery projects, including by the United
Nations. For example, for 374 projects allegedly being
implemented in all provinces of Syria, according to
the figures made available to us, a record $517 million
was received. We note that the Secretariat is providing
increasing amounts of funds every month without being
able to give us a basic breakdown of all the projects,
disaggregated by specific regions and thematic areas.
How is the total amount of funds raised for those
activities calculated? And for whose benefit is it
increasing so rapidly on paper? We will not get very far
with such an approach; that intolerable situation must
be clarified as a matter of urgency.
Finally, as we all recall, prior to the Security
Council’s adoption in January of resolution 2672 (2023),
on the future of the cross-border aid mechanism, the
Permanent Representative of that country sent a letter
to the then President setting out Damascus’s priorities
for shaping the humanitarian situation in its territory.
We fully endorse that short, but important, list of issues,
which is long overdue for all of us to seriously consider.
On a separate note, there is the extremely urgent
issue of the return of Syrian refugees, which is crucial
not only to the humanitarian reconstruction of Syria,
but also to reducing the burden on the host countries,
including neighbouring Lebanon. In December 2022,
the first review of the Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification in Lebanon was published. According
to the survey, at the end of last year, almost 2 million
people in the country, including 37 per cent of Syrian
refugees, were in the food crisis phase. Those numbers
are estimated to increase to 2.26 million and 42 per

23-023689/21

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

cent, respectively, in the next six months. It is clear that
Beirut is unable to shoulder that burden, and the issue
of Syrian refugees is becoming an existential threat for
Lebanon. Against that backdrop, the short-sightedness
of donors that are pushing Syrians into tents of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees inside Lebanon, instead of helping people
to return to their own countries, is surprising. A
sustainable solution to that problem must be found for
the benefit of the two countries.
We look forward to a United Nations response to all
the points that we raised — if not today, then at the next
round of the informal interactive dialogue, in February.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Deputy Director
Mudawi for their briefings.
A Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process
is the only viable way to resolve the Syrian issue.
China welcomes the extensive engagement of Special
Envoy Pedersen and his team with all parties on the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). We hope
that the Constitutional Committee will be reconvened
as soon as possible. China welcomes Special Envoy
Pedersen’s ongoing efforts to follow the step-for-step
approach and promote continued consultations and
the building of consensus among the various factions
in Syria.
Russia, Türkiye and Syria recently held three-party
talks and demonstrated their willingness to promote
the restoration of peace and stability in Syria. China
welcomes that positive step. We hope that the joint
efforts of those three countries will fundamentally
improve the situation in northern Syria.
The counter-terrorism situation in Syria remains
complex. The international community should adopt
unified standards, in accordance with international law
and Security Council resolutions, combat all terrorist
forces in Syria with zero tolerance and cease condoning,
shielding and politically exploiting terrorist forces. The
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria must be
fully respected. The illegal presence of foreign troops
and their illegal military operations in Syria must end.
The illegal plundering of natural resources in Syria by
foreign troops must stop immediately.
Earlier this month, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2672 (2023), on the extension of the
authorization of cross-border humanitarian assistance
10/21

25/01/2023

in Syria. China calls on the international community
to fully take stock of the lessons learned from the
implementation of the resolution over the past six
months and to make greater efforts in the next six
months in order to ensure its full implementation and
achieve a greater impact on the ground.
Cross-border aid is a temporary arrangement,
made under special circumstances. Ultimately, there
should be a gradual and orderly transition to cross-line
assistance so as to allow cross-line deliveries to become
the main channel for humanitarian assistance to Syria.
We welcome the United Nations updated cross-line
humanitarian operation plan in north-western Syria, and
we look forward to seeing a more significant increase
in the frequency of aid operations and in the size of
the convoys. The cross-line relief for the Al-Rukban
refugee camp in south-eastern Syria should be resumed
as soon as possible.
Early-recovery projects can help to foster
endogenous drivers for Syria’s development. China
urges all donors to further improve the funding of
early-recovery projects in order to prioritize the wellbeing of all Syrians and promote their balanced and
efficient implementation throughout Syria.
We note with regret the fact that explosive remnants
of war have had a severe impact on the livelihoods
and daily lives of the Syrian people. China hopes that
relevant areas will be included in the scope of early
recovery as soon as possible. Unilateral sanctions and
the consequent overcompliance issues run counter to
the efforts of the Security Council and the broader
international community to improve humanitarian
access and increase humanitarian resources in Syria.
China once again calls on the relevant countries
to immediately and fully lift unilateral sanctions
against Syria.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, and Ms. Ghada Mudawi,
Deputy Director of the Operations and Advocacy
Division of the Office for the Coordination on
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings.
I begin by acknowledging the Security Council’s
efforts to achieve sustainable political solutions to the
conflict in Syria, with a focus on respect for unity,
independence and territorial integrity, in accordance
with the principles set out in resolution 2254 (2015).
23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Ecuador commends the determination with which
Special Envoy Pedersen has sought to reconcile the will
of the political actors in pursuit of creative solutions to
build trust among the parties and promote conditions
for a lasting ceasefire.
I also join his call to reactivate the meetings of
the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. I encourage
the parties involved to renew their commitment to that
mechanism created to support the inclusive process
of drafting a new social pact that reflects the Syrian
reality. We believe that this is one of the steps that will
lead to a new stage of governance that incorporates all
social, political and religious sectors in the framework
of respect for international human rights law.
Ecuador highlights the results achieved in the
early-recovery and livelihoods projects in 2022 and
encourages the international community to continue
to support funding to consolidate that progress, in
accordance with resolution 2642 (2022), so that the most
basic needs of the Syrian population, such as access to
electricity, water, health and education services, are
alleviated in the short term.
The Secretary-General’s report on humanitarian
needs in Syria (S/2022/933) states that the situation in
that country is one of the most complex on the planet.
Internal and cross-border displacement and the lack of
guarantees to promote the safe and voluntary return of
refugees is one of the challenges, as are the growing
famine, malnutrition, food insecurity, poverty, sexual
violence, mental illness and the alarming number
of people who depend on humanitarian assistance
to survive.
For all of the above reasons, Ecuador values the
unity of the Security Council, which on 9 January
allowed it to unanimously adopt resolution 2672
(2023) extending the authorization for cross-border
humanitarian aid through Bab Al-Hawa, in northwestern Syria, for an additional six months, as provided
for in resolution 2642 (2022). In both cases, I highlight
the role of the co-penholders, as well as the role of the
10 elected members of the Security Council.
I must point out, however, that while that extension
until next July was vital to counter the precarious
conditions that the Syrian population is experiencing,
the Council should promote greater predictability in the
time frames for humanitarian crossings.

S/PV.9248

Therefore, while the United Nations system and
the international community must support efforts to
improve conditions on the ground, including through
timely, sustained and secure cross-line assistance
operations, the Council should authorize in July an
extension of the border crossing for at least 12 months or
until the situation described in the Secretary-General’s
report requires it.
To return to the initial thesis of my statement,
the only possible solution to the conflict is political.
The empty chairs at the tables of Syrian families
bear witness to the very high human and social cost
of this protracted war. That is why we are calling for
a renewed interest in engaging in political dialogue
in order to implement lasting solutions on the road to
justice, national reconciliation and the reconstruction
of the social fabric.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3) — Ghana,
Mozambique and my own country, Gabon.
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Deputy
Director Ghada Mudawi for their briefings on the most
recent political and humanitarian developments in Syria.
We welcome the participation of the representatives of
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and the Republic of Türkiye in this meeting.
The A3 is very concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Syria, which remains alarming. The needs
on the ground continue to grow. In 2023, more than
15 million people will need humanitarian assistance,
up from more than 14 million in 2022, the highest level
since the conflict began in 2011.
At the same time, the country is in the grip of a
severe economic crisis that is now at its worst level
since 2021. That is compounded by difficulties in
accessing basic services, the ongoing coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the resurgence of
the cholera epidemic.
As a result, Syrians struggle on a daily basis to
meet their basic needs. Indeed, more than half of the
Syrian population struggles to feed itself, and 6 million
people need assistance during a particularly difficult
winter. The people of north-western Syria are among
the most vulnerable and depend on humanitarian
assistance provided through the United Nations crossborder mechanism. It is estimated that slightly more

23-0236811/21

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

than 4 million people, 80 per cent of whom are women
and children, out of a population of 4.6 million, are
in need of humanitarian assistance to meet their most
basic needs.
We are particularly sensitive to the plight of women
and girls, who continue to be disproportionately affected
by the crisis. They face gender-based violence, forced
and early marriages and limited access to livelihoods.
Of the 8.5 million people in need of assistance for
gender-based violence, more than 55 per cent are
women and 37 per cent are girls.
To meet the ever-increasing needs, while the overall
level of funding for the humanitarian response plan for
Syria remains low, the A3 calls for greater solidarity
and increased humanitarian funding, including for
early-recovery and livelihoods projects. We note
with satisfaction that in 2022, donors contributed
$517.6 million to partially or fully fund early-recovery
projects in the 14 governorates.
We call for the lifting of sanctions that could impede
access to essential medical supplies, medical support
related to the COVID-19 pandemic or food aid in Syria
in order to prevent sanctions from having unintended
negative humanitarian consequences, in accordance
with Council resolution 2664 (2022).
The A3 notes with deep concern that hostilities,
air strikes and bombings continue along the front lines
and in pockets across the country. Those hostilities are
causing high numbers of civilian casualties, including
women and children, in violation of international
humanitarian law. In north-western Syria alone, 138
civilians were killed and 249 injured between January
and November 2022.
We therefore urge all parties to respect international
humanitarian law, including the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution, and to
always ensure that civilians and civilian objects are
spared in all military operations.
We fear the risk of escalation and a further
deterioration of the situation. It is extremely urgent
to restore relative calm on the ground. To that end,
renewing the political process is of vital importance.
We take this opportunity to commend Special Envoy
Pedersen for his continued efforts, in a difficult
context, to advance a step-by-step confidence-building
process in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and
to convene a ninth session of the Syrian-led, United
12/21

25/01/2023

Nations-facilitated Constitutional Committee. We also
urge the parties to exercise restraint and to shoulder
their responsibilities by committing themselves to
renewing the dialogue and cooperating to consolidate
the bundle of bilateral agreements reached by the main
actors in the region into a nationwide ceasefire for the
sake of the people of Syria.
We note with interest the progress made in crossborder operations throughout Syria following the
United Nations update of its plan to progressively
increase access and scale up assistance to those in need
in order to complement the cross-border mechanism’s
response. A total of 10 convoys have been dispatched
between August 2021 and January 2023, with a gradual
increase both in the truckloads and the number of people
reached. We therefore call on the parties to continue
to ensure the safe passage of cross-border convoys and
their personnel.
The A3 welcomed the unanimous extension by
the Security Council on 9 January (see S/PV.9237) of
the authorization of humanitarian aid through the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing for an additional six months, until
10 July. Accordingly, resolution 2672 (2023) authorizes
the work of that crucial mechanism, which provides
vital assistance to 2.7 million people in need every
month — approximately 65 per cent of those in need
in north-west Syria. The extension of the cross-border
mechanism is all the more vital for the Syrian people
as there has been no substitute for it to date, both in
terms of size and impact. We reaffirm our commitment
to respecting the Syrian Arab Republic’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
In conclusion, the A3 reiterates its solidarity with
the Syrian people in their quest for lasting peace and
stability. The firm and good-faith commitment of
Syria’s neighbours is essential for achieving that.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me start by
again thanking Special Envoy Pedersen and Deputy
Director Mudawi for their powerful briefings today. I
would like to highlight the following three points.
First, the United Kingdom welcomes the recent
adoption of resolution 2672 (2023) to continue the
delivery of life-saving aid to millions of Syrians
in need. But let us be clear. As we heard again
today, six months is not a sufficient timeline within
which humanitarians can effectively operate. The
humanitarian community has consistently warned us
that shorter mandate renewals force United Nations
23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9248

agencies and non-governmental organizations to direct
much of their efforts to contingency planning. That
uncertainty limits their capacity to help those in need.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, with 15.3 million Syrians now in desperate
need of humanitarian aid.

violations on a massive and systematic scale. And as
they begin to grasp the meaning of life, they may end
up thinking that what they see is the world — no, it is
Syria, the place where citizens have endured extensive
and deadly destruction that is almost unparalleled in
modern history.

Secondly, with humanitarian needs growing each
year, the Al-Assad regime continues to profit from
the production and trafficking of narcotics, most
prominently of captagon, which provides billions of
dollars annually to the regime. Turning the country into
a narco-State harms the people of Syria and adds to
regional instability. We urge partners in the international
community to condemn that clearly and to continue
supporting those affected by the captagon trade.

The unfortunate soul-wrenching irony of all that
is that children who happen to be 12 years old in
Syria today are considered lucky to have survived an
atrocious never-ending conflict, since children and
other civilians continue to get killed every day in
Syria. And it is needless to add that the situation of
children and women immured in displacement camps
is far worse — they survive in squalid and inhumane
conditions, in a prison within a prison.

Thirdly, we applaud Special Envoy Pedersen’s
efforts to continue engagement with Damascus,
as well as countries in the region and beyond. The
United Kingdom stands ready to support a political
process in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We must
guard against any process that does not deliver on the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and that
will not contribute to lasting and sustainable peace.
We had heard from Russia that it had been taking steps
to renew the Constitutional Committee, but we have
seen no progress. We urge Russia to stop stalling what
should to be a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process. It is time to move away from discussions of
process for the Constitutional Committee and begin to
tackle substance.
It has been seven years since the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015). The
principles set out in that resolution remain the only
means for achieving a sustainable solution to the
conflict and humanitarian crisis in Syria.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me join others in
thanking Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Mudawi for
their briefings.
Another year has passed, and we are approaching
the twelfth year of the horrific war that has devastated
Syria and its people. For anyone who is 12 years old in
Syria, all they have seen since the very first day of their
lives has been nothing else but war and its disastrous
consequences. They have grown up in constant fear of
death, facing acute hunger and freezing cold, with no
education or health care, and in perpetual displacement
and destitution. All they have seen around them,
without understanding, is widespread human rights

There is no doubt that the regime is primarily
responsible for the tragedy in Syria. It has shown
constantly and defiantly that the only language it knows
is that of the severe repression of its own citizens. What
has unfolded during the past long 12 years has been
the tragic living proof of the profound disrespect for
human rights and the wanton destruction of life that the
regime generates and worships, built atop mass graves
and unfathomable depravity. About 130,000 Syrians
are detained and continue to languish in prisons in
unimaginable conditions. Others are simply missing
or have vanished, and as the Special Envoy confirmed
again today, the Syrian regime keeps nearly every
Syrian family — and the world — in total darkness
about their whereabouts.
The regime continues to ignore the persistent
urgent calls of families across Syria who are seeking to
clarify the fate and whereabouts of their missing loved
ones. Serious action is therefore needed to end the
despicable practice of arbitrary detention and forcible
disappearance, including extrajudicial killings, and to
hold the perpetrators accountable. In that respect, we
reiterate our support for the creation of new mechanism
for missing persons in Syria. We reiterate our full
support for the work of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and we
join the call on all States, civil society and the United
Nations system to provide relevant information and
documentation in support of accountability in Syria.

23-0236813/21

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

We deplore the continued obstruction of the work
of the Constitutional Committee on laying the ground
for the drafting of a new constitution and the start of
political transition towards another Syria, a democratic
Syria. When all the key indicators are red and
flashing, when everyone knows that the country needs
everything — but more than anything a path to its
future — then blocking the Constitutional Committee
is equal to committing a crime, a crime against people
and their hope. We support the continual engagement
of Special Envoy Pedersen with the relevant parties
in Syria and the region in favour of a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned process under United Nations auspices in
order to advance an inclusive political solution that will
protect the territorial integrity, unity and sovereignty
of Syria, as well as the rights and dignity of its citizens.
Only a genuine and inclusive political process, with the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), will help to put a
definitive end to the conflict and offer Syrians a new
perspective — one they need and deserve.
Only a few weeks ago, the Council showed
unity — based on reason, facts and reality — by
extending the humanitarian cross-border mandate. It
showed that, when the interests of those in need are put
first, diplomacy works and produces results, and the
Council discharges its responsibilities and saves lives.
We must take into account the very clear observation
made many times, including today by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, that the future
renewal of the cross-border mandate should last for at
least one year in order to provide those on the ground,
the United Nations and everyone involved with the
proper means to perform their tasks. We need to apply
the same approach of unity to support the political
process if we want to help Syrians to overcome the total
impasse of this never-ending crisis of epic proportions,
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
characterized it, and give Syrians, especially the
children I mentioned and the country’s young people,
a chance for a better life, a life without war and with
rights and dignity.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Mudawi for their briefings.
I would like to stress three points.
First, as we do every month, we regret the absence
of any openness on the part of the regime to negotiate
14/21

25/01/2023

under the aegis of the United Nations the basis for a
lasting peace as defined by resolution 2254 (2015),
which was adopted unanimously by the Security
Council. Despite the Special Envoy’s efforts, the
Constitutional Committee, which has not managed to
produce a single result since its inception, no longer
meets at all. In order to overcome the status quo, the socalled step-for-step approach has been suggested, which
France, together with its European partners, supports.
The regime must commit itself to that approach. Any
change in the French and European positions on the
lifting of sanctions, normalization and reconstruction
will be possible only if the regime commits to a credible
and inclusive political process.
Secondly, the regime alone bears full responsibility
for the humanitarian disaster that the Syrian people
face. The brutality of the conflict and the repression
have caused one of this century’s largest movements of
people in terms of both displaced persons and refugees.
France and Europe will continue their engagement
alongside the Syrian people to save lives, fight against
sexual and gender-based violence, counter the risk of
famine and meet medical needs. At a time when the
Syrian population continues to face a devastating
humanitarian crisis, with 15.3 million people in need,
we recall the importance of ensuring full humanitarian
access. The renewal of the cross-border mechanism by
the Council, albeit for only six months, was essential.
Guaranteeing unhindered access is essential to ensure
effective humanitarian assistance. We all have a duty
to respect international humanitarian law. The Syrian
refugees aspire to return to Syria when their safety is
guaranteed and their rights are respected. It is therefore
up to the Syrian regime to create the necessary
conditions for their return.
Thirdly, we must continue to fight against
impunity. There are 100,000 people missing, and
countless atrocities have been committed. Peace cannot
be created without justice. France will continue to fight
tirelessly to ensure that those responsible for war crimes
and crimes against humanity are held accountable.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
make this statement on the political situation in Syria in
my national capacity.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, I align
myself with the statement made by my Brazilian
colleague on behalf of both our countries.
23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

I would also like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen
and Deputy Director Mudawi for their sombre but very
important briefings.
The Syrian civilian population continues to be
subjected to severe hardship. Switzerland is concerned
about the continuing violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
throughout the country. We call on all parties to the
conflict to respect their obligations under international
law. The way out of the conflict in Syria is clear and
we heard that today; it can be achieved only through
a political solution. That is why Switzerland supports
the efforts of the United Nations and its Special Envoy,
Geir Pedersen, based on the mandate given to him by
resolution 2254 (2015), which was unanimously adopted
by the Security Council. We commend him for his
recent consultations with key regional and international
actors at the highest level. Those efforts are crucial to
building confidence among the parties and maintaining
the momentum for a political solution at a time when the
already fragile humanitarian, security and economic
situation in Syria is worsening dangerously.
In order to fulfil its commitment to the
implementation of the Council’s resolutions, Switzerland
offers the best possible guarantees for the continuation
of the peace process in Geneva, the main headquarters
of the United Nations in Europe. We have great hopes
that the work of the Constitutional Committee will
soon resume under the aegis of the Office of the Special
Envoy. The Security Council, through resolution 2254
(2015), calls for the voice and expectations of the Syrian
people to be taken into account. Switzerland supports
Syrian civil society organizations, in particular through
the Civil Society Support Room in Geneva. Civil society
organizations are involved in identifying an appropriate
and sustainable political solution. Across all regions,
they are building social cohesion and preserving the
country’s territorial integrity.
Finally, Switzerland would like the Security
Council to remain seized of the issue of detained or
missing persons. Resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2474
(2019) underline the importance of this issue in any
peace process. Switzerland joins the appeals of the
Special Envoy and the families and commends the
efforts of the Secretary-General to shed light on the
fate of those persons. We call on all parties to put an
end to the practices of arbitrary detention and enforced
disappearances in Syria. Allowing the access of
specialized humanitarian organizations to all places of

S/PV.9248

detention would be an essential step in that direction.
Experience shows that trust cannot be restored in a
society until the families of the missing get answers
about the fate of their loved ones. Women and tens of
thousands of orphans across the country are waiting
to hear from a husband, a parent or a brother in order
to regain control of their lives. They have the right
to know.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Geir
Pedersen and Ms. Ghada Mudawi for their briefings.
Over the past 12 years of the crisis, Syria’s
territories have been used as a theatre for political and
military operations, which has had an impact on the
Syrian people. Those operations have also led to tragic
outcomes, including at the humanitarian, economic,
social and security levels. Although the Council renewed
the cross-border mechanism earlier this month in order
to mitigate the worsening humanitarian conditions in
Syria, a bandage will not heal a deep wound. While
those efforts are important, they do not address all the
causes of the Syrian crisis, particularly in the long term.
We reiterate the need to stop piecemeal and temporary
approaches. We need to move from managing the
Syrian crisis to resolving it, which includes turning the
page on disputes by political communication, dialogue
and diplomatic efforts. We also stress the importance of
finding Arab solutions to Arab crises to build a better
future for the peoples of the region.
Turning to the political situation, the United Arab
Emirates stresses the importance of supporting the
efforts of the Special Envoy for Syria, as well as Arab
and regional diplomatic efforts aimed at ending the
crisis. We also look forward to the upcoming trilateral
meeting and hope that such efforts and international
talks regarding Syria will yield results in the interest
of the Syrian people and in support of the security and
stability in the region.
At the same time, we reaffirm the importance of
overcoming the paralysis that affected the Constitutional
Committee during the previous period, as it is the only
platform in which Syrians can constructively engage
in a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned national dialogue
without foreign intervention or dictates in order to
move the constitutional process forward.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, we believe
that the unanimous adoption of the resolution to extend
the cross-border mechanism (resolution 2672 (2023))

23-0236815/21

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

reflects the unity of the Council about prioritizing
the needs of the Syrian people over any political
considerations. However, we must work to find solutions
that respect Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity, including by doubling crossline humanitarian aid, both in terms of its frequency
and scale, and early-recovery projects. In that context,
we commend United Nations efforts to increase crossline aid and stress the importance of intensifying
such efforts.
My country expresses its deep concern over the
deteriorating humanitarian conditions in the camps,
especially during the cold and harsh winter, given the
lack of basic infrastructure. That, in turn, threatens
the lives of millions of people, including women and
children. We emphasize the need to consider long-term
solutions to address those conditions and alleviate the
suffering of the Syrian people.
In conclusion, we hope that the year 2023 will
witness additional positive steps towards creating the
conditions appropriate to putting Syria on the path of
security and stability.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Deputy Director Mudawi for their
remarks. As always, their updates are a pertinent
reminder of the continued suffering endured by the
Syrian people and the need for a political solution in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).
As the Syrian conflict nears its thirteenth year,
millions of Syrians are desperately poor, hungry and
sick. In 2023, around 15.3 million people will require
some form of humanitarian assistance. Year by year,
living conditions for the Syrian population are only
worsening. The impact of years of violence inflicted
upon the Syrian people by the Syrian regime, instability,
corruption, economic struggles and the lack of progress
on the political front have rendered it impossible for
the population to be able to meet its most basic needs.
Cholera is spreading rapidly across the country. More
than 2 million children are out of school and are often
forced into work or pushed into early marriage to support
their families. Those are the agonizing consequences of
conflict for millions of children in Syria. As noted by
our briefers today, the situation in Syria remains first
and foremost a protection crisis.
Malta was pleased by the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2672 (2023) on 9 January (see S/PV.9237),
which saw the humanitarian cross-border mechanism
16/21

25/01/2023

renewed for a further six months. We encourage the
continuation and expansion of efforts to successfully
deliver assistance via cross-line aid convoys in the
north-west of Syria. However, it is clear that those
cross-line operations cannot substitute the size and
scope of the cross-border mechanism at Bab Al-Hawa.
Malta supports the use of all modalities to meet the
needs of millions throughout the country.
The Syria of today is one where mothers are
skipping meals to feed their children. Since much of the
country’s infrastructure has been destroyed, electricity
and fuel are scarcer than ever. Major cities face lengthy
power outages. We stress the importance of supporting
primary health-care services and strengthening maternal
health care and nutrition programmes for mothers and
their children. We also express our thanks and gratitude
for the work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and all humanitarians who strive
to reach millions of Syrians every day at great personal
risk. Malta remains committed to assisting the Syrian
people and to providing humanitarian support, as well
as ensuring that it reaches those most in need.
There simply can be no further delay in meaningful
and substantive political progress in line with resolution
2254 (2015). Malta urges the swift reconvening of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva and calls upon
the Syrian Government to engage in good faith in that
regard. We also highlight the importance of ensuring
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
at all stages of the political process. In that regard,
we welcome the Special Envoy’s engagement with the
Syrian Women’s Advisory Board in November and
stress that women’s participation must be more than a
formality. The agreed 30 per cent threshold should be
seen as the minimum.
Time is of the essence. As Special Envoy Pedersen
outlined, the dangers of a military escalation in parts of
the country remain real. Therefore, the first step is for
all parties to step back from escalation and work towards
a nationwide ceasefire. We must remain guided by the
needs of the Syrian people and steadfast in the pursuit
of justice and accountability for the crimes perpetrated
against them. In that vein, Malta reiterates its support
for the work being carried out by the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 to ensure accountability for the most serious
23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

crimes committed under international law. Malta also
continues to support the implementation of targeted
sanctions against relevant individuals and entities
involved in the repression of the Syrian people.
We also stress that all returns of Syrian refugees
and internally displaced persons must be legal, safe,
dignified and voluntary, in accordance with the
criteria set by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Furthermore, we call on
the Government of Syria to ensure the immediate,
transparent and verifiable release of all those detained
arbitrarily and for the provision of information on the
whereabouts and fate of the thousands who are missing.
In conclusion, I reiterate Malta’s support for Special
Envoy Pedersen and for his tireless work in advancing
a political process for Syria. Malta stands by his stepfor-step approach and calls on the Government of Syria
to engage faithfully and substantively with his good
offices. The people of Syria must come first, as that is
the only viable way forward.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and the Deputy Director
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Ghada Mudawi, for their briefings.
As 2023 begins, Japan hopes that a new year will
bring new momentum. Japan welcomes the unanimity the
Security Council showed in renewing the cross-border
aid mechanism earlier this month (see S/PV.9237) and
hopes that such solidarity can be sustained, including
when the time comes to renew the mechanism again
in July — regardless of the divergence of views on the
political front.

S/PV.9248

To that end, Japan urges all parties, especially the
Syrian authorities, to engage meaningfully in an
inclusive United Nations-facilitated political process in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). Japan calls on
the Council to unite in support of the efforts of Special
Envoy Pedersen. The Council must also work to ensure
that the Constitutional Committee makes real progress.
Japan strongly encourages the Syrian Government
to address in good faith the issue of detainees and
missing persons and create a conducive environment
for the return of refugees. In that vein, Japan notes
with appreciation the Secretary-General’s proposal
to establish a new mechanism to determine the fate
of missing persons in Syria and to provide support
for victims, survivors and their families. Japan also
takes note of the series of announcements concerning
an amnesty by the Syrian Government and strongly
hopes for its implementation in an expeditious and
verifiable manner.
Syria has a rich history and civilization dating back
millenniums. Damascus is one of the oldest cities in the
world. Aleppo was once a vibrant centre of commerce.
Let us remember that not just Syria’s present but also its
future are at stake. Today millions of children cannot
attend school. We the Council members must make the
utmost efforts to seek a political solution in a humble
and constructive manner so that the day comes swiftly
when those children can resume their education and all
Syrians can live in peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

As we approach 12 years since the outbreak of the
Syrian crisis, the country is shattered and the suffering
of its people is beyond measure. There are no winners in
the conflict. More than half of all Syrians are refugees
or internally displaced, cholera and coronavirus disease
have spread widely, and the economy has collapsed. We
are fully aware of the enormous humanitarian needs
in Syria, including for early-recovery activities, such
as the restoration of schools, hospitals and water and
electric facilities; the removal of landmines and debris;
and the provision of emergency medical assistance.

Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to reiterate my
delegation’s position on the practice of holding monthly
Security Council meetings on Syria in the absence of
any relevant developments. That leads Member States
to the usual routine of repeating the same statements
and phrases. However, it seems that those who are
attached to this kind of discussion have no regard for
the Council’s time and resources and for their use
to maintain international peace and security. They
would rather exploit the Council to repeatedly launch
campaigns of lies and misinformation while fabricating
baseless accusations.

Nevertheless, history has demonstrated that
conflicts eventually end and it is possible to rebuild.

In 2022, Syrians were faced with difficult and
multifaceted humanitarian crises, while the beginning

23-0236817/21

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

of 2023 has created opportunities for agreeing on
solutions to resolve and alleviate them. It is therefore
important that we take a moment to look at the root
causes that led the Syrians to the current difficult
humanitarian situation, including its deterioration
and persistence.
The wrong policies pursued by the United States
of America throughout the world — in our region in
general and in Syria in particular — led to instability
and insecurity and destroyed the development
achievements achieved over decades. The policy of
creative chaos adopted by successive United States
Administrations in our region and in Syria, which is a
vital part of the region, has produced and exacerbated
problems and ignited tensions, thereby resulting in
conflicts. Hundreds of millions of dollars have been
provided to suspicious media outlets to mislead public
opinion and distort the image of the Syrian State. That
malicious policy has destroyed all political, economic
and social achievements and has led to the emergence
of terrorist organizations, in particular Da’esh and the
Al-Nusra Front. That policy has also created harmful
and obscure structures alien to Syrian society, the sole
purpose of which is to serve the selfish geopolitical
interests of the United States of America and its allies.
The United States and its NATO allies have invented
a number of pretexts for directly intervening in Syria.
They have manipulated the provisions of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations to justify
their illegal military presence on Syrian territory,
which has gravely threatened the sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria and led to the theft of
more than $100 billion in Syrian national resources and
wealth, primarily in the form of oil, wheat and gas.
The United States and its Western allies have
provided protection and impunity for Israel, which has
enabled Israel to continue its occupation of the Syrian
Golan since 1967. That has prevented the Council from
assuming its responsibility to address Israel’s repeated
acts of aggression against Syria’s sovereignty and vital
infrastructure, the most recent of which was the attack
on Damascus International Airport at the beginning
of this year, which led to a number of martyrdoms,
casualties, material losses and the temporary suspension
of the civilian airport’s services. Those who claim here
that they are protecting Syria and Syrians failed to
condemn those attacks, which demonstrates the level
of their hypocrisy and adherence to double standards.
18/21

25/01/2023

At the same time, the United States and its
European allies have imposed unilateral coercive
measures on the Syrian people that are illegitimate,
inhumane and immoral. They have only exacerbated
the suffering of Syrians inside and outside Syria,
especially as they impact third countries. The targeting
of the Syrian health sector, which provides health care
to millions of Syrians, including specialized children’s
hospitals, by the Bureau of Industry and Security of
the United States Department of Commerce, through
the restrictions it has imposed on the sale of equipment
and the provision of services, support and spare parts to
many Syrian public and private hospitals, is an example
of how those measures threaten the lives of millions
of Syrians. Moreover, the United States delegation,
together with other delegations, claims that sanctions
do not affect the health sector. They shed crocodile
tears in this Chamber, while claiming that they are
providing humanitarian assistance to Syrians.
It is regrettable to hear certain United States and
European Union officials publicly and privately stating
that they will not implement the recently adopted
resolution 2672 (2023), in particular its provisions on
early recovery and electricity. That means essentially
that the resolution will remain unimplemented, as is
the custom with those countries, and we will hold them
accountable for that before the Council in advance.
The United States of America and its Western allies
have not lost a single opportunity to exploit and
politicize humanitarian activities. They blackmail
and pressure those in charge by controlling funding.
They also use various international bodies as a tool
for exerting political pressure on Syria by openly
manipulating international conventions or opting for
their selective misinterpretation in order to create
politicized mechanisms.
Such destructive behaviour by the United States in
Syria has brought insecurity and instability to millions
of Syrians. It has turned a large number of them into
refugees and displaced persons, undermined their food
security and caused difficult humanitarian conditions.
The coronavirus disease pandemic, the harsh winter and
the outbreak of cholera and other infectious diseases
have only exacerbated the Syrian people’s suffering
and misery.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns all those
crimes, violations and immoral practices perpetrated
by the United States of America and its allies and calls
upon the Security Council to assume its responsibilities
23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

and fulfil its mandate to ensure respect of Syria’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, and ensure compensation for all damages
borne by the Syrian people as a result of those faulty
policies and practices.
During those difficult years, the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic has dealt responsibly with all the
challenges it has faced. With high patriotic spirit, the
Syrian people have worked to combat terrorism, and the
Government succeeded in eliminating a large part of it.
Today it is more determined than ever to continue their
efforts aimed at combating the remnants of terrorists
and restoring security and stability throughout Syria.
The Syrian Government has also supported political
settlement tracks and national reconciliation efforts,
which have strengthened national unity, preserved
Syrian social cohesion and facilitated the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to those who deserve it, to
meet the needs of Syrians and support their resilience.
Syria has also implemented its legal obligations under
the international conventions that it has joined. It
has supported all initiatives put forward by brotherly
and friendly countries, especially the Astana format
meetings, to mitigate the repercussions of the crisis or
find solutions for it.
The Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms that the
ultimate solution to the crisis in Syria requires stopping
the repeated and systematic Israeli acts of aggression;
ending the illegal foreign presence on Syrian territories
in the north-east and north-west of the country, as
well as the presence of affiliated terrorist groups and
separatist militias; the immediate and unconditional
lifting of measures of economic terrorism and
collective punishment imposed on the Syrian people;
improving the humanitarian situation by addressing
the humanitarian needs of Syrians fairly and without
discrimination; donors fulfilling the commitments they
have made regarding the humanitarian response plan;
and increasing and expanding early-recovery projects
in quantity and quality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran):
We thank Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Mudawi for their
insightful briefings.
On the political track, we emphasize once again our
steadfast position that the Syrian crisis must be resolved

S/PV.9248

in accordance with principles of international law. A
political solution based on a Syrian-led and Syrianowned process facilitated by the United Nations is the
only way to end the crisis. Throughout this process, the
national sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic must be fully respected.
Terrorism continues to pose a serious threat to Syria
and the region. However, the presence of foreign forces
in the north of Syria under the pretext of combating
terrorism should not be used to violate and undermine
Syria’s national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Such an illegal presence continues to violate the United
Nations Charter and international law and creates ideal
conditions for terrorist activities, which must be ended.
In order to create grounds conducive for ending the
crisis in Syria, all uninvited foreign forces must leave
the country without any precondition or delay, and
terrorist groups must be confronted.
Equally important, the Security Council must
compel the Israeli regime to immediately end all acts
of aggression against Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. The Israeli regime continues to commit
these illicit acts that contravene international law,
notwithstanding the Syrian Arab Republic’s repeated
requests for the Council to explicitly condemn them.
We strongly condemn the Israeli regime’s recent
2 January terrorist attack on Damascus International
Airport, which constitutes a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and endangers regional
and international peace and security.
Along with the other members of the Astana format,
we support the Constitutional Committee’s work, which
must continue in accordance with its rules of procedures
and without foreign interference or artificially imposed
timelines. We hope that the procedural obstacles to the
functioning of the Constitutional Committee will be
removed as a result of the constructive engagement and
good faith of the parties and that the Committee’s next
meeting will be held soon. In this context, we support
the constructive engagement of the parties with the
Special Envoy to effectively resolve differences over
the Constitutional Committee meeting. We also support
the Special Envoy’s interaction with Syrian authorities,
which is required for the political process.
Given the increasingly dire humanitarian situation
in Syria, Iran welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2672 (2023), which extends the cross-border
mechanism for an additional six months, and it regards

23-0236819/21

S/PV.9248

The situation in the Middle East

this action as an important step forward in addressing
Syria’s pressing needs, particularly in the light of the
harsh winter conditions. However, we continue to stress
that the cross-border mechanism is only temporary
in nature. We believe that, in discussions on a new
extension, in July, the legitimate concerns of the Syrian
Arab Republic, together with identified gaps and
challenges, must be addressed.
We commend the efforts made so far by the United
Nations and other humanitarian actors to meet the
needs of the Syrian people. We are confident that, in
implementing resolution 2672 (2023), the focus will be
on improving early-recovery projects for the rebuilding
of critical infrastructure, enhancing cross-line aid
operations and supplying electricity, which has been
identified as a pressing challenge and a basic requirement
for all Syrians. Accordingly, political conditions should
not prevent humanitarian aid from reaching those in
need, and all parties must strictly adhere to the basic
principles governing humanitarian assistance while
maintaining neutrality and transparency.
We reiterate our call for the lifting of the unilateral
coercive measures imposed on Syria, particularly those
targeting ordinary people and patients in the health
sector. Such illegal actions are preventing resolution
2672 (2023) from being implemented, making
humanitarian aid more difficult to deliver, and even
delaying the return of refugees and internally displaced
people. We urge the international community to
increase funding for the humanitarian effort in Syria,
particularly in view of the harsh winter conditions.
Finally, we commend and support the Syrian
Government’s ongoing efforts for local and national
reconciliation, which are a critical step towards
restoring Syria’s stability and facilitating the dignified,
safe and voluntary return of refugees and internally
displaced people.
Syria has always played an important role in the
region, and it is a key pillar of regional peace and
security. We support Syria’s regional standing and
improved diplomatic relations because we believe that
a safe, secure and prosperous Syria benefits the Syrian
people, the region and the global community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
20/21

25/01/2023

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Türkiye): Let me thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen and Deputy Director Mudawi for
their briefings.
Earlier this month when the Security Council
agreed to extend United Nations cross-border assistance
for an additional six months, millions of Syrians who
depend on that vital assistance and the humanitarian
community breathed a sigh of relief. We thank Ireland
and Norway for their dedicated and responsible work as
co-penholders on the Syrian humanitarian file for the
past two years. We congratulate Switzerland and Brazil
on taking on that important responsibility. We expect
that, in the face of unprecedented needs in Syria, the
humanitarian imperative will be at the centre of the
Council’s work in the period ahead.
The Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2672 (2023) is important and welcomed, given the vital
role the United Nations cross-border mechanism plays
in the delivery of life-saving aid to 4.1 million people
in north-west Syria. The scale of the humanitarian
crisis and preserving regional stability necessitate a
longer-term maintenance of the United Nations crossborder mechanism. We reiterate our call on Council
members to continue to do what is right and support
the indispensable cross-border mechanism for as long
as it is needed. It should be a needs-based decision,
not a time-bound one. We will continue to support the
full implementation of Security Council resolutions in
all their aspects, including by facilitating cross-line
aid deliveries.
Syria is experiencing the highest number of
humanitarian needs amid harsh winter conditions.
The season is already hitting communities with rain,
unpredictable flooding and cold temperatures. For many
families among the 6.8 million internally displaced
in Syria, it is their twelfth winter in displacement.
Especially at camps for internally displaced persons,
the sole concern these days is how to get warm, which
often results in negative coping mechanisms, such as
using unsafe substances for heating.
Reports about people, including children, who lost
their lives and tens of thousands who were injured due
to winter conditions or fires are not only alarming but
also underscore the need for lasting shelter solutions.
We support the efforts of the United Nations and its
partners to replace the short-lived and easily damaged
tents with safer, more durable and dignified shelters.
Similar to Türkiye’s brick shelters project, durable
23-02368

25/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

shelters can provide a decent way of life for millions
of displaced Syrians. We continue to encourage other
international stakeholders and donors to prioritize
funding such projects.
Türkiye’s long-lasting priorities in Syria are clear
and intact — ensuring the security of our borders,
protecting Syria’s unity and territorial integrity,
eliminating all terrorist organizations from Syria,
ensuring the success of the political process and
creating the appropriate conditions for the return of
Syrian refugees to their homes in a voluntary, safe
and dignified manner. As the guarantor of the Syrian
opposition and the country hosting the largest Syrian
refugee population globally, Türkiye’s support to the
Syrian people will continue. We believe that a lasting
solution to the conflict can be achieved only through
a political process. We expect the ninth round of the
Constitutional Committee to be held as soon as possible.
It is crucial to start obtaining concrete results from the
process. We continue to communicate that message to
all interested parties.
We are as committed as ever to resolution 2254
(2015) and to United Nations principles on the return
of refugees. The United Nations and its agencies have
a major role to play in the process of creating the
necessary conditions for refugee returns, as well as in
implementing and monitoring returns on the basis of
United Nations principles. As we have done so far, we

S/PV.9248

will continue to work closely with the United Nations
on that issue.
The Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection
Units (PKK/YPG) terrorist organization in northern
Syria is a critical threat to our security. The terrorist
organization continues to target our citizens inside our
borders, as well as Syrian civilians. The organization
is also advancing its separatist agenda in north-east
Syria. It is a matter of public record now, including in
the Secretary-General’s reports to the Council, that the
members of the PKK/YPG and its offshoot, the Syrian
Democratic Forces, which is a minority in north-east
Syria, oppress the Arab majority in the region, including
by recruiting minors, imposing their own controversial
school curriculum on the Arabic-speaking majority,
closing schools in which students are taught in Arabic
and arresting Arabic teachers. As we have done so far,
Türkiye is determined to do whatever is necessary to
eliminate the terrorist and separatist threat posed by the
PKK/YPG.
We cannot allow or afford for the Syrian crisis
to be a frozen conflict. The international community
needs to step up efforts in support of a Syrian-led
political solution. The parameters are clearly defined
in the Council’s own resolution 2254 (2015). We will
not give up on our Syrian brothers and sisters. We will
continue to support them in their pursuit of a peaceful,
prosperous and just future.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

23-0236821/21
