TWENTY-FOURTH

YE,AR
th
MEETING:

NEW

23 OCTOBER

1969

YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . .. . . I . . . , . . . . . .f . . . . . . .

Page
1

. . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .. ,. . . . , . .

1

,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 23 September 1969 from the President of the General Assembly
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9462)
. . . . , . . . . . .. .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 15 14)

Welcome to the representative
Adoption

of the agenda

of Algeria

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records ojl*the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it apr :ars or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes or Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 23 October 1969, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

4. Mr. President, following up what you said in alluding to
my past, I should like to say that my delegation will
continue, as it has in the past, to co-operate with members
of the Security Council. I would add to what was said by
the President that I belong to a generation which first of all
fought, then negotiated, and now co-operates, and we are
ready, as always, to co-operate with all of you.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Social”
ist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

5. The PRESIDENT: I am sure that all of us greatly
appreciate the words of the representative who has joined
us, and we particularly look forward to working with him
in future.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l514)

I, Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 September 1969 from the President of
the General Assembly addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9462).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Welcome to the representative of Algeria

Letter dated 23 September 1969 from the President of the
General Assembly addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9462)

1, The PRESIDENT: Before we proceed with our meeting,
I should like to say that I am very happy that it falls to me
to welcome to this Council the distinguished representative
of Algeria, Mr. Mohamed Yazid. He has been well known
here in the United Nations in the past and returns to us
now witb. an enviable reputation, a reputation for bravery
and leadership. I am sure that I speak for all members of
the Council when I say that we welcome him warmly and
look forward keenly to working with him in the Council
and outside it. I should like also to pay my special respects
to Mr. Hadj Azzout, who has ably held the fort and
endeared himself to us all, None of us who had the privilege
of working with Mr. Tewfik Bouattoura will cease to mourn
the tragic accident which robbed us of one of the most
admired and best loved members of this Council. We shall
not forget him. It is in the high tradition set by Mr. Bouattoura and maintained by Mr, Azzout that Mr, Yazid comes
to US. We are most fortunate to have him with US.

6. The PRESIDENT: It will be recalled that, by letter
dated 23 September 1969 addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9462),1 the President of the General
Assembly informed the Council of the inclusion by the
General Assembly of an agenda item entitled “Amendment
to Article 22 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice (Seat of the Court) and consequential amendments
to Articles 23 and 28”.
7. Article 69 of the Statute of the International
Justice provides that:

Court of

“Amendments to the present Statute shall be effected
by the same procedure as is provided by the Charter of
the United Nations for amendments to that Charter,
subject however to any provisions which the General
Assembly upon recommendation of the Security Council
may adopt concerning the participation of states which
are parties to the present Statute but are not Members of
the United Nations”.

2. Mr. YAZID (Algeria) (translated porn French): Mr.
President, I should first of all like to thank you for
welcoming me and tell you how honoured and happy I feel
to be sitting for the first time under the Presidency of one
whose high moral and intellectual gifts are so highly
appreciated by my delegation and my country and who
represents a country with which we have fruitful and
co-operative relations.

8. As members of the Council are aware, Liechtenstein,
San Marino and Switzerland are parties to the Statute, but
are not Members of the United Nations. In accordance with
the provisions of Article 69 of the Statute, the Security
Council may wish to recommend to the General Assembly
for adoption provisions concerning the participation of

3. On behalf of the Council, I shall make it my duty to
communicate to the family of my young friend, Tewfik
Bouattoura, the thoughts expressedhere. These feelings will
help his family to face the tragedy of which it has been a
victim for nearly a year.

1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1969, page86.

1

States which are parties to the Statute but are not Members
of the United Nations in the procedure for effecting
amendments to the Statute.
9. After consultations with members of the Council, a
draft resolution on the subject was duly prepared and
circulated,. and there have been further consultations today
which have enabled me to circulate to members of the
Council an amended form of this document, which, I
believe, carries general support. The last paragraph varies
somewhat from the draft originally distributed.
10. I therefore wish the Council to pronounce itself on the
document which has been circulated in its fmal form, but
before going further I shall call on the representative of the
Soviet Union.
11. Mr. MENDELEVICH

Members of the United Nations, namely Liechtenstein, San
Marino and Switzerland, can take part in the consideration
of problems relating to amendments to the Statute which
are on the agenda of the present session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations. As is clearly stated in
Article 69 of the Statute and Article 108 of the lJnited
Nations Charter, any amendments to the Statute of the
International Court shall come into force for all parties to
the Statute only when they have been adopted by a vote of
two thirds of the parties to the Statute, and ratified in
accordance with their respective constitutional processesby
two thirds of the parties to the Statute, including ;all the
permanent members of the Security Council, The cleiegation of the Soviet Union considers that this provision,
clearly reflected in operative paragraph 2 of the draft
resolution, is extremely important and that the Security
Council should adopt it.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Re-

publics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, since this

is the first open meeting of the Security Council in
October, may I, first of all, in the name of the Soviet
delegation, welcome you on your assumption of the high
and responsible position of President of the Security
Council, There is no doubt that your very great political
and diplomatic experience will serve as a guarantee that
your activities as President of the Council will be effective
and successful. We know this from past years when you
presided-over the work of the Council, and even on the
basis of this month which is already drawing to an end. In
short, Mr, President, we consider that, with you in the
chair, the Security Council is in reliable hands. Were I bold
enough to try to emulate you in a field in which your
talents particularly excite our admiration-namely the field
of poetry-I would even try a Russian rhyme and say
“When Lord Caradon is at the helm, law and order always
prevail”.
12. I should also like to take this opportunity to welcome,
on behalf of the Soviet delegation, the new representative
of Algeria in the Security Council, Ambassador Mohamed
Yazid, an outstanding diplomat and representative of his
country, and should like to add that the memory of our
dear friend, Ambassador Tewfik Bouattoura, who was the
victim of such a sad tragedy, will of course always remain
with US. We would ask all our Algerian friends to transmit
the expression of our deepest condolences to the family of
Tewfik Bouattoura.
13. The Soviet delegation has had the opportunity of
studying the draft resolution before the Security Council
on the question of the participation of some States
non-members of the United Nations in the procedure for
effecting amendments to the Statute of the International
Court, In connexion with the consideration of this draft
resolution, the Soviet delegation would like to make the
following remarks.
14. In view of the Soviet Union’s firm and consistent
Position in support of the strict observance of the United
Nations Charter and the Statute of the International Court
of Justice, which is an inalienable part of the Charter, the
delegation of the Soviet Union considers that States which,
at the present time, are parties to the Statute of the
International Court but which, for various reasons, are not

15. It goes without saying that, in agreeing to the draft
resolution relating only to the procedure for allowing States
which are parties to the Statute but are not Members of the
United Nations to take part in the consideration of the item
concerning amendments to the Statute-included in the
agenda of the General Assembly-the Soviet deIegation is in
no way prejudging its position on the substance of that
item.
16. As we are now considering a concrete case of the
participation of non-Member States of the United Nations
in the work of the General Assembly, the delegation of the
Soviet Union cannot fail to draw the attention of the
Security Council and all its members to the continuing
discriminatory practice against several sovereign socialist
States, at the instigation and under the constant pressure of
some Powers.
17. To this day, because of the efforts of these Powers, a
discriminatory formula is regularly inserted in the resolu.
tions of the Security Council, the General Assembly and
other organs of the United Nations which unjustifiably
limits the number of States that can take part in Ulnited
Nations activities only to States that are Members of the
United Nations, or members of the specialized agencies,the
International Atomic Energy Agency and parties ta’ the
Statute of the International Court of Justice, The applica.
tion of this formula, which is contrary to the spirit o!Fthe
United Nations Charter and runs counter to the principle of
universality of our Organization, makes it possible for
non-member States of the United Nations, such as the
Federal Republic of Germany, South Korea and even South
Viet-Nam, to take part in United Nations activities while, at
the same time, it prevents socialist States, such as the
German Democratic Republic, the Korean People’s Democratic Republic and the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam
from taking part in such activities on the same basis.
18. We know what harm was done by the application of
this discriminatory practice to the cause of fair economic
co-operation and to the economic development of the
developing countries when, after the twenty-third sessionof
the General Assembly, an illegal decision was ta.ken
concerning the membership of the Preparatory Committee
for the Second Development Decade. A capitalist countrY,
the Federal Republic of Germany, a non-member of the

United Nations, was included in that Committee, while a
socialist country, the German Democratic Republic, was
barred. Any objective observer will readily see that such a
practice is one of the sombre vestiges of the cold war
period.

Security Councilfor the month of Septemberdid not allow
any discriminationto be madeagainstthe cablegram
of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the GermanDemocratic
Republic,and that cablegram
wasdistributedasan official
documentof the Security Councilfor generalreasons,just
as any other message
addressed
to the Council from any
other Statein the world.

19. Let us take a simple and typical case from the work of
the United Nations, the distribution of documents of
various States as official documents of the Security
Council. It is well known that neither the Security Council
nor the General Assembly has ever adopted any decision
that documents of such and such a State cannot be
distributed as official United Nations documents. Such a
decision could not have been taken, since either it would be
utterly absurd and run counter to common sense or would
legitimize discrimination against some States as compared
with others, which would be in contradiction to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,

23. Thereliesthe crux of the matter: the Presidentof the
Security Councildid not tolerateany discriminationagainst
the cablegramof the Minister for ForeignAffairs of the
GermanDemocraticRepublic,but the representatives
of
France, the United Kingdom and the United States,it
appears,would very much have liked to seethe German
Democratic Republic discriminatedagainstin connexion
with the circulationof its documents.Why? For the very
obviousreasonthat this troika doesnot like the socialist
regimein the GermanDemocraticRepublic. This troika
continuesto live in a world of illusions,assertingin its
letters, includingthe one from which 1 havejust quoted,
that there is only one GermanState in the world, the
FederalRepublicof Germany.Thisillusionwasinventedby
the politiciansof somecountriesin the yearsof the cold
war. But it wasunrealisticeventhen.Now, that the German
DemocraticRepublichas existed and flourishedfor two
decades,this idea nurtured by the troika is not even an
illusion, it is fiction. There wasa time when one of the
Statesmembersof that troika existedfor sixteenyearsin
such a world of fiction, not noticingthe existenceof the
Soviet Union, But realitiescompelledthat State to giveup
this illusion in regardto our country. Is this not a clear
enoughlessonof history?

20. However, quite recently, in September of this year,
when the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German
Democratic Republic despatched a cablegram to the President of the Security Council in connexion with the
question of Namibia, it was distributed as an official
document of the Security Council, as document S/9455,2
with an arbitrary footnote reading “Circulated at the
direction of the President of the Security Council”. Why,
may I ask, is it necessary to distribute as an official
document of the Security Council a cabIegram from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic
Republic on an item on the agenda of the Security Council
with a footnote drawing the attention of the members of
the Council to the fact that this is being done “at the
direction of the President of the Security Council”? Why?
What purpose is served? It is known that even without such
a footnote that official documents of the Security Council
are always distributed on instructions of the President of
the Security Council?

24. I repeat once againthat neither the United Nations
Charternor any other United Nationsdocumentdeterrnining the procedure of work of United Nations bodies
containsor could contain any provisionjustifying discrimination in the circulationof documentsemanatingfrom any
State asofficial documentsof the United Nations.

2 1, But that is not all. Yesterday, on 22 October 1969, an
official document of the Security Council, document
S/9486,3 was issued. It consists of a letter from the
Permanent Representatives of France, the United Kingdom
and the United States, in which a rather peculiar attempt is
made to cast doubt on the fact that that letter from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic
Republic was distributed on the instructions of the President of the Security Council. In the letter of those three
representatives it is stated that document S/9455 “was
circulated at the request of the Permanent Representative
of the Soviet Union, who was President of the Security
Council for the month of September”.

25. The delegationof the SovietUnion, firmly supporting
the principle of the sovereignequality of all States,large
and small,and consistentlydefendingthe universalnature
of internationalco-operationasreflected in the Charterof
the United Nations,cannot and will not countenancethe
arbitrary and discriminatorypracticespursuedby certain
countriesagainstspecificsocialistStates.The delegations
of
all countriestruly interestedin developingand strengthening friendship and co-operationamong peoples,in the
collective strengtheningof generalpeaceandsecurity, and
in the normal operation of the United Nations must
understandour positionand do all in their powerto put an
endto this intolerablesituation.

22. I wish to tell the representatives of France, the United
Kingdom and the United States that document S/9455 was
distributed like any other document of the Security
Council, not on the instructions of some delegation or
other, but on those of the President of the Security
Council, and there was no need to give any special
indication of this fact. The fact is that the President of the
2 Ibid.,

Supplement

for July August

and

26. Thosearethe remarkswhichthe Sovietdelegationhas
deemed it essentialto make in connexion with the
considerationof the item on the agendaof the Security
Council,
27. The PRESIDENT: I do not proposeat this stageto
commenton the substanceof the speechto which wehave
just listened,but I shouldlike to thank the representative
of the Soviet Union for his very kindly poetic referenceto
myself. In the past,asall of uswill recall, we havehad to

September, pas 1%

3 Footnote1, pages
95-96.
3

33. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): Mr. President, it goes without saying that we too welcome you back
in a position which is hardly unfamiliar to you, as President
of our Council. I might say that I have been trying during
intervening moments since the Soviet representative proposed a Russian poem in your honour to translate it into
English in such a manner that it might rhyme. I have beea
unable to do so, but I certainly subscribe to the sentiments
that he expressedin Russian.

survive on a somewhat harsh diet of Russian proverbs. I am
sure we all greatly look forward to a more delicious and
digestible diet of Soviet poetry in the future.
28. Mr, BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Mr. President, I should like to apologize to you for not
having been present at the last meeting of the Council, and
for that reason I should like at today’s meeting to address
to you my warm congratulations now that you have
assumed your high office. For more than ten years now, I
have had the honour and pleasure of knowing you, and I
would venture to say knowing that in your country French
wines are greatly appreciated what we say in France about
old wines: the more you know them, the more you like
them.

34. I wish also to say that we join our colleagues on the
Council in welcoming back to our midst Ambassador Yazid.
He is no stranger to these halls. During his previous long
stay here, from 1955 to 1961, as Minister of Information in
the Provisional Algerian Government, he was one of the
best known figures in the United Nations, despite his then
unofficial capacity. Now that he is back among us as the
representative of his country, we look forward to renewing
our association with him, and, on behalf of my delegation, I
want to assurehim that we look forward to a friendly and
fruitful co-operation with him and his delegation.

29. I should also like to join in the welcome which you
addressed to our new colleague from Algeria, Mr. Mohamed
Yazid. I can say that I have very special r’easons for
appreciating Mr, Yazid, a man who is exceptionally capable,
because I have been able to note this on many occasionsin
the past, at a time when our relationship was more on a
visual than on a speaking level. I am indeed glad that that is
no longer the case today. As you said quite rightly,
Mr. President, we shall not forget our former colleague,
Mr. Bouattoura and he and his family are very much in our
minds. Finally I would say that Mr. Yazid’s predecessor,
Mr. Azzout, will carry with him our best wishes and our
friendship in all the posts he will occupy in his career,
which has barely begun.

35. With regard to the agenda before us, I would simply
support the remarks made by the representative of France.
We too find ourselves in agreement with the proposed
amendment, that is to say, the slight modification or
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution before us.
36. I would also concur in the statement of the representative of France with respect to another issue raised by the
Soviet representative, which wasnot on our agenda, and we
would reserve our right to revert to it at a later time.

30. Your have asked us, Mr. President, for our opinion
about the text which has been put before us, and more
particularly about the final draft resolution which you have
circulated.

37. The PRESIDENT: As no other speakers have asked to
address the Council this afternoon, first of all, I should like
to express to our colleague, the representative of France,
my very sincere personal gratitude for the complimenls
which he addressed to the President. He represents a
country which is skilled in compliments and can c:onW
them with a distinction which is unique, and I particularly
appreciate words from him. I remember that when I first
saw this Security Council many years ago he was a
distinguished ornament of the Council, and I always feel
when he is here that our deliberations will be maintained at
a very high level. I thank him for the words he addressedto
me.

31. Although my knowledge of English is far from perfect,
I should like to make a few remarks on that text. First of
all, I do not understand very well the amendments which
are being proposed. We have been told that there is no need
to say what is already known, but since you have spoken of
proverbs, I shall quote an old French one: “Cela vu suns
dire mais chest encore mieux en le disanP.4 That is the way
I feel about this matter. You have found a very elegant
formula for saying the same thing in a different form, but
since this new form has been found and since it meets with
the agreement of the Council, I should like to say, on
behalf of my delegation, that I am quite prepared, to give
my consent.

38. I would now go on to say, speaking as President, that I
have listened to the representative of the Soviet Union and
to the representative of France on the question of the
document before us. I would say to the representalive of
France that it was not at my initiative that the change was
made, but I thought it was in the interest of speed and in
accordance with the wish of the Council that we should
proceed to finality today. I am grateful to both representatives for their kindness in agreeing that the document InaY
go forward with our approval. I shall, therefore, commuflicate to the President of the General Assembly, if there is IN
objection raised in the Council, that this document is
acceptable to us.

32. Our Soviet colleague brought up a matter which was
not qn the agenda of the Council, I listened to him very
attentively, and I was somewhat taken aback on being
described as a “member of a troika”, since I am under the
impression that I am not a very good trotter, especially at
my age, but I think that coming from him, it wasmeant as
a compliment. I do not intend to comment today on the
statement he made, since it concerns an item which wasnot
actually on our agenda and to which I have not prepared a
reply, I should simply like to say that my silence on this
point does not mean that I agree with the point of view he
put forward.
4 That goes without saying, but it is evenbetter to say it.

It wassodecided.

4

b

39. Before we adjourn our meeting, I would say one short
word, speaking on behalf of the UNITED KINGDOM. I
merely Irish to say, with reference to the part of the speech
of the representative of the Soviet Union which dealt with a
matter that wasnot on our agenda today, that I, too, would
reservethe right, if necessary, to comment on that subject
on another occasion.
40. Speaking again as PRESIDENT all I would say at the
moment is this: that it is the clear and compelling duty of

all those of us who temporarily occupy the position of
President of this Council-if I may use his words-scrupulously to avoid all arbitrary and discriminatory actions.
41. If *there are no further comments, the Council will
stand adjourned.

The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

COMMENT

LES PlJtXlCATlONS

DES NATIONS

Les publications
des Notions
Unies
sont
d4poritairer
du monde
entier.
Informez-vour
Notions
Unies, Section
des ventes, New York

en vente
duns
auprba
de volre
ou GenBve.

COMO

SE PROCURER

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicociones
de lar Nocioner
Unidor
erttin
en todos parter
del mundo.
Consulte
o su librero
Ventos, Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

UNIES
ler libroirier
librairie
ou

et

ler

agencer

adrersez-vow

6:

UNIOAS

en venta en libreries
o dirijose
o: Nocioner

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

throughout
New York

y coso~ dirlribuidoros
Unidos,
Secci6n

in other currencies)

de

82255-December

1972-2,050
