A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/187
6 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (b)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.2)]

49/187. Development of public information activities in the field of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that activities to improve public knowledge in the field of human rights are essential to the
fulfilment of the purposes of the United Nations set out in Article 1, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations and that carefully designed programmes of teaching, education and information are essential to the
achievement of lasting respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling the relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Commission on Human
Rights,
Recognizing the catalytic effect of initiatives of the United Nations on national and regional public
information activities in the field of human rights,
Recognizing also the valuable role that non-governmental organizations can play in those endeavours,
Believing that the World Public Information Campaign for Human Rights is a valuable complement to
the activities of the United Nations aimed at the further promotion and protection of human rights, and recalling
the importance attached by the World Conference on Human Rights to strengthening the Campaign,
Welcoming the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights with the
function, inter alia, of coordinating relevant United Nations education and public information programmes in the
field of human rights, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993,

95-77101

/...

A/RES/49/187
Page 2

Recognizing that the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat is the focal point for
elaborating, coordinating and harmonizing United Nations policies and activities in the field of information, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 48/44 B of 10 December 1993,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the development of
public information activities in the field of human rights, including the World Public Information Campaign for
Human Rights; 1/
2.
Appreciates the measures taken by the Department of Public Information and the Centre for
Human Rights of the Secretariat to ensure the further production and effective dissemination of human rights
information materials in cooperation with regional, national and local organizations, as well as with
Governments;
3.
Notes with appreciation the dissemination by the Department of Public Information and the
Centre for Human Rights of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference
on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 2/ and of information on follow-up activities;
4.
Requests the Centre for Human Rights, in cooperation with the Department of Public
Information, to finalize its comprehensive review of the programme of information and publications in the field
of human rights, including the elaboration of a new information strategy, and to make an assessment of the
effectiveness of this programme, and encourages the Centre to continue its efforts towards streamlining and
focusing its publications programme;
5.
Encourages the Centre for Human Rights to continue the development of training courses and
materials, including targeted training manuals for professional audiences, as well as the dissemination of human
rights information materials as a component of technical assistance projects;
6.
Welcomes the efforts of the Department of Public Information and the Centre for Human
Rights to disseminate information on human rights by electronic means, including through the United Nations
Bibliographic Information System;
7.
Notes that a database has been established by the Centre for Human Rights for the promotion
of all aspects of human rights;
8.
Urges the Department of Public Information to continue to utilize United Nations information
centres for the purpose of timely dissemination, within their designated areas of activity, of basic information and
reference materials on human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the reports of States parties under
human rights instruments and, to this end, to ensure that United Nations information centres are supplied with
adequate quantities of those materials;
9.
Requests the Department of Public Information to continue to make use of the resources
available for this purpose to produce audiovisual materials on human rights issues;

1/

A/49/582.

2/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/49/187
Page 3

10.
Requests the Secretary-General to take advantage, as much as possible, of the collaboration of
non-governmental organizations in the implementation of the World Public Information Campaign for Human
Rights, including in the dissemination of human rights materials;
11.
Encourages all Member States to make special efforts to provide, facilitate and promote
publicity for the activities of the United Nations in the field of human rights, including through support of United
Nations information centres, to accord priority to the dissemination in their respective national and local
languages of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 3/ the International Covenants on Human Rights 4/
and other international instruments, as well as reports under human rights instruments, and to provide
information and education on the practical ways in which the rights and freedoms enjoyed under these
instruments can be exercised;
12.
Supports the recommendation contained in section II.D of the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action that Member States develop specific programmes and strategies for ensuring the widest
human rights education and the dissemination of public information, taking particular account of the human
rights needs of women, and encourages Member States, in drawing up national action plans for the promotion
and protection of human rights, to include broad-based education and public information programmes on human
rights;
13.
Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to coordinate and
harmonize human rights information strategies within the United Nations system;
14.
Calls upon the Centre for Human Rights to coordinate the substantive activities of the World
Public Information Campaign for Human Rights pursuant to the direction of the General Assembly and the
Commission on Human Rights, and to serve as liaison with Governments, regional and national institutions,
non-governmental organizations and concerned individuals in the development and implementation of the
activities of the Campaign;
15.
Calls upon the Department of Public Information to coordinate the public information activities
of the Campaign and, in its responsibility as secretariat to the Joint United Nations Information Committee, to
promote coordinated system-wide information activities in the field of human rights;
16.
Stresses the need for close cooperation between the Centre for Human Rights and the
Department of Public Information in the implementation of the aims established for the Campaign and the need
for the United Nations to harmonize the activities in the field of human rights with those of other organizations,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross, with regard to the dissemination of information on
international humanitarian law, and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, with
regard to education for human rights;

3/

Resolution 217 A (III).

4/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
/...

A/RES/49/187
Page 4

17.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session a
comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution for consideration under the item entitled
"Human rights questions".

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
