UNITED NATI‘ONS

TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 7 JUNE 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1350) . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . , . . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . , . . , , .

1
1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902);
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907);
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/791 0) . . . , . . , . , . . . , . . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . .

S/PV. 1350

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HIJNDRED

AND FIFTIETH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Eban (IsraelJ,
Mr. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan),
Mr. G. J. Tomeh [Syria), Mr, S. Chammas
(Lebanon),
Mr. K. Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhinla
(Morocco), Mr. G. Al-Rachach (Saudi Arabia), Mr. G. A.
Al-Rashid (Kuwait), Mr, M. Me&-i (Tunisia) and Mr. W. El
Bouri (Libya) took the places reserved for them

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 350)

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will continue
its examination of the three items inscribed on its agenda,
and will deal with the draft resolution submitted at the
1349th meeting by the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. Copies of that draft resolution
have been circulated as document S/7940.

3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

3. The representative of Canada has asked for the floor,
but the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics wishes to raise a point of order,

4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).
Adoption

7 June 1967, at 2.20 p.m.
Republic, Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,
Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber in order to participate
without vote in the discussion.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

1. Adoption

MEETING

4. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I am obliged to speak
on a point of order.
5. First, I should like to draw attention to the fact that
the Security Council itself does not strictly observe the
decisions it has taken. A decision was taken a short while
ago to interrupt our work until 2 o’clock, but we are
resuming our work at half past two, which cannot be
regarded as normal.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/7902);

6. Secondly, the USSR delegation has proposed that the
Council should vote immediately and refrain from a debate.

Complaint of the representative
of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security’” (S/7907);

7. I should like, Mr, President, to repeat our insistent
demand once again, and ask you to take account of our
request and defer discussions and statements until later,
after we have voted.
8. This is what was agreed. May I remind you of it once
again.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representa.
tive of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910)

9. The PRESIDENT: I am sorry for the delay in resuming
the Council’s discussion. However, the day before yesterday
[1347th meeting] we decided to have a short recess for
consultations, and that short recess lasted for eleven hours.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, Jordan, the Syrian Arab

10. This morning, the 1349th meeting was convened for
12.30 p.m., but at the request of the representative of the
1

practice in these casesin the Security Council, members of
the Council should receive a written text, so that they can
study it properly and decide on their positions.

Soviet Union I delayed the opening of the meeting twice
for ten minutes. The reason for the recess which we have
just had was to give time for delegations to consult and to
try to seek instructions.

16. Accordingly, Mr. President, I should like to ask that
members of the Council should be provided with this text
in the usual manner, and in the meantime we could hear
statements by the parties which, we understand, are
intending to express their respective views.

11. I had a request for a short delay-of course, what
constitutes a short delay is a relative question-and out of
courtesy to the members of the Council I thought it fit to
admit that short delay. I am, however, fully aware of the
urgency of the situation and I hope we can avoid a further
discussion of procedure.

17. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union has proposed that a text of the draft resolution
submitted by the representative of Canada be circulated,
and that pending the distribution of the text we proceed
with our debate.

12. The representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics has insisted on having an immediate vote.
However, the President has no special power to close the
debate. A decision of the Security Council is required. I
shall therefore ask the members of the Council whether it is
their wish that we close the debate, or whether there is any
objection to this proposal.

18. The representative of Bulgaria has asked to speak on a
point of order.
19. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated j?om
French): We have just adopted a resolution calling for a

13. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): It is far from my wish to
delay the vote on the draft resolution proposed by the
representative of the Soviet Union and I am prepared to
vote on it now. The purpose of my asking to speak wasto
draw the attention of the Council to the fact that in both
of the resolutions we have before us-the one which we
adopted yesterday /S/7935]
and the draft which the
representative of the Soviet Union introduced at noon
today [S/7940] -paragraph 2 in both cases simply asks the
Secretary-General to keep the Council promptly and
currently informed, In order not to delay the vote on the
draft resolution submitted by the representative of the
Soviet Union, I was going to suggest that after voting on
that draft resolution, the Security Council should take up
as a separate draft resolution the following text:’

cease-fire. We are awaiting the adoption of another draft
resolution, submitted by the representative of Canada,
designed to enable certain members of the Security Council
and the Secretariat to take action.
20. In the meantime, while the debate continues, I believe
that it is the President’s duty to take immediate measures
to ensure that the resolution we have just adopted [234
(1967/j is communicated to the parties concerned and put
into effect. Similarly, it is the Council’s duty torequest him
to take such action. In due course we may be able to adopt
the Canadian draft resolution, but I urge that the measures
1 have mentioned be taken immediately. This is a point of
order.
21. The PRESIDENT: May I inform the Council that
measures to accelerate the work are already in progress.
Cables will be sent immediately. The Secretariat has alread)
started work on the matter.

“The Security Council,
“Noting
S/7940,

resolutions S/7935,
of 7 June 1967,

of 6 June 1967, and

22. I now invite the representative of the United Arab
Republic to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

“Requests the President of the Security Council, with

the assistance of the Secretary-General, to take the
necessary measures to bring about full and effective
compliance with these resolutions.”

Mr. El KONY (United Arab Republic): My Arab
colleagues yesterday drew the attention of the Council to
the hysterical atmosphere which has been created here ia
New York against us, the Arabs. I trust that I may bc
permitted at the outset to say also a few words to express,
on behalf of my delegation, our feelings of resentment and
sorrow at being subjected, in the City of New York, to all
kinds of intimidation and unjust treatment.
23,

14. The PRESIDENT:
A request has been made by the
representative of the Soviet Union for an immediate vote
on the draft resolution which he submitted this morning
/S/7940/.
He would & to have this vote without any
debate. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to this,
It wasso decided.

24. The Council must have noticed how everything connected with the Arabs, victims of a treacherous aggression,
has been falsified and how we have been vilified during the
present crisis. This becomes more glaring when the aggressors are favoured and glorified. I am not going to mention
the various threats that we often receive, as I am sure that
the representatives to the United Nations, in the perform
ante of their duties, do not heed these intimidations. I
cannot but register my protest against this unfair and
ungenerous treatment in a city which is supposed to be the
host to this universal Organization.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.
The draft resolution wasadopted unanimously.2

15. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (translated from Russian): As has always been the
1 Later circulated as document S/7941.
2 Seeresolution 234 (1967).
2

33. For the last nineteen years-may I ask the represent.
ative of the United States-what has his country done to
make Israel abide by the United Nations resolutions? While
the United States keeps asserting its devotion to those
resolutions, the question arises-and it is now being tested
in the glaring realities in the Middle East-whether Israel’s
display of territorial ambitions, which has always been
evident, would be tolerated by the United States,

25. Eleven years ago, in 1956, a treacherous aggression
took place against my country. Israel prepared for it and
connived for its execution, and fired the first shot. At those
moments the comtivers were the British Government and
the Guy Mallet Government. The whole world remembered, and definitely still remembers, how much wassaid to
establish the innocence of that unholy alliance. Yet it is no
longer a secret that that plot was carefully studied,
examined and hatched.

34. Is the United States asserting today, by deed or action,
that it will not allow Israel to annex an inch of Arab
territory? Yet, nowhere do we hear from the higher
authorities in the United States, or from the representatives
of the United States, a clear-cut statement asserting that
Israel will not be allowed to use brutal force for their
malicious aims.

26. The avalanche of books and memoirs has clearly
unveiled how that tragedy was engineered and executed. In
fact, those books have shown clearly the falsehood of the
denials of those days that there was no collusion. We are
hearing today the cries of categorical denials, but time will
again prove, as it has done in the past, the falsehood of
these cries.
27. The Council will remember that two days ago I stated
before the Council [1347th meeting] that history was
repeating itself. Indeed, the happenings of yesterday proved
beyond a shadow of doubt the collusion between Israel, the
United Kingdom-a former partner-and the United States.

35. Our understanding of resolution 233 (1967) adopted
by the Council yesterday is that Israel, the aggressor,should
cease its aggression and withdraw behind the armistice
demarcation lines and’ points prior to the outbreak of
hostilities.

28. I have also had occasion, as recently as two weeks ago
[1342nd meeting], to say that the many acts of aggression
committed by Israel against the Arab countries could not
have been attempted without outside encouragement and
support, and that such support invariably alternates
between one source and another. I added that, in the
present case, it comes from the United Kingdom and the
United States. It has been proved beyond doubt that both
the United States and the United Kingdom participated in
the air operations of the Israel aggression, assisting Israel on
a large scale in its attacks against the Egyptian, the
Jordanian and the Syrian fronts. Moreover, they provided
an air umbrella over Israel. In spite of all the categorical
denials by both Governments, the fact remains that there
has been collusion between the three Governments.

36. While we note that Jordan has accepted the cease-fire
call, Israel has continued its aggression and is still occupying
territories in Jordan. Israel also is still continuing its
aggression on United Arab Republic territory. Moreover, it
has not withdrawn from that territory. Thus, it has not
implemented the decision of the Council.
37. Hence, it is clear that Israel has not respected the
Council’s resolution, and thus it has become of no value.
The Council should therefore correct this situation immediately before it worsens.
38. My delegation asks the Council to condemn Israel, and
to order it to cease fire immediately and to withdraw to
positions prior to the outbreak of hostilities.

29. This, I submit, is the consistent policy of hypocrisy
and antagonism towards the Arab nations practised by the
United States in the Middle East.

39. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the Foreign Minister of
Israel to take a place at the Council table and make a
statement.

30. This is not a case which is of concern to the Arab
countries alone. It is a new pattern of international
relations which affects small countries, all countries
emerging from the era of colonialism, all the developing
countries. This, in fact, is a sad lesson for all of them-that
the self-styled international policeman is there for them to
obey. He is the one to make the rules and he is the one to
enforce them.

40. Mr. EBAN (Israel): Nothing more absurd has ever been
said at an international forum than that the United
Kingdom and the United States took part in the military
operations with which Israel was involved this week. Israel
received not one single ounce of help from anybody in
repelling the aggressive design to which I referred yesterday.
41. A second thesis that has been developed here, both by
the representative of the United Arab Republic and, before
him, by the representative of the Soviet Union, is that Israel
is the aggressor, As I said yesterday (1348th meet&d, the
central theme of the Arab-Israel conflict is clear and simpleThere are Member States that desire to destroy another
Member State. This is the heart and the crux of the
problem. There are those who deny the existence, the
sovereignty, the national personality and the territorial
integrity of a Member State, and who both proclaim and at
times carry out measures for the destruction of its
independence and its integrity. There is neither any historic
basis nor moral justification nor juridical foundation for
that assertion. The Security Council has not, of course,

31. Can we forget that the United States was the driving
force behind the Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba? Can the
reasons behind the flagrant intervention of the United
States in the Dominican Republic remain secret? Those are
only a few examples of the sombre deeds of the United
States Government in this respect.
32. Those who have declared that they guarantee “the
independence and territorial integrity of the States in the
Middle East” have tolerated one expansion of Israel after
another, despite the United Nations resolutions regarding
Palestine and its people that have been repeatedly adopted.
3

identified itself with this doctrine in all the discussions that
it has had in recent days about the conflict.

“Cairo Radio broadcast the rejection of the cease-fire
call.”
The Associated Press from Cairo:

42. I now seek to come to the issue which is before the
Council, namely that of the cease-fire. Since I addressed the
Security Council last night, I have had the opportunity of
reviewing what I then said. I have little of substance to add.
The Government of Israel is totally united in its central
purposes. These are to repel the attempt which was
mounted three weeks ago to procure our encirclement and
strangulation, and thereafter to work with our neighbours
to build a better and more stable system of relationships.
These are our objectives; these are our aims.

“Cairo Radio declared today that the Arab countries
are determined to carry on the war against Israel despite
the cease-fire call from the United Nations Security
Council.
“Teach the Israelis a lesson, drive them out of the land,
said the Egyptian Government radio in a new call for
all-out war.”
49. This, I think, is the crux of the situation-that there is
a unilateral and so far unreciprocated acceptance of the
cease-fire. Nothing astonished me more than that the
United Arab Republic representative could come to this
table this afternoon, after the acceptance of two resole.
tions, without saying the simple words that the United
Arab Republic accepts the two resolutions that have been
passed, to say at least that it accepts them in principle,
subject, of course, to reciprocity and to the elaborationof
the necessary details and the co-ordination of the cease-fire
on the ground.

43. Now these objectives require that the fighting stop.
Therefore, when the Security Council adopted resolution
233 (1967) last night, the normal expectation was, first,
that all Governments would immediately clarify that they
welcome and accept the cease-fire. There should, in fact,
have been a response of principle, and second, having so
agreed, they would then co-operate for the effective
implementation of that resolution,
44. Now what in point of fact happened? The first
Government to pronounce its attitude was that of Israel. I
said that we welcomed the cease-fire resolution. I invited
other Governments to indicate their acceptance. That was
our position; that is our position, We welcome, we favour,
we support, we accept the resolution calling for immediate
measures to institute a cease-fire,

50. I draw the attention of world opinion to the fact that
this has not been said. That is the reason why the crisis was
not solved as a result of last night’s resolution,
51. The central fact is that there has been a cease-fire
resolution that Israel has accepted and that the United Arab
Republic and Syria and Iraq have rejected, or, at the very
least, have neglected an opportunity to accept.

45. Now I believed, innocently, that it should have been
possible to make progress immediately
even before the
Secretary-General’s cables went over the wires to other
Governments. After all, the Governments concerned are all
represented here, some of them on Ministerial level, If they
had come to this table last night, or even so far this
afternoon, and indicated their acceptance of the cease-fire
resolution, we would already have made some advance,
leaving only the logistic problems to be solved.

52. There has, of course, been one element of progress.
The Government of Jordan has accepted the cease-fire.
However, there is here a complication which arises from the
fact that the Jordanian acceptance is not paralleled by
Egyptian acceptance, for, as the Security Council no doubt
knows, it is Egyptian command that now operates over the
armed forces of Jordan, The absence of a United Arab
Republic acceptance of a cease-fire certainly has a negative
effect on the Jordan Government’s acceptance of the
cease-fire, This is not simply a question of theory; it is also
a question of fact, Let me illustrate this by two facts which
hake emerged since the Security Council met last night.

46, Since the cease-fire resolution was adopted by the
Security Council last night, the representative of Syria has
spoken, the representative of Iraq has spoken, the representative of the United Arab Republic has spoken. I have
heard and studied every word that they have said, I cannot
find in any of those speeches one single sentence saying
that “We, Syria, we, Iraq, we, the United Arab Republic,
welcome and accept the cease-fire resolution”,

53. This morning, that is to say many hours after the
adoption of the Security Council resolution, an Egyptian
commando force stationed in Jordanian territory attacked
Israel traffic in the vicinity of Nahshon, near the Jerusalem-Tel Aviv road. The road between Jerusalem and Tel
Aviv is the main artery of civilian communication in Israel.
Here were Egyptian commando units operating from
Jordan coming into the central artery of communications in
Israel and undertaking a military engagement in which
many were killed and in which a senior Egyptian conlmando officer was taken prisoner. His statement is that his
mission was to carry out acts of sabotage against airfields in
the southern part of Israel. His statement wasrecorded aad
will soon be available here.

47. I listened with special care to the distinguished
representative of the United Arab Republic this afternoon.
Surely there is only one thing that the world community
wants to know from the States in the area at this time:
whether they accept the resolution which the Security
Council adopted last night.
48. Having heard nothing from the United Arab Republic
at this table, we are forced to rely upon press reports, one
of which tells us of a Cairo Radio broadcast:
“A United Arab Republic spokesman said that Egypt
today rejected the United Nations Security Council
resolution for a cease-fire in the Middle East.

54. This indicates that United Arab Republic acceptance is
crucial not only for what happens on the Egyptian-Israel
4

front, but also for what happens on the Jordan-Israel front.
Therefore, both in respect of the situation in the south and
in respect of the situation on the Jordan front, the absence,
to this very hour, of any acceptance in general, in principle,
as policy, of the cease-fire resolution by the United Arab
i Republic must cause grave anxiety, unless perhaps there is
~ opportunity still for the United Arab Republic representative to correct this obscurity. There may be some
misunderstanding. Perhaps he wished to express his acceptance of these resolutions and I did not catch that
acceptance. But it is a fact that as of this day it is Israel
alone that has accepted the cease-fire resolution, and
Jordan also has accepted it, but the value of that
acceptance is, as it were, eroded by the absence of
acceptance by the United Arab Republic Government,
which actually commands the operations in Jordan itself.

tions totally. I did so on the highest authority of my
Government. But I did more than that, I issued an
invitation to the United Nations to investigate those charges
fully and impartially, as the United Nations would do. That
invitation still stands. It is notable that those who propagate these totally unfounded and unsubstantiated charges
do not in any way refer to or accept the concept that the
United Nations, an impartial agency, should investigate in
order to submit an objective report about. the truth or
falsity of those charges. They are false charges, and the only
reasonable conclusion which anyone can draw is that the
authors of the charges know full well that they are false.
61. Reference was also made to our Press and its treatment of the issues we are debating, Our Government takes
great pride in the fact that we have a free Press, but I
should like to point out that our Press fully reports all
aspects of this situation. If we look-as we all do here in
New York-at The New York Times of this morning we see
dispatches from all of the capitals involved, from Cairo,
from Damascus, from Jerusalem, from Tel Aviv, from
Baghdad, which fully report the events which are taking
place there and give the viewpoints about this conflict of
the countries concerned. I am quite content to rely on the
manner in which our free Press handles this matter-in
contrast to what the controlled Press in some of those
capitals is saying about this situation,

55, Another instance of the anomaly arising from the
nonacceptance of the resolution is that despite Jordan’s
acceptance the firing still goes on in Jerusalem. Many
hundreds have been injured on the Israel side of Jerusalem.
Some people ask: why was it not possible to silence that
fire? The reason is that the Egyptian commander has
ingeniously placed his guns so close to the Holy Places that
he has immunity from fire. That is why fire has continued
intermittently and sometimes constantly into Jerusalem,
56. Let me again summarize my Government’s attitude.
We stand by the undertaking that I gave last night. If we
could have an immediate acceptance of the cease-fire
resoIution at this table, I think that very little time would
be needed to bring it into effect, although there are, as I
have said, problems of co-ordinating the actual cease-fire to
ensure that advantage is not gained by either side, That,
however, is a logistic problem and not one for the Council
itself, If there is no cease-fire at this moment, it is because
Israel has accepted the cease-fire and the United Arab
Republic and Syria have rejected it. Jordan is not in a
position to carry it out without a parallel Egyptian
acceptance.

62. Finally, statements were made about diplomatic courtesy and usages, This is a matter which concerns me very
much. At the present moment, as the result of false and
inflammatory charges against my country, United States
embassies in certain capitals are being sacked and burned,
while in New York and in Washington our Government,
strongly committed
to the immunity
of diplomatic
Missions, has taken every step and every precaution to
ensure that no such action can take place here.
63.’ Mr, TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): After the vote on the resolution we adopted a few
moments ago I should like to express my delegation’s views
on a number of points raised during the discussion,

57. I would also point out that there are other Arab States
whose troops have been involved and are still involved in
the fighting. There are Algerian troops and there are troops
from Kuwait. It seems to me that the cease-fire resolution
should be communicated to every State whose troops are
taking part in the fighting in any sector, and I would
recommend in respect of both resolutions that the list of
the recipients of the Security Council’s resolutions should
be enlarged so as to include every State which can
reasonably be regarded, on the strength of its own
pronouncements, to be taking part in the conflict.

64. Despite the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council, the Israel aggression continues; as we have just
learned from Press reports, hostilities have not ceased.
According to those reports, Israel, the aggressor, is still
trying to take advantage of its surprise attack, SO as to
provoke situations enabling it to create faits accomplis that
would constitute advantages and a bonus for aggression.
However, the Security Council cannot allow this aggression
to continue, much less permit situations to be created that
would provide the aggressor with opportunities and reward
aggression.

58. ‘The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United States in exercise of his right of reply.

6.5. This unprovoked aggression has caused enormous
suffering and devastation, loss of human life and material
damage that no one can ignore or underestimate. The
resolutions we adopted yesterday and today are only the
first step towards the restoration of calm in that region.

59. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Just a
few minutes ago, the Council heard once again from the
representative of the United Arab Republic, Mr. El Kony,
accusations ‘against my country of participation in the
unhappy conflict which is taking place in the Near East.

66. Just now, we heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel state that his country, if I understood him correctly,
has already agreed to abide by the Security Council

60. Yesterday I attempted [1348th meeting/ in the most
precise terms to deny, repudiate and reject those accusal
5

word in replY to what wassaid earlier by the distinguished
delegate of the United Arab Republic.

resolution adopted yesterday. However, we have neither
seen nor heard anything to indicate that that is SO. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel also stated that it was
not Israel, but the United Arab Republic and the other
countries that were unwilling to accept the Security
Council resolution. But only a few minutes ago we heard
the representative of the United Arab Republic state that
he understood that resolution to signify that Israel’s
aggression must cease; that is our understanding also, and
the understanding of all those who realize that the
aggression must cease immediately. The aggressor cannot
demand that resistance to his aggression should ceasebefore
he himself will arrest aggression; it is the aggression which
must cease if resistance to it is to come to an end. You
cannot hsk a people not to resist aggression against its own
territory; you cannot ask a people not to defend its
national sovereignty. It is the aggressor who must be asked
to stop his aggression, Despite the appeals of the Security
Council, a country would be failing in its national duty if it
did not defend itself against aggression.

71. I am Sorry that he has repeated charges which have
been adequately denied before, He goes back many years
for his evidence. However, we are speaking not about past
years, but about the facts of the situation in 1967. I am
sure that he himself will be convinced by the evidencewhich is clear-that from the beginning of this debate and
during the series of events which we have been discussing,
my country at every stagehas made every effort, first of all
to prevent a war, and then, when it broke out, to stop jt.
72. The evidence is there, that we were perhaps the first to
wish to convene the Council, We were amongst the first to
back support for the Secretary-General’s appeal. We were
amongst the first to call for a cease-fire on Monday, 5 June,
when hostilities broke out, and we had greatly hoped that
the call could be made earlier than it was, That is the
evidence. Yesterday I repeated in the Council [13#8th
mectirzg] the policy which had been declared and accepted
in my own country by the Foreign Secretary in the House
of Commons.

67. For that reason I believe we must take urgent
measures now to put an end to aggression. Aggression calI
only lead to resistance, which must continue. Furthermore,
that is in conformity with Article 51 of the Charter, which
states that countries, individually or collectively, may
defend themselves against aggression until the necessary
measures have been taken to stop the aggression. It is for
that reason, Mr, President, that I would request you,
respectfully and earnestly, to ensure that measures are
taken to that end.

73. I have 110 need to go further into those clear
statements which I have already made, but I have one other
reason for speaking in right of reply on the matter which
was raised by the representative of the United Arab
Republic. I wish to read the text of a letter which I have
today addressedto you, Mr, President:
“I wrote on 6 June about reports carried by official
Middle East newsmedia which alleged that British aircraft
took part in the recent fighting in the region on the side
of Israel, In that letter I made clear that these reports
weremalicious fabrications.

68. I should now like to make a few comments on the
draft resolution which has just been submitted by the
representative of Canada (S/7941], the operative paragraph
of which reads as follows:
“Regtrests the President of the Security Council, with
the assistance of the Secretary-General, to take tile
necessary measures to bring about full and effective
compliance with these resolutions”.

“I am now instructed by my Government to inform
Your Excellency that they would welcome an immediate
impartial investigation of these charges by the United
Nations, My Government would be prepared to offer the
United Nations investigating officials all necessaryfacile
ities. In addition to such an investigation, my Govern
merit is prepared to invite United Nations officials to visit
British aircraft carriers, as well as the airfields in the
sovereignbase areasin Cyprus and our installations on the
airfields in Malta.

In principle, we agreed to study this draft resolution in
order to see in what context we could accept it, We should,
however, like a little time to study also the context in
which, technically, we could anticipate this draft resolution,
seeing that we adopted another resolution
[234 (196?)] a f ew moments ago, Furthermore, if I am not
mistaken, the latter resolution calls for a cease-fire at 2000
hours GMT and should be put into effect within a few
hours. Would it not be advisable to adjourn our meeting?
That would give us time to study the new draft resolution,
and when the Council reconvenes the President could tell us
whether the cease-fire has actually been put into effect, and
explain what the situation is and in what conditions we
could proceed to the vote. Moreover, the draft resolution
may call for amendments or additions,

“I should be grateful if Your Excellency would have
this letter circulated immediately as a Security Council
document.” [S/7939./
74. The PRESIDENT: Steps have been taken to circulate
the letter to which the representative of the United
Kingdom just referred, I call on the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
7.5, Mr, FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): At the meetings of the
Security Council in the course of the past few days the
representatives of certain countries have, as we have seen,
made liberal use of fine words to create an impression that
their intentions are honest and their behaviour magnani.
mous. But, if their statements are compared with the facts,

69. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United Kingdom in exercise of his right of reply.
70. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I would have
very much wished not to have to intervene again in this
debate in exercise of my right of reply, but I must say one
6

then the unmistakable conclusion emerges that there has
actually been some kind of distribution of roles, and that
someone is trying to pull the wool over the Security
Council’s eyes.

80. I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
81. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
During the recess of
the Security meeting this afternoon, I received the following report from General Odd Bull, Chief of Staff of
UNTSO:

76. In his many statements yesterday and today the
United States representative, with his marathon speeches
about Washington’s peaceful intentions, is creating a screen,
as it were, behind which in the meantime the aggressive
forces of Israel, disregarding the Security Council’s decision
that the military invasion must cease immediately, are to
this verbal accompaniment continuing to violate the sovereignty of Arab States, conquering the land of their Arab
neighbours with sword and fire and carrying out their
predatory plans by armed force.
77.

“1. Situation report at 10 a.m. Greenwich Mean Time.
Report on situation in Jerusalem City area during the
night of 6/7 June:
“(a) Israel forces continued bombardment
Scopus and reducing Jordan strongpoints.

of Mount

“(b) Augusta Victoria Hospital burnt out.

As we watch attentively what is being said and what is

“(c) Citadel on west side walled city also received
heavy weapon attack during the morning of 7 June.

being done, we should like to remind those whom it may

concern of a pointed and apposite saying: “Do not burn
false incense before the true Buddha.”

“[d) Sporadic fire, mostly mortar and machine-gun, has
continued in the city.

78. The USSR delegation considers it necessary to draw
the Security Council’s attention to a statement issued by
the USSR Government on 7 June 1967, in ,view of its
important nature. Today, 7 June, the USSR Government
has addressed the following statement to the Government
of Israel:

“‘{e) Crest of Mount Scopus occupied by Israel in clear
view of the city with clear fields of fire into the walled
city.
“(f) Government House area allegedly received heavy
mortar bombardment reportedly causing Israel casualties.

“Information
is being received from various sources
that the resolution of the United Nations Security
Council /233 (1967)] calling for an immediate cease-fire
and a cessation of all military activities is not being
complied with by the Israel side. Israel is grossly and
demonstratively violating this resolution and continuing
its war on the Arab States.

“(g) Mandelbaum Gate area placed under Jordan
mortar fire for a short period in mid-morning.
“(h) Chairman of Hashemite Kingdom of JordanIsrael Mixed Armistice Commission reports all quiet in
the area at present.

“The position thus adopted by the Government of
Israel is further proof of the aggressive nature of your
policy, which disregards elementary rules of international
relations and openly defies the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter,

“(i) Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan-Israel Mixed
Armistice Commission house has been occupied by Israel
forces. Senior Israel delegate has advised the Chairman
that if he and UNTSO personnel at the Mixed Armistice
Commission house wish to leave he will assist and accept
full responsibility for the building and property. I”-that
is, General Odd Bull-“have advised the Chairman to
remain there for the present.

“The USSR Government has warned the Government
of Israel in no uncertain terms against pursuing a policy
of aggression and military adventures. But Israel’s leaders
have not listened to the voice of reason. If the Government of Israel does not now comply at once with the
concerted demand of States for an immediate cease-fire,
as expressed in the Security Council’s resolution, the
Soviet Union will reconsider its attitude to Israel and will
take a decision concerning the further maintenance of
diplomatic relations with Israel, which by its acts is
setting itself against all peace-loving States.

“(j) Situation in the city at 10.45 am. very quiet. I am
watching the developments.
“2. Observers from Jenin and Latrun observation posts
have returned under UNTSO control under Israel forces
escort. Observers at Tulkarm are safe. Arrangements to
recover them under discussion. Observers at Hebron are
safe. I have radio contact with the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan-Israel Mixed Armistice Commission.

“The USSR Government will, of course, consider and
take other measures made necessary by Israel’s aggressive
policy.”

“3. At approximately 10.30 a.m. Greenwich Mean
Time heavy Israel mortar bombardment placed on target
area in the vicinity of Bethlehem.

79. The PRESIDENT: It has been brought to my attention that the Secretary-General has received new informa-

“4. Cease-firenot effective.”

tion on developments in the area. I believe that all members
of the Council will wish to hear the Secretary-General
before we proceed with our debate.

That is the end of the cable.
7

82. I have just received a communication
from the
Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations.
The text is as follows:

86. The PRESIDENT: A motion has been made under rule
33, paragraph 1, to suspend the meeting for fifteen minutes. Any motion for the suspension shall be decided
without debate. I call upon the representative of Bulgarin
on a point of order.

“Dear Mr. Secretary-General,
“I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of the copy
of your telegram of last night addressed to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs in Jerusalem.

87.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated fkm
We submitted our proposal before the motion of
the representative of Canada. I think that my colleague on
the left-although
he is not always on the left-has
misunderstood my proposal, and I should therefore like to
explain it more fully. I proposed that the meeting should be
adjourned until the time when the cease-fire wassupposed
to go into effect, so that we could obtain additional
information. I am not opposed to a discussion of the
Canadian draft resolution and would favour it being
adopted this very day, if possible, but we must have enough
time to discuss it, revise it if possible, amend it, I already
have several amendments to submit, but I cannot give a
tentative formulation of them, as that would only compllcate our work.

“In this connexion, I wish to draw your attention to
the statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs at
the 1348th meeting [para. 179/ of the Security Council
on 6 June 1967, immediately following the adoption of
the resolution (233 (1967)J, as follows:
“ ‘Let me then say here that Israel welcomes the
appeal for the cease-fire as formulated in this resolution, But I must point out that the implementation
depends on the absolute and sincere acceptance and
co-operation of the other parties, which, in our view,
are responsible for the present situation, And in
conveying this resolution to my colleagues, I must at
this moment point out that these other Governments
have not used the opportunity yet to clarify their
intentions.’

88. For that reason I would appeal to my colleague on my
left to be good enough to agree that we should adjourn the
meeting until a later time, today perhaps, so that we may
have an opportunity to study his draft resolution, submit
amendments to it and then hear the Secretary-General’s
report on the current situation in the field. For that reason
I would request my colleague to respond to my appeal, for
which I wanted to give him valid reasons. If he wants to
make another proposal, however, that is another matter.

“I have the honour to request you to bring this letter to
the immediate attention of the Security Council.
“(Signed) Gideon RAFAEL
Permanent Representative”

83, The PRESIDENT:
his statement.

Mr.

French):

89. The PRESIDENT: The situation as I see it is as
follows. If my memory is correct, the representative of
BuIgaria asked a question in his earlier intervention; he said:
We seruit-il pas bon d’ajourner notre siance? ” I did not
take that as a formal motion for adjournment.

I thank the Secretary-General for

84. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): Earlier this afternoon,
after I had suggested and read out my draft resolution, the
representative of the Soviet Union quite properly requested
a written text, I believe that all members of the Council
now have the text. It is simple and straightforward and it is
intended simply to fill an obvious gap in definition of
responsibility in regard to the implementation
of the two
cease-fire resolutions which this Council has unanimously
adopted. I commend it to the members of the Council
because I believe that, as has already been made clear, there
is a requirement to do more than simply inform the Council
or keep the Council currently informed of the situation.
There is a responsibility-which
I believe you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-General have in fact been carrying
out-to keep in touch with all the Governments concerned
to see that the resolution is implemented and then keep the
Council informed.

90. A formal motion for suspension of the meeting has
now been made. A question has been put by the representative of Bulgaria, whether the representative of Canada
would agree to the Council’s adjournment and meeting
again, even later today. I would address this question to the
representative of Canada.
91. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): As you correctly say,
Mr. President, the rules of procedure give priority to a
motion for suspension of the meeting. I have in fact moved
for a suspension of the meeting. If it is more convenient to
my colleague from Bulgaria to have an adjournment for half
an hour instead of fifteen minutes, that would be agreeable
to me. I do not believe a suspension is made sille die. or
simply to later in the evening; it is usually for a specific
time, and I believe it would be within the rules to adjourn
for a specific time, say half an hour.

85. I understood the remark of my colleague and friend
on my right, the representative of Bulgaria, to mean that he
suggested there should be a suspension of the meeting so
that the text could be discussed, as the previous one was. I
suggest that under rule 33, paragraph 1, we suspend the
meeting for ten or fifteen minutes so that the necessary
consultations can take place with regard to the text, and
that we then proceed to a unanimous vote, as we did on the
previous resolution.

92. The PRESIDENT: A motion has been made for an
adjournment for half an hour, If there is no objection, the
meeting will be adjourned for half an hour.
93. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated frofll
French): We are opposed to an adjournment that would last
only half an hour. We feel that the meeting should be.
adjourned and that the President should reconvene the
8

Council when he feels he can give us further information.
We roust have at least an hour to take some refreshment
and to work here at the United Nations.
94. It is not really urgent at this point to give the
President powers such as are described here. I should like to
understand this matter more fully. According to the
Charter and the rules of procedure, the President already
has all the powers he needs in order to act. We now want to
give him special powers. It is for that reason that I think it
would be useful to reflect a little more on the wording to
be used in this draft resolution. That is why I appealed to
my colleague on my left to agree that there should be
another meeting of the Security Council today-I am not
opposed to that, but I should like to study his proposal in
more detail and obtain the information I need. There is no
point in saying the same thing over and over again. The
Security Council would meet almost continuously today,
but there would be two meetings; that is all.
95.’ The PRESIDENT:
A motion has been made to
adjourn the meeting for half an hour. That would be a
motion under rule 33, paragraph 3. If I understood him
correctly, the representative of Canada agreed to change his
motion from a motion to suspend the meeting to a motion
for adjournment.
96. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): I am sorry, Mr. President,
but I did not agree to changing my motion for suspension
to one for adjournment, I asked if the representative of
Bulgaria would accept my suggestion for a half-hour’s
suspension, which he did not. My motion for suspension
therefore stands.
97.

The PRESIDENT:

In that case, then, there is motion
under rule 33, paragraph 1, for
fifteen minutes. I have to put this motion to a vote without
debate.
to suspend the meeting,

98. I call on the representative of Ethiopia on a point of
order.
99. Mr. MAKONNEN
(Ethiopia): Would you allow me,
Mr. President, to make an appeal by way of a point of
order, It seems to me that we are departing from the spirit
of co-operation that has characterized our work in the last
few critical days. One welcome sign in the decisions we
have taken so far in the urgent effort to halt hostilities is
the unanimity that has characterized our action. This is a
tendency which we should encourage, since it is a hopeful
basis on which to work in the difficult and heavy task that
awaits our urgent and serious attention . . .

100. The PRESIDENT: I am very sorry indeed to inter.
rUpt the representative of Ethiopia. I am in the hands of the
Council; but a motion has been made for suspension ofthe
meeting under rule 33, paragraph 1. According to this rule,
any motion thereunder would have to be decided without
debate. If the representative of Canada insists on this
motion, I must bring it to a vote without debate.
101. I call on the representative of Ethiopia on a point of
order.
102. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Speaking again on a
point of order, I was hoping that the representative of
Canada, whom I know to be a gentle and co-operative man,
would not insist on rushing a draft resolution of this kind
through the Council when one of his colleagues is making
an appeal to him SO that the Council may be able to
continue in its concerted action. However, if it is your
understanding, Mr. President, that the representative of
Canada insists on a vote, then of course, just as you are in
the hands of the Council, I am in your hands.
103. The PRESIDENT: A motion has been made by the
representative of Canada-and I take it that it is maintained-to suspend the meeting under rule 33, paragraph 1,
104. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): In responseto the appeal
for unanimity made by the representative of Ethiopia, I
would point out that this is not quite the same appeal as
that made to me by the representative of Bulgaria. The
request of the representative of Bulgaria wasto adjourn the
meeting for receipt by the Council of some kind of
mformation which is supposed to be forthcoming from
somewhere-I am not quite sure where. But in view of this
appeal for unanimity, and in the belief that this draft
resolution is a necessarycomplement to the two resolutions
the Council has adopted, I suggest that we adjourn the
meeting until we are ready to meet to adopt this draft
resolution.
105. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Canada has
now moved to adjourn the meeting under rule 33,
paragraph 2, until such time as we can vote on the draft
resolution, in accord with the appeal made by the representative of Ethiopia to pave the way for a unanimous
decision. I shall have to put this motion to a vote without
debate.
A vote was taken by showof hands
The motion was adopted unanimoufly.
106. The PRESIDENT:

The meeting is adjourned.

Themeetingroseat3.50p.m

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publicatians,mq
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler
publications
dipositoires
du

der
monde
Section

Litho

in U.N.

Notions
entier.
des

DES NATIONS

New

ou Gen&ve.

IlOJlYYMTb

kI3AAHMfl

COMO

CONSEGUtR

PUBLICACIONES
de

from
bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

en venle
oupr&r

KAK

partes
del
Nuevo
York

obtained
or write

Unies
sent
Informez-vous

Unies,

Las publicaciones

be

LES PUBLICATIONS

Nations

en todo
Yentas,

PUBLICATIONS

venter,

York

OPrAHkI3AL(Ml4

de

OSbEAMHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidar

estcin

en venlo

q

su librero

o dirijase

0.50 (or equivalent

HAuMfi

UNlDAS

10s Naciones

$U.S.

UNIES

dons
les librairier
et les agencer
votre
librairie
ou adressez-vous
b:

mundo.
Consulte
o Ginebra.

Price:

throughout
New York

en

librerias
a: Naciones

in other

y cosos
Unidas,

currencies)

distribuidorar
Secci6n

de

08780-December

1970-2,100
