S/PV.8468

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8468th meeting

Monday, 25 February 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Esono Mbengono . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2019/44)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05401 (E)
*1905401*

S/PV.8468

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2019/44)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with article 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department
of Peace Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/44, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur and the operations of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I have just returned from a visit to the Sudan
and Darfur with my colleagues Assistant SecretaryGenerals Oscar Fernandez-Taranco and Mourad
Wahba, of the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Regional Bureau for Arab States of the United Nations
Development Programme, respectively. The objectives
of our visit were, first, to inject momentum in the
transition process; secondly, to convey joint messages
on the withdrawal of UNAMID and the transition to the
Government of the Sudan, United Nations interlocutors
and key partners; and, thirdly, to explore challenges
and modalities related to the transition and how those
could be addressed early and effectively.
Before I share my observations and findings from
the visit, I would like to touch upon several updates
since the publication of the most recent report of the
2/19

25/02/2019

Secretary-General, dated 14 January 2019 (S/2019/44).
The most significant development was the declaration
of a state of emergency by President Al-Bashir on
22 February, which applies to the whole country and
is foreseen to be in place for one year. In that context,
the federal and the state Governments were dissolved,
while maintaining the national and state assemblies and
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Justice and Defence.
The Minister of Defence was appointed to also assume
the functions of the First Vice-President. In addition,
18 new governors from the military and security
apparatus were appointed to replace the dismissed
governors, known as walis. The Sudanese Armed
Forces have been given the task of delivering law and
order, in addition to national defence.
Those developments came at a time when the
Darfur peace process had come to a standstill once
again, in the context of the ongoing demonstrations
against the economic and political conditions in the
Sudan. It should be noted, however, that all along
sporadic protests in Darfur have taken place in Nyala,
South Darfur, on 13 January, and in El Geneina, West
Darfur, and Ed Daein, East Darfur, on 17 January. Yet,
citing solidarity with the protest movements, the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM)/Gibril Ibrahim faction
and the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)/Minni Minnawi
faction reversed their December 2018 agreement to
resume talks with the Government of the Sudan in
January 2019.
Meanwhile, President Al-Bashir declared an openended cessation of hostilities in Darfur and the two areas
on 28 January. Subsequently, on 9 February, the SLA/
Minni Minnawi, JEM/Gibril Ibrahim and two other
groups — the Sudan Liberation Movement/Transitional
Council and the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth, led by Malik Agar — extended a unilateral
cessation of hostilities in Darfur and Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile states for an additional three months. The
impact of the recent developments in Khartoum on the
dynamics related to the peace process in Darfur has
yet to be assessed, but the replacement of all walis will
have a bearing on the process, and some rebel groups
have demonstrated a stiffening of their position.
In Jebel Marra, intermittent clashes between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid faction continue. On 17, 28, and
29 January, SLA/Abdul Wahid elements attacked
Sudanese Armed Forces personnel in the Manabu
farming area, 15 kilometres south-east of Golo, and
19-05401

25/02/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in total, three Sudanese Armed Forces personnel were
killed. On 2 February, UNAMID heard sporadic gunfire
in the area and sent out a patrol, but was prevented
from proceeding further by the Sudanese Armed
Forces, which cited the lack of security clearance.
The Sudanese Armed Forces and the SLA/Abdul
Wahid faction continued to exchange fire in Manabu
on 9, 11, 17, and 19 February, resulting in the death of
seven SLA/Abdul Wahid members and one Sudanese
Armed Forces member in total.
In addition, infighting between two sub-factions
of the SLA/Abdul Wahid was reported in Daya village,
12 kilometres north-east of Golo, on 17 January and
7 and 13 February, with four casualties. Reportedly,
those factions disagree over their prospects as
participants in the peace process, while some of their
clashes also seem to indicate competition over scarce
resources. Although those clashes have not resulted
in new displacement, civilians in the area have been
exposed to numerous incidents of robbery, abduction
and violence, attributed to both personnel in military
attire and SLA/Abdul Wahid elements. UNAMID also
received reports of repeated sexual violence by the
Rapid Support Forces in the Guldo area on 6 February.
As mentioned in the progress report before Council
members, the intensification of the conflict in areas of
Jebel Marra last year saw an increase in reported sexual
violence incidents. Conflict-related sexual violence
remains a threat to the population in Darfur, especially
displaced women and girls, who face particular risk
when they engage in livelihood activities outside
internally displaced persons camps. And the fear of
sexual violence also hampers the return of civilians to
their places of origin.
I would like to emphasize in that regard that,
during our visit to Darfur, and more specifically
to the Sortony team site, we had an opportunity to
have an exchange with internally displaced persons,
all of whom expressed their deep concern over the
departure of UNAMID in the absence of trusted and
professional law enforcement agencies. I would like
to call on the Government of the Sudan to continue
its efforts aimed at creating conditions propitious
for the return of internally displaced persons, and,
among the confidence-building measures that could
be envisaged, to pursue a constructive dialogue with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and swiftly adopt a
framework of cooperation as a basis for addressing

S/PV. 8468

sexual violence, including justice and accountability, in
line with resolution 2429 (2018) and consistent with the
benchmarks presented in the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 12 October 2018 (S/2018/912).
There were three incidents of movement restrictions
around the Golo area by the Sudanese Armed Forces,
who claimed a lack of knowledge regarding UNAMID’s
patrols. Another denial of access took place near
Menawashei, South Darfur, by Sudanese military
intelligence, which cited the lack of security clearance.
As a result, the mission could not verify allegations
made by the SLA/Abdul Wahid that Sudanese Armed
Forces artillery fire had resulted in the burning of
villages, thereby causing fatalities, on 24 January.
The Sudanese Armed Forces denied UNAMID access
south-east of Kutum, in North Darfur, claiming that the
area close to the Libyan border was rife with rebels and
that the safety of peacekeepers could not be guaranteed.
The frequency of inter-communal tensions and
other security incidents remains relatively low, except
for a few hotspots, in particular in the Jebel Marra
area. A group of armed men in military attire fired
indiscriminately on 13 January at a group of farmers in
Ain Siro, in North Darfur 34 kilometres north-west of
Kutum, killing one. The death of an Awlad Zaid man in
West Darfur triggered clashes between Misseriya and
Awlad Zaid in a village approximately 80 kilometers
north-east of El Geneina on 16 and 21 January. Seven
Misseriya and one Awlad Zaid were killed, and 560
houses were burnt in seven villages.
In line with resolution 2429 (2018), we completed
the closure of 10 team sites by December 2018, which
were handed over to the Government of the Sudan.
The former sector headquarters in Nyala, Ed Daein
and El Geneina are due to be closed by June, leaving
the remaining 13 team sites in the greater Jebel Marra
and the logistics hub in El Fasher. The new mission
headquarters in Zalingei is now fully operational,
while the office of the Joint Special Representative was
relocated to Khartoum.
Meanwhile, UNAMID and the United Nations
country team, with the support of their respective
headquarters, continue to work together to ensure a
smooth transition from peacekeeping in Darfur and
lay the ground for sustainable peacebuilding. The
entire United Nations system is committed to ensuring
that we operate as one, in close coordination with the
Sudanese Government. In that regard, on 7 February,

19-054013/19

S/PV.8468

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Secretary-General issued a planning directive on
the transition and, as I mentioned, during our visit
with Assistant Secretaries-General Taranco and Wahba
we participated in a retreat organized jointly with
Government representatives, UNAMID and the United
Nations country team to further enhance coordination
during the transition process.
Allow me to stress that, as noted during my visit,
the United Nations system has made considerable
political, humanitarian, and peacekeeping investments
since the escalation of the conflict in Darfur 15 years
ago. It is our collective responsibility to ensure that
UNAMID’s exit does not create a vacuum that leads to
persistent local-level tensions or new risk factors. The
engagement of the Government of the Sudan will be
ever-more critical in that context. At the same time, our
visit also served to bring to the fore the challenging
factors that the Government, UNAMID and United
Nations country team are facing to maintain the pace
of the transition, including in terms of the availability
of resources.
Indeed, despite all efforts by the Mission and
the United Nations country team to conclude in less
than two months the memorandums of understanding
pertaining to the state liaison functions and the
allocation of programmatic resources to the country
team for the implementation of key mandated tasks
in the areas of human rights, the rule of law and
durable solutions for internally displaced persons,
their effective implementation on the ground could end
up been complicated by the shortages of liquidities.
In addition, efforts should be made in earnest by the
international community to mobilize the resources that
are needed to support the UNAMID exit strategy and
its immediate effect on the ability of the Government
of the Sudan and the United Nations country team
to address the challenges of the transition in Darfur,
while focusing on a difficult economic and social and
humanitarian context in the broader Sudan.
Moving forward, the recent developments and the
ongoing evolution of the conflict dynamics mentioned
earlier — namely, the lack of tangible progress in
the peace process and the localized conflict in Jebel
Marra — compels us to think through what can and
should be done during the UNAMID drawdown
and beyond. The way forward on the Darfur peace
process needs to be discussed jointly between the
United Nations and the African Union, including its
objectives, expected outcomes and interlocutors and
4/19

25/02/2019

their constituencies, particularly in the context of
evolving national and regional dynamics. The Jebel
Marra area is still a conflict zone, without a cessation
of hostilities. Overall, there are still close to 2 million
internally displaced persons in Darfur. Local rule-oflaw capacity needs to be strengthened for the prevention
and resolution of inter-communal tensions, particularly
where clashes persist over access to land, migration
routes and other sources of livelihood. Human rights
issues, including as it pertains to the protection of
women, children and vulnerable youth from violence,
remain significant.
Between now and June, we will have an opportunity
to assess and recalibrate what UNAMID has achieved
and will leave behind. In that context, I would like to
acknowledge Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/19, of 11 December 2018, which clarified
that some of the proposed benchmarks and indicators
contained in the Secretary-General’s report of 12 October
2018 are of more immediate priority and that some
reflect longer-term peacebuilding objectives in Darfur.
The strategic review, ahead of the presentation of the
recommendations by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for the
UNAMID mandate renewal, will offer an opportunity
to better unpack those indicators. In the meantime, I
can assure the Security Council that UNAMID will
spare no effort to give priority to progress against the
benchmarks and indicators focused on the protection
of civilians, particularly relating to internally displaced
persons and returning refugees, human rights, the rule
of law, the humanitarian situation and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as requested by the
Council. I look forward to discussing initial parameters
of the review with members of the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing on her visit and the latest developments on the
ground. I will focus my remarks today on three issues:
the situation in Darfur, the transition and the broader
situation in the Sudan.
First, on the situation in Darfur, the United
Kingdom welcomes the extension, until 8 May, of
the unilateral cessation of hostilities by the Sudan
19-05401

25/02/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Liberation Army/Minni Minawi faction, the Sudan
Liberation Movement/Transitional Council and the
Justice and Equality Movement. We also welcome
the open-ended cessation of hostilities announced by
the Government of the Sudan. Despite that, however,
we are concerned about ongoing violence in the Jebel
Marra region between the Government of the Sudan
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction,
including reports of retaliatory attacks on civilians,
the destruction of property and the displacement of
significant numbers of civilians. As we have stated
many times before in the Chamber, we also continue to
be deeply concerned by ongoing intercommunal conflict
and widespread human rights abuses and violations,
in particular the prevalence of conflict-related sexual
violence. In that regard, we urge the Government
of the Sudan to ensure justice and accountability for
survivors and to engage constructively with the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Secondly, turning to the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and development, we welcome the
progress made to date with the drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). If Darfur is to transition successfully and
sustainably away from peacekeeping, not only does
armed conflict need to cease, but the root causes of the
conflict must also be addressed. As Assistant SecretaryGeneral Keita has just mentioned, the benchmarks,
as set out in presidential statement S/PRST/2018/19,
issued in December 2018, are crucial in that regard.
The United Kingdom calls upon the Government of
the Sudan to commit itself fully to making progress
towards the achievement of those benchmarks so as to
demonstrate its commitment to addressing root causes
in Darfur and to laying a foundation for sustainable
peacebuilding and development.
Given the substantial peacebuilding and development
needs, as well as the ongoing humanitarian need in
Darfur, it is also extremely important that the Council
have a clear and accurate account of the situation on
the ground. We therefore encourage the Government
of the Sudan to cooperate with the relevant United
Nations entities on the ground to ensure an accurate
depiction of the situation in Darfur in order to ensure
that peacebuilding, development and humanitarian
efforts are adequately resourced.
Third and finally, given recent developments, I
would like to touch on the broader current situation in

S/PV. 8468

the Sudan. The United Kingdom is deeply concerned
about President Al-Bashir’s announcement of a state
of emergency on Friday, which gives sweeping new
powers to the security services and goes against the
recommendations of the previous national dialogue.
The protests that have been taking place across the
Sudan are peaceful and demonstrate the expression
of legitimate grievances. Individuals have a right to
set out their views. Additionally, several opposition
political leaders, activists and journalists remain in
prison — some for over two months now. They should
be released immediately.
The proposals made by President Al-Bashir in
his speech on Friday will not help bring about the
political consensus needed to stabilize the country. In
the current environment, it is difficult to see how the
proposed national dialogue can therefore be a success.
The political instability in the Sudan and the
declaration of a state of emergency naturally affect
the situation in Darfur. The United Kingdom has
been deeply concerned by the violations committed
by Government security services during the recent
protests. Those are the very services that UNAMID is
supposed to be handing over security and protection
responsibilities to in Darfur. Not only will President
Al-Bashir’s announcements and the conduct of the
security services further delay the agreement of a
sustainable peace deal, but they also call into question
the Government’s commitment to delivering progress
on human rights, the rule of law and security sector
reform, which are so I desperately needed in Darfur.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom will continue
to closely monitor the situation in Darfur and the
wider Sudan. We continue to urge the Government of
the Sudan to embark upon the political and economic
reforms necessary to deliver true stability, and we will
continue to work with the members of the Council to
ensure the necessary support to the people of the Sudan.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Keita for her briefing and her visit.
Since this is the first time that we have taken
the floor on this agenda item, let me briefly outline
Germany’s approach to the situation in Darfur and the
Sudan more broadly.
To start with, we could not agree more with the
statement made by Assistant Secretary-General Keita
that a political solution to the conflict in Darfur is key

19-054015/19

S/PV.8468

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to sustainable peace in Darfur. Germany supported this
approach in 2011 and 2012, during our last term on the
Council, and our actions today are guided by the same
vision. That is why we support the mediation process
between the Government and the armed groups. Today,
we encourage all parties — the Government of the
Sudan and the Darfuri armed groups — to build on
the positive dynamics of the pre-negotiation agreement
signed in Berlin in December 2018. Progress needs to
be made urgently.
At the same time, we have to recognize that the
peace process in Darfur cannot be separated from
the overall political dynamic in the Sudan. Since
mid-December 2018, a substantial number of Sudanese
have demonstrated peacefully for respect for human
rights, the rule of law and a political transition. By
announcing a state of emergency on 22 February,
President Al-Bashir has limited the scope for the rule of
law and human rights in the Sudan. In this situation, it is
necessary to look even more closely at the benchmarks
for a withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in particular
the promotion of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. We call upon the Government of the Sudan
to respond to the legitimate grievances of the Sudanese
population politically and without force.
Building sustainable peace requires a long-term
strategy. To avoid relapse into conflict in Darfur, the
current transition processes, from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, need the full support and attention of
the Council, the international community, the United
Nations system and the host Government. The visit
by Assistant Secretaries-General Keita, FernándezTaranco and Wahba reflects the priorities for United
Nations engagement: peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and long-term development. Germany supports those
priorities and we consider it to be our joint responsibility
to ensure that the decade-long international engagement
in Darfur delivers concrete and lasting results for the
people of that territory. In this context, I would like to
make three concluding points.
First, we have to do everything we can to ensure that
UNAMID, as long as it is deployed in Darfur, delivers
against the mandated tasks. That means all mandated
tasks. It means not only peacekeeping to start with, of
course, and as a priority, but also mediation, including
intercommunal mediation, peacebuilding and support
for internally displaced persons. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/19, of December 2018, clearly outlines
6/19

25/02/2019

the benchmarks that need to be achieved. An integrated
transition strategy and cooperation among all relevant
United Nations entities is therefore of utmost importance.
The upcoming strategic review should therefore
be used to assess the United Nations engagement
comprehensively and make recommendations on the
United Nations reconfiguration.
Secondly, we see it as the responsibility of
the international community, and in particular the
Security Council, to ensure that a relapse into conflict
is prevented. Any transition is challenging and any
transition demands responsibility and adequate
attention. In that context, we need to make sure that
UNAMID continues to receive sufficient political
support and sufficient financial means, including
programmatic funding, to implement its mandate. That
includes operational peacebuilding and stabilization
measures. We also need to make sure that a sufficiently
strong United Nations presence on the ground is built
up, in parallel with the UNAMID drawdown, and that
it will be in a position to support the consolidation of
the peacekeeping gains already achieved and continue
to advance mediation, peacebuilding — in particular in
the security sector — and development tasks. Germany
is committed to taking on responsibilities in this regard
as co-penholder, with the United Kingdom, on the
UNAMID file.
Thirdly and lastly, Germany is convinced that
we can succeed only in close collaboration with
the Government of the Sudan, but this must be a
partnership built on mutual trust; resolving the pending
issues around UNAMID’s access to parts of Darfur;
demonstrating tangible progress in establishing a
presence of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the Sudan, with access to Darfur and
human rights monitoring capacities; and engaging with
the Peacebuilding Commission. Those are steps that
would increase trust at the international level and work
towards progress in the mediation process, as well as on
intercommunal matters such as land and water.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to warmly thank Ms. Bintou Keita for her important
and enlightening briefing. Her joint mission to Darfur
with Assistant Secretaries-General Fernández-Taranco
and Wahba is an initiative that I commend. It is a
good practice, in conjunction with efforts to ensure
genuinely integrated United Nations action, which is
particularly essential in the post-conflict transitional
phase and in line with the reform of the United Nations
19-05401

25/02/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

system sought by the Secretary-General and supported
by Member States in promoting synergies among the
various pillars. This good practice could be usefully
replicated elsewhere. I would like to focus today on
three points.
The first is that the improvement of the situation
in Darfur must not eclipse the importance of the
remaining challenges. The Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2019/44) shows that the security situation in
Darfur is relatively stable. However, we deplore the
recent clashes in Jebel Marra starting last year, which
have led to the displacement of thousands. France is
also alarmed by the high level and seriousness of human
rights violations, and in particular the ongoing sexual
violence we have witnessed. We call for the perpetrators
of that violence to be brought to justice and punished.
The Sudanese authorities and armed groups must
necessarily make progress in the peace process. They
must put an end to hostilities, but also must address
the root causes of the conflict. France welcomed the
signing, on 6 December in Berlin, of a pre-negotiation
agreement between the Government and certain armed
groups to resume the peace process. Unfortunately,
negotiations have since been postponed.
That postponement is taking place in the context
of social strife, which the Sudan has been experiencing
since 19 December, and which France is following
very closely. We have taken note of the declaration of a
state of emergency and call on the Sudanese authorities
to guarantee the right to the freedom of assembly,
association and expression, in accordance with their
international commitments. All parties should exercise
restraint and refrain from any further use of violence,
so as to calm the situation.
My second point is that, due to this precarious
situation, the withdrawal of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) must
be undertaken in a prudent manner and adapted to
the situation on the ground. In that context, we must
ensure that it is gradual and cautious, as the situation
on the ground permits. In its presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/19, adopted in December, the Security
Council recalled that particular consideration should
be given to certain elements, including the situation
of internally displaced persons and refugees, respect
for human rights and respect for the rule of law. It is
also important that UNAMID remain operational and
actively participate in the stabilization of Darfur until

S/PV. 8468

its closure. In that regard, I welcome the mediation
efforts of UNAMID, which have been very useful in
resolving and avoiding local conflicts.
Finally, we must now prepare for the post-UNAMID
period in order to make a successful transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. The main challenge
for all of us today is to ensure that the situation in
Darfur remains stable after the mission’s departure.
We must now prepare for the post-UNAMID period.
As indicated by the Secretary-General in his report,
the issue of funding will be crucial, as the departure of
the peacekeeping operation will mean the cessation of
mandatory financial contributions and the transition to
voluntary contributions for the country team’s activities.
We must tackle this issue head-on, in a responsible way.
That is also in keeping with our commitments under
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We have indeed
pledged to support United Nations country teams
in transition periods to enable them to continue to
assist host countries in peacebuilding efforts. We also
encourage UNAMID and the country team to work
together as much as possible in order to best prepare for
that transition.
It is also important that the international community
be able to monitor developments in Darfur. The country
office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights will play an essential role. The
Peacebuilding Commission can also be a relevant
forum for constructive dialogue with the Sudanese
authorities on peacebuilding in Darfur. We must pursue
those discussions with the Sudanese authorities, and in
close consultation with the African Union, which is,
and will continue to be, a key actor in peacebuilding
efforts in Darfur.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for
her briefing on the latest developments on the ground
in Darfur.
We continue to evaluate the impact President Omar
Al-Bashir’s announcement last Friday. We are deeply
concerned about the declaration of a national state of
emergency, and call on the Government of the Sudan to
respect the rights of all individuals in the Sudan, bring
an immediate end to the violent repression of peaceful
protests and seek accountability for those responsible
for violations and abuses. Rather than taking steps to
expand the ability of the security services to target
peaceful protesters and opposition, what is needed are

19-054017/19

S/PV.8468

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

steps to create an environment for an inclusive political
process that truly addresses citizens’ legitimate
grievances and that will lead to sustainable peace and
democracy in the country.
Just over two months ago, the Security Council
agreed on a presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/19) in
which it noted some progress in the security situation in
Darfur and expressed support for the eventual transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and development.
That expression of support also included a call for clear
and achievable benchmarks and indicators to assess
progress on critical areas in advance of the eventual exit
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). We believe the existing
benchmarks must be refined to align with the mission’s
mandate and strategic priorities. Chief among them
should be the cessation of hostilities, the protection
of civilians and a mutually acceptable comprehensive
political agreement. We await the Organization’s
strategic assessment and its recommendations on the
pursuit of critical benchmarks and indicators ahead of
that transition.
Again, we urge the Government of the Sudan to
end the use of violent measures to address the protests,
and to hold all responsible for human rights abuses and
violations accountable. We call for an inclusive political
process towards elections where all Sudanese citizens
can exercise their rights to the freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly; the immediate
release of all journalists, political opposition leaders,
human rights activists and other protesters who have
been arbitrarily detained; and for the Government of
the Sudan to afford those facing charges full access to
legal representation.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
today. Allow me to also express our appreciation to
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa, for her comprehensive briefing on her recent
visit to the region and developments regarding the
situation in the Sudan. We also commend the work
being done by the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). In addition, we
welcome the statement to be delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations.
Ms. Bintou’s briefing highlights the intricacies
and challenges of making peace. Accordingly, the
peacemaking journey in Darfur has not been an easy
8/19

25/02/2019

one, as we have all witnessed during the past 14 years.
However, the tireless efforts of the international
community and consistent support over the years
have resulted in the considerable improvement of the
security situation in Darfur. The improvement of the
security situation has even propelled the drawdown
of UNAMID. In that regard, South Africa welcomes
the continued improvement of the security situation
in Darfur during the reporting period, as well as the
absence of intercommunal violence, as reported. We
also note that the number of crime-related incidents and
human rights violations declined during this period.
However, it is clear that we are not where we should
be. Areas of concern remain, particularly in Jebel
Marra. The continued clashes between armed groups
and the Government of the Sudan serve to highlight that
more efforts are required in that region. The ongoing
insecurity obstructs the lives of many vulnerable
civilians. In that regard, we call upon armed groups,
particularly the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction to resolve their disputes through the avenues for
political dialogue that have already been established.
Furthermore, it is imperative that all parties
continue to implement the outstanding provisions of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. It remains
essential for all parties to continue their commitment
to the negotiations process under the auspices of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel. In
addition, as the international community, we should
continue to support the process to ensure that we do not
reverse the gains that we have achieved thus far.
South Africa remains concerned about the violations
of human rights reported in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/44). Women and children continue to
be the most affected by sexual violence, which has
increasingly become a weapon of war and conflict, and
affects the long-term prospects for achieving peaceful
and prosperous communities. We would like to urge the
Government of the Sudan to combat sexual violence in
conflict and bring the perpetrators to justice.
South Africa has noted the continued reduction
of the military strength of UNAMID, as well as the
handover to UNAMID’s formed police units and the
redeployment of the police units. It is important that
UNAMID provide adequate rule-of-law and livelihood
services in terms of its mandate to address the security
concerns of the local communities and the 2 million
internally displaced persons. We therefore wish to stress
19-05401

25/02/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the importance of humanitarian support and access to
the affected areas in Darfur. It is crucial that there be
an eventual transition from humanitarian support to
reconstruction and development in the Darfur area, as
UNAMID eventually exits the Sudan. It is imperative
for UNAMID to continue to provide technical and
logistical assistance to the Sudan disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration commission to
assist with the disarmament and demobilization of
armed combatants.
In order to facilitate the implementation of the
transition, including through the relocation of the
Office of the Joint Special Representative to Khartoum,
it is vital to involve the relevant local authorities and
officials in the Sudan in that process, so as to ensure
an open dialogue and transparent processes that will
lead to the engagement of the Sudanese Government.
As the UNAMID mission transitions out of Darfur, we
strongly support the Secretary-General’s observation
recommending the close partnership and continued
engagement of the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations system. That
partnership has been a key ingredient in the notable
achievement in Darfur. That partnership will also be
equally important in maintaining future progress and
stability in the area. Similarly, for any peace to be
sustained, we need to harness our efforts in addressing
socioeconomic development in the Sudan. Economic
development will alleviate potential conflict triggers
in future.
We should also guard against spoilers utilizing
the current socioeconomic challenges in the Sudan
to further their own narrow interests. Our efforts in
making peace in the Sudan have showed and continue
to show signs of progress. We should remain steadfast
and tireless in that trajectory. Making peace in Darfur
will continue to positively affect the region as we
all contribute to the African Union’s aspirations of
silencing the guns by 2020.
Lastly, we would like to express our appreciation to
those working at the coalface in Darfur — Joint Special
Representative for Darfur Jeremiah Mamabolo and his
team — for their continued commitment to building
peace in the region.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to warmly thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her informative
briefing. Belgium also welcomed the recent February

S/PV. 8468

visit by Assistant Secretaries-General Keita, FernandezTaranco and Wahba. We believe that the visit served
to underscore our obligation to identify and lay the
groundwork for the United Nations role and presence
on the ground following the withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
The signs that progress has been made in Darfur
are clear, and Belgium reaffirms its support for the
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
the development of Darfur. Complacency would,
however, be an inappropriate response. A cautious
approach to closely supporting the withdrawal is
required. In general, the establishment of the rule of
law and fundamental respect for human rights are key
elements to ensuring Darfur’s future. The protection
of the civilian population and the improvement of
the humanitarian situation, as well as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and reform of the
security sector, remain necessary for reaching a lasting
solution to the crisis.
Although a general improvement in the security
situation in Darfur is encouraging, Belgium remains
especially concerned about the situation in the Jebel
Marra area, given the armed incidents between the
Sudanese Government and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid faction. In addition, human rights
abuses continue, primarily affecting children and
women, including sexual violence in an environment
of impunity. Belgium welcomes the signing in Berlin
in December 2018 of the pre-negotiation agreement
between the Government of the Sudan and two Darfurbased groups. However, the delay in the launch of
negotiations among the parties is regrettable. The
non-inclusive nature of the national dialogue and the
inoperability of the various entities responsible for
implementing the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
are also worrisome.
The situation in Darfur must be considered in its
specifically Sudanese context and cannot be separated
from it. Belgium expresses its concern about the current
situation in the Sudan, characterized by protests and
the authorities’ violent response. On 22 February, the
President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, declared
a one-year state of emergency throughout the country,
as well as the dissolution of the Government at the
federal and state levels. As the country undergoes a
difficult situation, Belgium calls for restraint in the
use of force by the security services and the immediate

19-054019/19

S/PV.8468

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

release of demonstrators who were arbitrarily detained.
The authorities must fully respect the right to
demonstrate peacefully, protect civilians and guarantee
strictly proportionate use of force. The current tense
environment risks negatively affecting the engagement
of the parties to the conflict in Darfur in the dialogue.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita for
her important briefing on the recent developments on
the ground. We noted that there are still clashes and
the loss of life, and we regret that fact. My statement
will focus on three key issues, namely, the security
situation, persisting challenges and support for the
transition in Darfur.
Concerning the first issue, Indonesia is pleased that
the security situation across Darfur outside Jebel Marra
is relatively stable. The continued improvement in the
security situation has enabled the phased withdrawal of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the plan for its eventual exit in
2020, in line with resolution 2429 (2018). My delegation
commends the critical work of UNAMID in Darfur.
Indonesia takes pride in being a part of UNAMID,
and is currently represented by 477 peacekeepers on
the ground. We welcome the progress in reconfiguring
UNAMID, including the inauguration of its new
headquarter in Zalingei in January. UNAMID should
continue to play a crucial role in protecting civilians
and supporting capacity-building in the area of the
rule of law. Indonesia also commends the Sudanese
Government for its efforts to create security in Darfur,
including through the weapons-collection campaign and
promoting the peaceful resolution of intercommunal
conflict. The Sudanese Government should eventually
be able to bear the primary responsibility for
security in Darfur as we proceed with the UNAMID
reconfiguration. Indonesia sees the Security Council’s
intention to establish key benchmarks to review its
measures on Darfur as a step in the right direction. I
should like to underline that UNAMID’s exit should
not be allowed to create a vacuum that would lead to
further tension and conflict. The needs of the civilian
population should be prioritized.
Secondly, Indonesia remains cognizant of many
persisting challenges. Further efforts are needed to
address the root causes of the conflict, including land
and intercommunal disputes. Intermittent clashes in
Jebel Marra and destabilizing activities by the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction continue to
10/19

25/02/2019

result in civilian casualties and displacement. We ask
all parties to exercise restraint. There can be no military
solution to conflict in Darfur.
Indonesia joins others in urging all non-signatories
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, including
Abdul Wahid Nour, to join the peace process. We hope
to see a follow-up to the signing of a pre-negotiation
framework between by the Sudan Liberation ArmyMinni Minawi and the Justice and Equality Movement.
The needs of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
must also be addressed. There must be unfettered
access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. We
also call on all parties, including the Government of
the Sudan, to create a conducive environment for the
return of IDPs.
The difficult economic situation and the risks
associated with it remain a cause for concern and
underline a strong case for the provision of development
assistance. In that regard, the international community
should continue to assist the Sudan. Peace would be
difficult to achieve without real and tangible economic
development, including improvements in governance,
infrastructure and institutions.
Thirdly, Indonesia sees the need for stronger
support for peacebuilding and development in Darfur.
The sustained engagement of the United Nations and
the international community, based on mutual respect
and national ownership, is key to preventing a relapse
into conflict. Indonesia recognizes the importance of
sustained and predictable financing for peacebuilding
in Darfur, as well as the role of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture as a crucial enabler for
transition. We welcome the proposal to hold a pledging
conference for Darfur to ensure sufficient funds for the
United Nations country team. There is merit in exploring
the potential of South-South and triangular cooperation.
I should like to close by reiterating our longstanding support for our Sudanese brothers and sisters
in their quest to achieve peace and stability. We have
contributed concretely in that regard through our
peacekeepers. Darfur has come a long way. The onus
is on all of us — the Sudanese Government and the
international community — to consolidate and not
jeopardize what has been achieved thus far. In the end,
the civilian population is the most important aspect.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
19-05401

25/02/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Ms. Bintou Keita for her detailed briefing on her
recent visit to Darfur. We welcome her commitment
to the discussions on the eventual exit of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) from Darfur.
With regard to the situation at hand, we welcome
the reports of relative calm and stability in Darfur,
with the exception of hotbeds of tension in Jebel Marra,
where the conflict between the Government and the
rebel forces of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul
Wahid persists. We are pleased by the recent reductions
in incidents of intercommunal violence and conflicts
generated by the destruction of crops. However, it is
worrying that the root causes of intercommunal conflicts
remain unresolved, and that conflicts generated by land
disputes that affect internally displaced persons upon
return to their places of origin remain ongoing.
Also of particular concern are the diminished but
persistent attacks and threats against humanitarian
personnel and the denial of access to some areas,
specifically in Jebel Marra, to UNAMID personnel.
We encourage the Government of the Sudan to continue
to implement initiatives such as the disarmament of
the civilian population, as established in the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur.
On the other hand, we are optimistic about the
progress made in the peace process in Darfur, such as
the signing of a pre-negotiation framework agreement
between the Government, the Sudanese Liberation
Army-Minni Minawi and the Justice and Equality
Movement, the meeting for which was convened in
Berlin on 6 December 2018.
With regard to the Doha Document, we underscore
the urgent need to reinvigorate that implementation,
especially with regard to the return of displaced persons
and the reintegration of ex-combatants, as well as the
need to fulfil the international community’s promises
of financial support, which is crucial for stability and
sustainable peace in the country.
However, we are concerned that, recently and as a
consequence of the eruption of protests on 19 December
2018, that process has been postponed. We are also
concerned by the latest reports of the Government’s
actions, such as the announcement of a state of
emergency throughout the country, the dissolution of
the federal and state Governments and its implications
for the UNAMID restructuring process. We call on
all parties to commit to the peace process in order to

S/PV. 8468

ensure a definitive ceasefire and full humanitarian
access to the population affected by the conflict.
Another aspect of particular importance to us is
violence against women and girls. Despite reported
declines in such incidents, it is concerning that the
protection of girls and women from sexual violence
remains a challenge to the peace process in Darfur.
The high levels of threat of sexual violence restrict
the freedom of women and girls in the vicinity of
refugee camps and areas of return for displaced
persons, especially in the Jebel Marra area, in the
context of clashes between Government forces
and the Sudanese Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid. We
encourage further discussions between the Government
of the Sudan and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
on the establishment of a cooperation framework for
prevention and response in those cases.
Moreover, Darfur has been described as the first
climate-change conflict. That is of particular importance
to my delegation, as it is one of the priorities of the
Dominican Republic. Darfur is a diverse ecological
zone that is affected by droughts and is a first-hand
witness to the advance of the Sahara desert. That
strengthening process of desertification and drought
has slowly eroded the availability of natural resources
that are essential for survival and peaceful coexistence.
Former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said that
the conflict in Darfur began as an ecological crisis
caused, at least in part, by climate change. According
to the United Nations Environment Programme,
temperatures will continue to rise in the coming decades
in the Sudan, which could lead to a 70 per cent decrease
in the cultivation of grains such as sorghum. We are
concerned about the implications that this droughtconflict cycle may have at the community level and
the increase in communal conflicts over water scarcity.
Therefore, in addition to the concern we have already
expressed, we see that situation as an opportunity for
the Council to address, in a unified manner and with
a practical approach, the risks associated with those
climate phenomena and their role as multipliers of
fragility, vulnerability and generators of conflicts.
With regard to the current process of downsizing
UNAMID and limiting operations to the Jebel Marra
area, we understand that it should be operational and not
a reduction in the responsibility for monitoring human
rights and protecting civilians in Darfur. It is necessary

19-0540111/19

S/PV.8468

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to ensure a smooth and seamless transition involving
local authorities, autochthonous administrations,
internally displaced persons, youth and women. Any
reduction should reflect genuine improvements in the
situation on the ground and assurances that the United
Nations country team will have the necessary resources
and support to fill the gaps that have arisen.
Furthermore, we should ensure that any handover,
future transfers or closures of support offices or team
sites are made in consultation with local authorities
and for the benefit of communities, with attention
to the human rights of individuals. In addition, the
Sudanese Government must fulfil its role as the
main party responsible for achieving peace, stability
and development for the Sudanese people, with the
cooperation of the United Nations and other entities.
The Government of the Sudan must take national
ownership of that process and make a commitment
to working constructively and effectively to fulfil the
parameters established by the Secretary-General and
ensure a successful transition. We call on it to consider
allowing the mission to return to its former areas of
operation should further conflicts erupt down the
road. It is also essential to ensure a transparent justice
process for the men, women and children who have
been victims of human rights crimes and violations
committed by both sides during the conflict. Their
voices must be heard. All allegations must be properly
investigated and those responsible brought to justice.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Assistant SecretaryGeneral Bintou Keita for her detailed briefing on the
situation in Darfur and her own impressions of her
recent trip to the Sudan.
We share our colleagues’ assessments of the
current state of affairs in Darfur and note the
continuing generally stable situation in the region.
We are pleased that there have been no major armed
clashes there for a long time and that intercommunal
conflicts are virtually non-existent. It is encouraging
that on the whole the Government of the Sudan is
successfully implementing its package of measures for
collecting weapons from the population and is doing
a great deal to normalize the situation in Darfur. We
note Khartoum’s constructive role in resolving regional
issues, including its contribution to advancing the peace
process in South Sudan, and we should also single out
the efforts of the Sudan generally and President Omer
12/19

25/02/2019

Al-Bashir personally regarding the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, which resulted in the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.
I am sorry to be compelled to point out here that a
number of our Western colleagues have once again used
today’s meeting on the situation in Darfur to criticize
the Sudanese leadership regarding episodes that have
nothing to do with that subject, which is a completely
unacceptable tactic. It is crucial to evaluate the prospects
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) solely in the light of the situation
in Darfur itself. We will not support attempts to drag
any other issues related to the internal situation in the
Sudan into this discussion. As regards Darfur directly,
given the positive momentum in the region, we believe
it is important to continue the process of drawing down
UNAMID’s military component in accordance with
resolution 2429 (2018). We share the view that in order
to avoid relapses into conflict it is important to prevent
a power vacuum in the region and focus on building the
capacity of State institutions in Darfur. That is a goal of
the transition concept of the functioning of UNAMID
approved in the resolution, designed to support the
people of the Sudan in launching the peacebuilding
phase of the settlement in Darfur.
We call on donors to fulfil their commitments made
at the Cairo and Doha conferences in March 2010 and
April 2013, which we believe, along with a relaxation of
the unilateral sanctions on the Sudan, will undoubtedly
help to normalize the socioeconomic situation in the
Sudan as a whole as well as resolving issues related to
the efforts for peacebuilding and consolidating security
in Darfur. We are satisfied that almost all the provisions
of the 2011 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur have
been met.
We deplore the fact that although the unreconciled
armed opposition has forfeited its presence on the
ground, it has continued its attempts to undermine
the situation and incite new outbreaks of violence in
the region. We have long known that the Darfur peace
process has been stalemated thanks to the unhelpful
negotiating position of the Sudan Liberation ArmyAbdul Wahid. It is unfortunate that the Secretariat has
continued to resort to false equivalencies by essentially
refusing to admit that. We believe that flirting with the
unreconciled opposition only harms the peace process
and that the Sudanese opposition’s external sponsors
19-05401

25/02/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

should not encourage the unreconciled opposition
to hold meetings in their capitals and should work
actively to convince their protégés to make more
realistic demands.
We have noted the conclusion on 6 December,
through the mediation of the African Union, of a
pre-negotiation agreement with the non-signatories
to the Doha Document. We are sorry it did not last
long. We view it as another concession on the part
of the Government to the radical opposition, and we
hope to see it produce serious rapprochement efforts
from the latter. If Abdul Wahid Nour does not meet
the African Union’s demand that he take part in the
negotiating process unconditionally, we are willing to
consider the possibility of sanctioning him through the
Security Council.
We believe that establishing the necessary
preconditions in Darfur will enable us to arrive at a full
withdrawal for the mission in accordance with the time
frame outlined for it in resolution 2429 (2018), which is
the end of 2020.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita for her valuable briefing on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and her visit to the Sudan. I also thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco and Mr. Mourad Wahba
for their presence at this meeting. Today I will address
four issues with regard to Darfur — the security
situation, displaced persons, UNAMID’s exit strategy
and the transitional period and peacebuilding.
With regard to the security situation, today
and for the past several years, well before Kuwait
joined the Security Council, the security situation in
Darfur has continued to improve steadily, with the
exception of clashes initiated by a particular faction
that has continually rejected the peace process from
the very start. We therefore reaffirm the importance
of supporting the efforts of the Sudan to extend its
sovereignty throughout its territories, including by
assuming its primary responsibility for protecting
civilians in view of UNAMID’s military drawdown, a
process that confirms the continuing stable situation in
Darfur and the diminishing need for a United Nations
military presence there.
The displaced persons and civilians in Darfur
in general remain a central priority for the Security
Council, and their safe, dignified and voluntary return

S/PV. 8468

must therefore remain our common goal. Their return is
evidence of the efforts to successfully address the root
causes of the conflict without creating new benchmarks
or indicators. We welcome the ongoing cooperation
between UNAMID and the Government of the Sudan,
as well as with communities in Darfur, in meeting with
the displaced, as we saw in Nyala this year, because
communicating with them will move us closer to
ensuring their desired return.
With regard to UNAMID’s exit strategy, we welcome
and affirm the importance of ensuring that the Sudan
and its partners continue working on implementing the
remaining provisions of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur in order to pave the way for the mission’s
withdrawal next year. The Doha Document remains
a cornerstone of the settlement in Darfur, and we
urge the Security Council to give priority to political
solutions that fulfil the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. We commend the timely visit by the three
Assistant Secretaries-General, which we were briefed
about today, reflecting UNAMID’s changing mandate
with a view to ensuring a smooth exit. With regard to
the transitional period and peacebuilding, supporting
sustainable peace in Darfur requires that we closely
monitor the needs of the Sudanese Government and
UNAMID. The visit was therefore a welcome and
much-needed development after our meeting last
September on the margins of the high-level week of
the General Assembly to discuss peacebuilding in
Darfur. It is high time that we expedited our efforts to
help the Sudan and its people in order to present it as
an example of how to transition from peacekeeping to
post-conflict peacebuilding.
In conclusion, we affirm our willingness to support
the efforts of the Secretariat in assessing the needs of
the next phase, and we renew our call for support to
the Sudan in achieving stability and a comprehensive
peace throughout its territories, as it is doing with
neighbouring countries.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita
for her briefing. Together with Assistant SecretaryGeneral Wahba, of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), and Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco, of the Peacebuilding Support
Office, Ms. Keita recently made a joint and very timely
visit to the Sudan that was conducive to regional peace
and stability in Darfur and to advancing the smooth
implementation of the transition plan for the African

19-0540113/19

S/PV.8468

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
The security situation in Darfur has remained
generally stable in the past few years. Since the latter
half of last year, during which UNAMID was gradually
transferring its responsibility for security to the
Government of the Sudan, the situation has remained
stable. China appreciates UNAMID’s contribution
to the maintenance of peace and stability in Darfur
and welcomes the Sudanese Government’s voluntary
enhancement of governance and security capacitybuilding in Darfur, its continued weapons collection
campaign and its efforts to reach out further to the
non-signatories to the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, and we trust that those measures will be
conducive to Darfur’s long-term stability. At the same
time, however, Darfur is still dealing with problems
of intercommunal tension, internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and relatively limited socioeconomic
development. I have three points to make in that regard.
First, it is important to continue to advance the
political process for Darfur. The Government of
the Sudan is committed to a political solution to the
Darfur issue. There are some opposition and armed
groups in Darfur that should lay down their weapons,
participate actively in the peace process and work to
resolve problems by political means such as dialogue
and consultation. Countries with influence should work
actively to exert pressure on them.
Secondly, priority should be given to assisting the
Sudanese Government in strengthening its capacitybuilding. While the Government has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of regional security
in Darfur, the international community should actively
assist it in enhancing its capacity-building for the
maintenance of law and order and security control
in order to help its security forces take over full
responsibility for security from UNAMID as soon
as possible and ensure UNAMID’s withdrawal from
Darfur in 2020, in accordance with the road map. In the
light of the latest developments, the Security Council
should work quickly to conduct a review with a view to
ultimately lifting the sanctions on the Sudan.
Thirdly, we should accelerate the reconstruction
process in Darfur. In the light of the needs of the
Sudan, the international community should continue to
provide active humanitarian assistance and economic
support. The immediate focus should be on assisting
14/19

25/02/2019

the Government in addressing the return and settlement
of IDPs, building and improving local infrastructure
and enhancing agricultural production and food selfsufficiency. We welcome the necessary support of
UNDP and the Peacebuilding Commission to the
rebuilding and development of the Sudan.
China has consistently supported the Darfur
peace process and is one of UNAMID’s main troopcontributing countries. We have made positive
contributions to the maintenance of peace and stability
in Darfur over the years and would like to continue
to make concerted efforts, in cooperation with the
international community, to play a constructive role in
realizing peace, stability and development in Darfur.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
comprehensive briefing, especially her comments on
her visit to the Sudan. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his most recent report (S/2019/44) on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
Poland welcomes the improved security situation
in Darfur. At the same time, we are aware that the
progress that has been made is volatile and reversible,
because the root causes of conflict have not yet been
fully addressed. We remain concerned about the reports
of continued clashes between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
in Jebel Marra and their consequences for the civilian
population. We are also sorry to have to note that the
human rights situation in Darfur remains problematic.
We strongly condemn sexual and gender-based violence
and the targeting of the civilian population, especially
those most vulnerable — women, children, people with
disabilities and internally displaced persons — including
by Government security personnel. In our view, the
Government of the Sudan should spare no effort to hold
the perpetrators accountable and should do its utmost
to fight impunity, provide security and ensure the rule
of law in Darfur. In that context, we also see a need for
enhancing the capacity of State institutions and lawenforcement agencies, and we urge the Government to
continue cooperating with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We reiterate our position that the only possible
solution to the conflict in Darfur is a political one.
In that context, we welcomed the signing in Berlin in
December of a pre-negotiation agreement, although we
19-05401

25/02/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8468

regret that the current internal situation in the Sudan
has resulted in the loss of that recent momentum in the
peace process.

clashes have persisted between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid in
the Jebel Marra area.

With regard to the UNAMID drawdown, we
welcome the fact that the Mission’s reconfiguration is
proceeding in accordance with the plan. We believe that
the Council should closely monitor the impact on the
ground of UNAMID’s downsizing so as to ensure that
the gains that have been achieved in Darfur will not
be compromised. The Government of the Sudan should
be held to account for ensuring progress towards the
achievement of the exit benchmarks and indicators. The
drawdown should be compensated for by an increased
presence of the United Nations country team and,
particularly important, by ensuring that the country
team has sufficient and adequate resources to carry out
its work in Darfur.

However, in this context of greater stability, we
note with concern the recent measures issued by the
Government that may jeopardize progress in Darfur.
In particular, we refer to the state of emergency
decreed throughout the country and the dissolution
of the federal and provincial Governments. That is
particularly sensitive when we recognize that only a
political agreement will make it possible to achieve
sustainable peace in Darfur.

We believe firmly that during the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding there should be
a particular emphasis on improving socioeconomic
conditions in Darfur in the areas of the provision
of health services and jobs, education, trade, basic
economic infrastructure and agriculture, and on
effectively establishing the rule of law throughout
Darfur. Cooperation between the Government of the
Sudan, the local authorities in Darfur, UNAMID and
the United Nations country team is crucial in that
regard. We believe that the international community
should join those efforts and support the recovery and
development of Darfur in order to avoid a relapse into
conflict. In that context, we hope to see the new Darfur
development strategy finalized as soon as possible,
which could streamline international assistance.
In conclusion, I would like to express our gratitude
to all UNAMID personnel and the United Nations
country team for their continued dedication and
contribution to promoting peace, security, stability and
reconciliation in Darfur.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our appreciation for the convening
of this meeting and for Assistant Secretary-General
Keita’s important briefing.
The Secretary-General’s 90-day report (S/2019/44)
informs us that Darfur has never been more stable
since the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) was first established.
Intercommunal violence has diminished and the
security situation has improved, despite the fact that

The pre-negotiation agreement between the
Government and some armed groups that are not
signatories of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
was an important step towards peace in Darfur,
pending the start of negotiations among all parties to
the conflict. It now remains to see the effect of the
surprise measures on this process, which is entering a
complex stage owing to the progressive withdrawal of
the mission. In this context, we reiterate the call on all
parties to cease hostilities in Darfur once and for all
and to resolve outstanding substantive issues, such as
the use of land and natural resources, through dialogue.
In the area of human rights, we deplore the
continuing serious violations of fundamental rights,
many of which have been attributed to the Sudanese
Armed Forces, with women and children being
particularly vulnerable. Conflict-related sexual
violence continues to be considerable. In this context,
the early implementation of the framework for
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations in preventing and responding to
sexual violence is of the utmost importance. We believe
it is essential that UNAMID be able to effectively
exercise its mandate throughout Darfur, especially in
the area of Jebel Marra, which is particularly affected
by this scourge. We therefore call on the Government
to ensure that the mission and humanitarian personnel
have unrestricted access to that area.
On the other hand, we are pleased to see that
UNAMID’s close coordination with the United Nations
country team and local authorities has led to a significant
reduction in the intensity of intercommunal violence.
We welcome efforts aimed at addressing the drivers of
the conflict, such as access to water resources and the
rehabilitation of local police stations and rural courts.
In this context, we welcome the return of part of the

19-0540115/19

S/PV.8468

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

displaced population to their places of origin, which we
hope will be continued with the adequate provision of
basic services. We are also pleased that the UNAMID
reconfiguration process is proceeding as planned. We
appreciate the efforts of the staff of the mission and
of the United Nations team to carry out the transition
process, focusing on the priorities established.
For that reason, we also welcome the recent
joint visit of the three Assistant SecretariesGeneral — Bintou Keita, Oscar Fernández-Taranco
and Mourad Wahba — and note the need for the donor
community to contribute to these efforts. Resource
mobilization will be essential to facilitate a successful
peacebuilding process in the long term. In this
regard, we stress the importance of giving priority to
investments in development with a view to achieving
sustainable peace.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our support for
the African Union, the United Nations team and the
agencies of the system, and in particular for UNAMID
for its strenuous efforts to achieve a successful
transition in Darfur amid the enormous challenges it
faces every day.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s meeting, which is devoted
to the latest developments in the situation in Darfur
and the implementation of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). It thanks Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, for
her comprehensive briefing following her successful
visit to the Sudan.
After the outbreak of sociopolitical unrest leading
to loss of life and material damage, Cote d’Ivoire calls
on all parties to exercise restraint and encourages the
Government of the Sudan to continue its efforts to
find solutions to the root causes of this crisis in order
to preserve the gains of the ongoing political process
in Darfur. It also urges all Sudanese stakeholders to
work in a consensual manner to create conditions of
transparency and credibility for the elections scheduled
for 2020.
With regard to the security situation, my country
welcomes the relative stability that Darfur has
enjoyed for several months. However, it deplores the
resumption of clashes between Government forces and
those of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid in
16/19

25/02/2019

Jebel Marra. This situation is at the root of population
displacements, loss of human life and persistent sexual
violence against women and girls. Côte d’Ivoire calls
on the warring parties to give priority to dialogue as a
means of resolving their differences. In this regard, it
supports the Secretary-General’s call on Abdul Wahid
to join the peace process without delay in order to bring
the crisis to a definitive end.
In this context, my country notes with satisfaction
the signing, on 6 December 2018, of a pre-agreement
between the Government and two movements that are not
signatories to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
as a prelude to the forthcoming peace negotiations. It
welcomes these achievements facilitated by President
Thabo Mbeki, head of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, and hopes that they will help to
create the conditions for a final settlement of the crisis
in Darfur.
My delegation also welcomes the significant
decrease in intercommunal violence thanks to the
combined efforts of national and local authorities,
UNAMID and the United Nations country team. In
this respect, it underlines the need to seek adequate
solutions to land issues and difficulties related to
access to basic social services. On the humanitarian
front, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the improvement in food
security thanks to favourable weather conditions during
the period from June to September 2018.
With regard to human rights issues, my country
commends the remarkable work done by the Sudanese
police forces, which have replaced UNAMID police
elements, in securing some internally displaced persons
camps. However, it notes with concern the SecretaryGeneral’s report’s observations of repeated acts of
violence against civilians, particularly in the Jebel
Marra area, and the increase in sexual violence against
women (S/2019/44). In this context, Côte d’Ivoire
believes that it is important to ensure the strengthening
of the capacities of judicial institutions in order to help
establish the rule of law.
With regard to the transition process in Darfur, my
country would like to support the sustained efforts of
national and regional State actors, UNAMID and the
United Nations country team to ensure a successful
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in
Darfur. It also welcomes the multifaceted support
provided by UNAMID and the United Nations country
team to the Government of the Sudan, particularly in
19-05401

25/02/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the areas of strengthening the rule of law and access to
justice. In the light of its own experience, my country
reaffirms the need to establish strong institutions that
guarantee the rule of law and to promote national
ownership of the issue, with a view to peacebuilding.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire invites the international
community and development partners to provide the
necessary support to ensure that the transition is funded
and that Darfur’s development needs are met.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Equatorial Guinea.
First of all, I would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita
for her excellent briefing on the situation in Darfur and
for her trip to the area. We also welcome the presence
of the representative of the Government of the Sudan at
today’s meeting.
From Ms. Keita’s briefing, it should be noted that
the overall situation in Darfur has stabilized quite a
bit over the past few months. We continue to closely
follow the evolution of the situation on the ground and
are encouraged by the fact that progress is being made
in terms of stability and the positive steps under way.
The area has been free of serious violence for several
months now, which is further evidence of the advances
made with regard to Darfur.
However, as stated previously, we remain concerned
about the violence that continues to negatively affect
the population of Jebel Marra. Indeed, the Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is concerned
about the still precarious humanitarian situation and
the difficulties faced by displaced persons returning to
their lands, as well as the persistence of sexual violence.
In this context, my country encourages all parties to
the conflict to recommit themselves to the political
process on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, and to cease and desist from engaging in deadly
clashes, as they continue to cause unnecessary deaths
and displacement of civilians.
We also call on the countries that host the armed
movements to commit to the peaceful pursuit to a
lasting solution in the Darfur region. In that regard,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that in
order to successfully address the root causes of the
crisis that continue to lead to acts of violence related
to land disputes, mediation and reconciliation efforts

S/PV. 8468

are needed with a view to ending the conflict and
preventing its recurrence.
We note that bringing peace to Darfur would be
a firm step towards achieving the shared African
aspiration of silencing the guns by 2020. We commend
the Government of the Sudan for its support of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and for the efforts it has made in its
weapon collection programme. The full implementation
of that programme is key both to sustaining the peace
currently prevailing in Darfur and to restoring lasting
peace to the region. This important programme is now
being carried out in the Jebel Marra area.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges the
Government of the Sudan to improve the security
environment in the political framework through the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur with a view to achieving a definitive ceasefire.
To that effect, broader support must be given to the
political process led by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. In that regard, we welcome the
signing in December of the pre-negotiation agreement
in Germany.
In conclusion, my delegation congratulates the
Sudanese Government, Mr. Mamabolo, Joint Special
Representative and Head of UNAMID, and all
UNAMID personnel, and calls on them to continue their
work to improve the living conditions for the people of
Darfur. We must ensure that the possible withdrawal
of UNAMID does not leave behind a power vacuum
that could reactivate the conflict. It is important that
the zone remain peaceful in order for post-conflict
reconstruction to be effective.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you once again, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting devoted to the
consideration of the periodic report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/44) on the situation in Darfur and on
the transition from peacekeeping to the peacebuilding,
recovery and reconstruction phase. That will be the
core of my statement.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report.
We also thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa, Department of Political and

19-0540117/19

S/PV.8468

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Peacebuilding Affairs, as well as her team. We thank
Ms. Keita for her valuable briefing following her
recent visit to the Sudan two weeks ago. We will gladly
facilitate future visits at any time upon the submission
of the proper request.
This meeting is taking place just as the stabilization
process is gaining momentum in Darfur. That was
recognized in Security Council resolutions 2363 (2017)
and 2429 (2018). It also reflects what was agreed by
the Sudanese Government, the African Union and the
United Nations in February 2015 through the Joint
Working Group on the importance of the gradual,
phased and smooth exit of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We
are delighted that the position of the Council is fully
in line with the national and regional positions on
this matter.
My delegation hopes that the transition from
peacekeeping to recovery, stability, peacebuilding
and reconstruction will enjoy the same support that
was provided to UNAMID. The goal is to support the
great improvement of the security situation in Darfur
and to complement it with development efforts in
order to achieve socioeconomic and environmental
development and to address the consequences of the
conflict in Darfur. In that context, it is important to
recall that underdevelopment was the main factor that
led to the insurgency in Darfur. It is also crucial to bear
in mind the close link between peace and development.
It is impossible to have one without the other.
In that regard, my delegation hopes that all the
efforts of regional and international partners will
support the Sudanese Government in laying the
groundwork for stabilization, peacebuilding and
reconstruction in Darfur, particularly with respect to
repatriating internally displaced persons and refugees;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
strengthening peaceful coexistence among various
communities; contributing to capacity-building at the
local level; and creating job opportunities for young
people, who represent more than 65 per cent of the
population of Darfur. This is a joint venture between
the international community and us.
I have the pleasure to announce that the Sudanese
Government is ready and willing to welcome the team
that will be sent by the Secretariat and the African
Union Commission in March to conduct a strategic
review of UNAMID, in accordance with resolutions
18/19

25/02/2019

2363 (2017) and 2429 (2018). The objective of that
review is to define the parameters of the final exit of
UNAMID by June 2020. As the Council is aware, the
final exit will mark success in achieving the goal for
which the Mission was deployed in 2007. It will be a
joint national, regional and international success that
should take its due place in the annals of the peaceful
resolution of conflicts around the world.
I think we are all entitled to celebrate what has been
achieved thus far. We are all entitled to celebrate the
synergy of national, regional and international efforts
that led to the conclusion of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic on 6 February. Before that, those same efforts
led in September 2018 to signing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. As the Council is aware, the broad and varied
experience of the Sudan and the Sudanese was key
in both of those achievements. Those achievements
cannot be separated from the successful experience
of UNAMID, which has had a positive outcome at the
regional and international levels. I should like to touch
upon a number of important issues that were raised by
Security Council members.
First of all, it is important to understand and
recall that the topic of this meeting is the situation
in Darfur and its five states. The topic therefore does
not include the regions outside of this geographical
area. If, for whatever reason, the Council wished to
consider the situation in any other area, including the
Sudan, which exercises complete sovereignty over its
own territory, the Council would first have to agree to
address that topic in accordance its 1947 provisional
rules of procedure, based on the majority or consensus.
Members are well aware of that. If we are to consider
shared responsibilities for addressing the situation in
the Sudan in general, we must keep in the extremely
important point that our country has been suffering for
more than three decades from the effects of unilateral
sanctions that have no precedent in international
law and were neither recognized nor adopted by the
Security Council.
Those sanctions have negatively affected millions
of vulnerable people, including women, children and
the elderly. They have deprived the Sudan of its basic
needs, such as spare parts for our aircrafts, which has
led to the failure and crash of civil aircrafts. Sudan
Airways was undermined after having been the most
famous airline in Africa since 1947. In addition, the
19-05401

25/02/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan has been deprived of its rights as a post-conflict
country suffering a huge debt burden and as one of the
least developed countries, while hosting more than
2 million refugees. Just one of the aforementioned
factors should qualify the Sudan for complete relief
from its heavy debt burden and for favourable treatment
by international financial organizations, which is
anything but the case today.
Furthermore, our peace partners have not fulfilled
their promises in the economic sphere, made following
the conclusion of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, and followed by the peaceful resolution
of the issue concerning the Republic of South Sudan
in 2011, based on that agreement. Unfortunately, the
peace partners, some of whom are permanent members
of the Security Council, have turned their backs on
their promises and commitments.
All members of the Council and the international
community know that the core reason behind the
conflict in Darfur is primarily related to development,
as indicated by the Permanent Representative of
the Dominican Republic. Undoubtedly, it also has
to do with the deterioration of the environment and
desertification that the west coast of Africa continues to
endure. I recall what the former Secretary-General said
in 2007 when he first took office. He said that the root
cause of the conflict in Africa is the deterioration of
the environment. I recall that after he said that, he was
fiercely attacked in the media, and I still recall what the
New York Times and The Washington Post wrote in that
regard. However, that having been said, some would
choose to compound this conflict by adding political
reasons. They try to use the International Criminal
Court in a way that completely distorts the facts.
Council members know that Jebel Marra is
characterized by its unique situation, as recognized
in resolution 2363 (2017). There are 2 million people
in that area, but it should be recalled that it is only a
small part of one state among five that make up greater
Darfur. Given that perspective, the situation in Jebel
Marra should not be used as the sole prism for viewing
the situation in Darfur. That situation therefore should
not be presented differently from the situation on the
ground, owing to the simple reason that the Security
Council has adopted a specific arrangement concerning
the Jebel Marra area. The appropriate course of action for
the Council to take, as viewed by us and by the majority

S/PV. 8468

of Council members, is to act on the determination that
it has expressed in the relevant resolutions and to follow
up on the provisions of resolution 1591 (2005) which
was adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Last month, I met with the Secretary-General
and provided him with information confirming that
members of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
faction, who have retreated into the difficult-to-access
mountains, were behind the protests raising legitimate
demands, as recognized by the President of the Republic.
They used knives and guns during those protests.
Concerning the state of emergency that has been
declared, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, to which the Sudan is a signatory,
provides for the declaration of a state of emergency.
We informed the Secretary-General last month of our
intention to declare a state of emergency in the states of
Kassala and North Kordofan, pursuant to the provisions
of the International Covenant and of the 2005 interim
Constitution of the Sudan. We will immediately update
the Secretary-General on our declaration of the state
of emergency in various parts of the Sudan, in line
with the provisions of the International Covenant. The
Government of the Sudan is fully committed to the
inalienable rights of individuals, as enshrined in the
Constitution of the Sudan, which are the same as those
enshrined in the International Covenant.
In conclusion, my delegation expresses once
again its gratitude to UNAMID for the work it has
accomplished since its deployment in Darfur in
2008. We also thank all peacekeepers and the troopcontributing countries, the African Union Commission
and the Secretariat, in particular the Department of
Peace Operations, Department of Operational Support
and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs. We once again express our commitment to
cooperating with UNAMID until its full withdrawal
from my country after having achieved success and
peace in our important region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

19-0540119/19
