S/PV.8533

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8533rd meeting

Wednesday, 22 May 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Ndong Mangue
Mr. Melki
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Alahmad
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Mpanyane
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2019/393)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14913 (E)
*1914913*

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2019/393)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Raisedon
Zenenga, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Officer-in-Charge of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia; Mr. Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia; and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator of the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Mr. Zenenga and Mr. Madeira are joining this
meeting via video-teleconference from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/393, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zenenga.
Mr. Zenenga: Allow me to express my good wishes
for the holy month of Ramadan.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) began the new year facing a security crisis
as a result of the mortar attack on the United Nations
compound on 1 January and a political crisis as a
result of the expulsion of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom on the same
day. The two incidents severely disrupted mandate
implementation and the Mission’s engagement with the
Federal Government of Somalia. They also elevated the
security risk level for United Nations personnel and left
our staff deeply demoralized.
2/25

22/05/2019

We immediately prioritized the safety and security
of our staff, while concentrating our efforts on mending
relations with the Federal Government and putting
mandate implementation back on track. Working
together with the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia (UNSOS) and the United Nations country
team, we have taken measures to provide more secure
accommodation and working space for our staff and
to strengthen our resilience to mortar attacks. I thank
UNSOS for the support that it has provided.
However, a lasting solutionution to the continuing
security threat will come from denying Al-Shabaab the
space and opportunities to prepare and launch attacks.
The United Nations system and international partners
are working together to enable the Somali security
forces to take control of areas used to launch mortars
and to support the implementation of a comprehensive
Mogadishu security plan.
We are making good progress on resetting
UNSOM’s relations with the Federal Government.
Building on Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo’s visit
to Mogadishu in February, my discussions with Prime
Minister Hassan Khayre have been constructive. We
have agreed on arrangements to restore and strengthen
the Mission’s engagement with the Government, and the
Prime Minister has assured me of his commitment to
strengthening the relationship ahead of the arrival of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
There will be challenges on the road ahead and
there are still issues that will test the relationship with
the Federal Government. But we are certainly in a
better place than we were at the beginning of the year.
Mandate implementation is back on track, particularly
in the areas where we deliver technical support.
Those include preparations for the 2020 elections, the
constitutional review process, capacity-building of the
police and contributing to the planning for ongoing
security operations, including stabilization activities.
Working together with other international partners, we
are also using our good offices to encourage dialogue
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states.
Despite the challenging security environment and
the recurrent political crises, as well as the capacity
constraints and challenges of managing political
obstacles to its reform agenda, Somalia has remained
on a positive trajectory. During the reporting period the
country made significant progress on its economic and
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8533

security sector reforms. There was also progress on the
inclusive politics agenda, including the constitutional
review process and preparations for the universal
suffrage elections.

political road map to remain on track, and we urge all
stakeholders to work towards reaching agreement that
can be translated into parliamentary approval in the
coming months.

At the spring meetings of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank in April,
participants commended Somalia for the achievements
on its economic reforms. The satisfactory completion
of the third staff-monitored programme has enabled the
design of a fourth such programme that will pave the
way for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative
decision point, anticipated in early 2020.

A technical revision of 9 of the 15 chapters of
the Somali Provisional Federal Constitution was
undertaken. That is a significant achievement.
However, progress will ultimately be measured
against political agreements between the leaders of
the Federal Government and the federal member states
on key areas of the Constitution, including power- and
resource-sharing.

The Federal Government decided to apply the
same rigorous approach to bring accountability and
transparency to the security sector. For instance,
biometric registration of all Somali National Army
soldiers was completed on 3 March. All 16,000
registered soldiers now receive their salaries directly
into their bank accounts. That has cut out middlemen
and reduced corruption and ensures the regular payment
of salaries to military personnel. It also paves the way
for rightsizing the National Army.

Important progress has also been made on human
rights. Following the violence that resulted in civilian
casualties during the elections in South-West State last
December, both the Federal Government and the SouthWest State authorities completed investigations into the
killing of civilians. South-West State also conducted
reconciliation meetings with the communities involved
and agreed to pay reparations to the families of
the victims.

In parallel with those security sector reforms, the
Federal Government launched military operations in
Lower Shabelle region to advance the transition plan,
degrade Al-Shabaab in strongholds that are contiguous
to Mogadishu and thereby stop the recent increase in
Al-Shabaab attacks in Mogadishu. In an unprecedented
development, the current military operations,
supported by the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia, UNSOS and international partners,
have catalysed joint planning and the systematic
generation of capable, accountable, acceptable and
affordable Somali National Army units. They have also
demonstrated the value of a comprehensive approach
to security by incorporating stabilization and policing
elements in military operations and have reinvigorated
implementation of the transition plan.
Technical preparations for universal suffrage
elections in 2020 are making progress. The process of
identifying potential voter registration sites began this
month. The National Independent Electoral Commission
opened offices in most of the federal member states.
The draft political parties bill and the electoral bill
were approved by the federal Cabinet and submitted
to Parliament. However, the electoral bill remains a
contentious issue with the federal member states. The
adoption of those bills is absolutely essential for the

On 18 May, the Federal Parliament ratified the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
The ratification will now go to the President for his
signature. I congratulate the Federal Government on
that important step to promote and protect the rights of
persons with disabilities.
Somalia continues to grapple with significant
challenges. The Federal Government’s reform efforts
have encountered inevitable resistance. The economic
reforms and security sector reforms in particular entail
dismantling a war economy that had flourished for
decades. There are many vested interests, which pose
obstacles to increased accountability. Taking on those
vested interests requires not only the determination,
which the Federal Government has shown, but also an
inclusive approach of building relationships with all
stakeholders to demonstrate that the reforms will yield
benefits for the whole nation.
The full and sustainable implementation of
Somalia’s priorities hinges on the restoration of
cooperation between the leadership of the Federal
Government and the federal member states. While it was
an important step towards the resumption of dialogue,
the consultative meeting held between the leaders of
the Federal Government and the federal member states
in Garowe from 5 to 10 May failed to reach agreement
on any of the substantive issues and on the date, format

19-149133/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

and venue of the next meeting. Together with other
international partners, we continue to encourage the
Federal Government and federal member state leaders
to urgently resume dialogue and cooperation, which
are indispensable for the sustainable implementation
of reforms.
The disputed electoral processes in Galmudug and
Jubaland, scheduled respectively for July and August,
were discussed during the consultative meeting. They
have become a source of concern. As was the case in
South West state last year, the risk of violence is very
high. We continue to urge the federal and regional
authorities to draw lessons from South West state, as
well as good practices from the Puntland elections,
and to manage disputes in the upcoming electoral
processes in a manner that avoids conflict and ensures
transparency and fairness.

22/05/2019

Gulf, should be nurtured. The trajectory is upward and
positive. We can all work together to energize Somalia’s
population and their international partners towards
reform and progress.
The President: I thank Mr. Zenenga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Security Council on
the situation in Somalia.
Allow me to start by expressing my condolences
to the United Nations family and to the families of
the 21 United Nations colleagues who perished in the
Ethiopian air disaster in March. We at the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) pay tribute to
them for their service to humankind and their efforts to
make our world a better world.

The dialogue between Somalia and Somaliland,
which also has implications for the completion of the
constitutional review process, remains stalled. We are,
however, encouraged by the remarks of Somaliland’s
President Muse Bihi Abdi on 18 May, expressing his
readiness to promote peace with Puntland, including
through the exchange of prisoners, and to cooperate
with Somalia on issues related to security, trade
and education.

On behalf of the African Union Commission, I
would also like to pay tribute to AMISOM’s former
Acting Police Commissioner, Ms. Christine Alalo, who
also perished in the March air crash. Her exceptional
leadership qualities, commitment and passion were
instrumental in the positive performance of AMISOM’s
police component in very challenging circumstances.
She will be remembered for her valuable contribution
to efforts for peace and stability on our continent.

The positive dynamics in the Horn of Africa
region hold great opportunities for Somalia to realize
its strategic and economic potential. However, the
ongoing deterioration in relations between Somalia
and Kenya, emanating from the maritime boundary
dispute, is worrisome. It has implications for Somalia’s
State-building and peacebuilding efforts. Dialogue, not
only between Kenya and Somalia but also with other
member States of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, is essential for lowering tensions and for
addressing the fundamental issues that have created the
continuing tensions.

In previous reporting periods, differences between
the Federal Government and the federal member states
overshadowed the political landscape in the country
and warranted our collective and justified concern.
Today in Somalia we are witnessing encouraging signs
of political engagement. The inaugural ceremony of
Mr. Saed Abdullahi Mohamed Deni as President of
Puntland, in January, was a significant moment of
gathering and collective reflection in that regard. The
event brought to Garowe the entire Somali political
class. Former Somali President Sheikh Sharif and
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, as well as leaders of the
regional states, ministers, lawmakers and their national
leaders, were in attendance. All without exception
hailed the values of reconciliation and solidarity and
appealed for the unity of the Somalian nation.

Somalia has immense opportunities to make further
progress in the coming months. For that to happen, its
leaders at the federal and subfederal levels must agree
to work together in a spirit of consensus. Parliament
must focus on passing priority legislation in a timely
manner. All national stakeholders need to collaborate
effectively in responding to the imminent drought
and avert a famine. And key relationships, including
with national stakeholders, international partners and
regional Powers, both in the Horn of Africa and in the
4/25

In his remarks during the event, President Abdullahi
Farmajo called for forgiveness and collaboration and
pledged that he will spare no effort in resolving the
political stand-off between his Government and the
federal member states. Since January this year, AMISOM
has observed the gradual evolving of centre-periphery
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

relations. Both the Federal Government and federal
member states are investing effort in dialogue to reset
their relations. It is in the international community’s
interest to continue to encourage and harness the
readiness of the Somali political stakeholders to engage
with each other.
The encouraging atmosphere of dialogue was also
witnessed on 11 March, when Prime Minister Hassan
Khayre paid a working visit to Kismayo, where he spent
a number of days as the guest of Mr. Madobe, regional
President of Jubaland, with whom he discussed ways
of advancing consensus in Somalia. Despite divided
opinions about its outcome, the recently concluded
week-long meeting in Garowe represents an important
step in the right direction after a long time of absence
of collaborative engagement between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the regional member
states. The African Union encouraged that effort as we
look forward to a new round of talks to accelerate the
implementation of Somalia’s inclusive political agenda.
With regard to the constitutional review process,
so far the two mandated constitutional bodies — the
Joint Parliamentary Constitutional Review Oversight
Committee and the Independent Constitutional Review
and Implementation Commission — are delivering
some progress. In that respect, AMISOM commends
their efforts, particularly the series of strategy sessions,
the most recent of which was the Djibouti session in
March. A key outcome of the Djibouti session was the
decision to expand the review process to the regions.
That is part of a public outreach and consultation
campaign on the provisional Constitution.
With regard to elections, the effort to speed up
the review of the much-awaited electoral law and
political party law was quite evident. In late April,
the draft electoral law was tabled before the Cabinet
and, on 2 May, endorsed and subsequently referred to
the Federal Parliament. While AMISOM takes note of
the initial reactions to the draft electoral law, it is of
essence that all stakeholders intensify their interaction
with a view to achieving the final adoption of those
important bills in the coming months.
The work being done by the National Independent
Electoral Commission to ensure that the universal
elections in 2020-2021 are conducted in a free, fair
and transparent manner is commendable. Over the
past quarter, the Commission has registered progress
on pre-voter registration preparations, including the

S/PV. 8533

mapping of potential sites for that purpose across
Somalia. Once concluded, it will fall to the Somali
security forces and AMISOM to secure the locations.
In support of the National Independent Electoral
Commission, AMISOM is working closely with its
Chairperson and her team, particularly in the area of
capacity-building. As part of that, and in line with
AMISOM’s new mandate under the African Union
Peace and Security Council’s communiqué from its
848th meeting, of 9 May, AMISOM recently agreed on
a support package with the Commission. The package
will include training on developing an electoral
security strategy, electoral dispute resolution, and a
training-the-trainers course on electoral security for
the Somalia police force. We note with appreciation
Prime Minister Khayre’s appointment of a lead official
to handle the issues related to the establishment of the
federal electoral security task force.
On 1 April, a well-trained and equipped battalion
of the Somali National Army, together with Danab
special forces and AMISOM, successfully dislodged
Al-Shabaab from Sabiid, a strategic bridge town in the
fertile plains of the Shabelle River. A month later, the
town of Bariire, sprawling on both sides of the Shabelle
River, was also taken by another battalion of the Somali
National Army, supported by AMISOM and partners.
For seven years, the town of Sabiid was a strategic
stronghold of Al-Shabaab. It offered the extremist
group a hub for assembling vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices that were routinely transported into
Mogadishu and indiscriminately targeted, maimed and
killed innocent Somali men, women and children. That
stronghold has now been taken away from them. One
month and three weeks later, the Somali National Army
continues to hold the bridge town of Sabiid. The town
is being rebuilt and stabilized. Ninety per cent of the
population that fled the town at the time of occupation
have now returned to their homes.
The Somali National Army is patrolling the streets
of Sabiid, protecting population centres and securing
critical infrastructure and sensitive sites. The Governor
of Lower Shabelle is tirelessly in touch with the
population, moving from village to village, listening to
their needs and concerns and helping to address them.
He has asked the population to identify a suitable person
from among them to be appointed as administrator of
the town.

19-149135/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

The Government has put in place infrastructure
to receive and distribute humanitarian assistance
and attend to other pressing needs of the population.
Humanitarian agencies are responding generously by
availing themselves of and distributing emergency
food items, medicines, water purification tablets,
mosquito nets, blankets, iron and plastic sheets and
other emergency requirements. Partners are reacting
positively to the Government’s appeal for quickimpact projects to open up roads, build schools, police
stations and other public infrastructure, providing the
population with sustainable sources of water, health
services, schools, a marketplace and essential services.
What is happening in Lower Shabelle is a
game-changer. A Government-led, coordinated and
complementary joint intervention, conducted shoulderto-shoulder with AMISOM, the United Nations, the
European Union, the United States of America, the
United Kingdom and other partners, is implementing
a comprehensive approach to security in Sabiid and
Bariire, under the transition plan.
The recovery of Sabiid represents an overall
success for the Somali National Army, for AMISOM
and for partners. Key to that success has been joint
comprehensive planning and coordination, both in
terms of military and civilian tasks. That approach and
support for it need to be sustainable, predictable and
assured so that Sabiid, Bariire and other towns that are
going to be liberated from Al-Shabaab as a result of the
implementation of the transition plan do not fall back
into the hands of the extremist group.
While on the topic of stabilization and earlyrecovery activities, I am pleased to report that AMISOM
will be scaling up its support to the residents of Sabiid.
That follows an initial support package of non-food
items to 600 households, consisting of 2,700 blankets,
2,700 plastic sheets and 3,050 mosquito nets. Our
new focus, following interaction with Lower Shabelle
stakeholders, will now be on Sabiid’s immediate needs,
as well as those of Bariire.
To further ensure that stabilization takes place,
AMISOM welcomes the recent initiative announced
by Prime Minister Khayre on 18 May on behalf of the
Federal Government to align military and policing
activities in Sabiid. In that regard, AMISOM stands
ready to work with international partners, the Federal
Government and South-West state to identify, screen
6/25

22/05/2019

and train a local policing force, both in Sabiid and
Bariire as well as other recovered areas.
If there is a lesson to be learned from Sabiid and
Bariire, it is that successful Somali National Armyled operations under the right conditions are possible
and achievable. Somalis have the capacity to take over
responsibility for the security of their own country.
Those conditions are: the ability of the Somali National
Army to generate forces; a properly trained Army; a
well-equipped Army; and guaranteed Army salaries.
Fortunately, all those conditions were available and met
prior to and during the Sabiid and Bariire operations.
That is the way to go. We need to be sure that Somalia’s
security forces are equipped and supplied with essential
hardware and means to contain Al-Shabaab. The group
remains a potent threat, especially with its ability to
recruit, self-finance and target Government officials,
businesses and civilians. While we have been witnessing
an intermittent downward trend in Al-Shabaab’s
operational activities, including mid-level defections,
we must remain vigilant when it comes to the emerging
threat of the Islamic State.
During the reporting period, we observed that the
Islamic State might be exploiting Al-Shabaab’s recent
tactical shift. In that respect, AMISOM is assessing
reports that the Islamic State is seeking to move into
areas previously controlled by Al-Shabaab. Mindful of
that threat, and as we approach the height of Ramadan,
AMISOM, together with Somali partners, is prepared
for any counter-attacks on Sabiid and Bariire and
for reprisal attacks on Mogadishu. We are equally
anticipating and putting in place measures to address
Al-Shabaab’s operations in their new locations across
the Bay, Bakool and Hiran regions.
I would now like to turn to the status of the transition
plan. It is now one year since the African Union Peace
and Security Council endorsed the transition plan,
in its 769th communiqué, of 30 April 2018. Since
then, AMISOM has continued to register progress in
implementing the transition plan, based on our available
capabilities. On the operational pillar, AMISOM has
successfully completed key tasks. We have transferred
security responsibility for Mogadishu stadium to
Somali security forces and recently, on 28 February,
we handed over Jaalle Siyaad Barre Military Academy.
Between mid-February and 5 April, we completed the
drawdown of 1,000 troops. Meanwhile, in preparation
for securing the main supply route between Mogadishu
and Baidoa and recapturing Lego, we undertook key
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

shipping operations in Sabiid and Bariire, which I just
spoke about.
As part of our comprehensive approach to
security, AMISOM also registered a key milestone
on the institutional capacity-building pillar. With the
completion of the regional forces operational readiness
assessment in mid-February, AMISOM remains clear
about the trajectory of the transition and our final
exit from Somalia, as guided by the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council. For that reason, it is important that
we collectively address some of the key challenges
affecting the implementation of the transition.
First, the Federal Government will need further
assistance in generating the required troops to
undertake joint operations with AMISOM, assume
security responsibilities, hold territories and make sure
that the population is with it and does not run away
from it.
Secondly, the transition will need to see an
accelerated inclusive political settlement between the
Government and the regional states, as well as between
clans, particularly agreements on resource- and powersharing, governance, land issues, oversight structures
and the integration of forces.
In resolution 2431 (2018), the Council directed
AMISOM to develop a new concept of operations that
would be aligned with supporting the implementation
of the transition plan. That exercise was completed
last November. However, to fully operationalize the
concept of operations, AMISOM sector commanders
met from 11 to 14 February with their Somali National
Army counterparts in Mogadishu. The outcome of the
sector commanders conference now forms the basis
for AMISOM’s reconfiguration of its military, police
and civilian components. That includes dedicated
implementation plans for all AMISOM sectors, taking
into consideration the collapsing of forward-operating
bases or handing them over to Somali security forces,
and the creation of quick-reaction forces and mobile
forces for the military component.
I am happy to report that, in line with the concept
of operations, to date three AMISOM sectors have
undergone reconfiguration, with the creation of quickreaction forces and mobile forces. Operations are taking
place in sectors a to 6. AMISOM also handed over
its Afmadow forward operating base to the Jubaland
security forces in April. In the coming weeks, as the

S/PV. 8533

Somali security forces begin to increase their capacity
to generate forces and assume security responsibilities,
AMISOM will start its reconfiguration exercise across
the remaining sectors, particularly in sector 5. We are
currently discussing the modalities for the handing over
of Warsheikh, in sector 5, to the Somali police force.
I am pleased to report that in addition to
operationalizing AMISOM’s concept of operations
across all sectors, AMISOM has put in place a
monitoring and evaluation mechanism. All AMISOM
senior officials, starting with my deputy, are placed in
different sectors to very closely follow developments
and the implementation of the concept of operations
and the challenges it faces, as well as to ensure that we
support our commanders to make sure that we deliver
on our transition plan. Our ability to track the progress
of the concept of operations will now equip AMISOM
with the data to make the required adjustments in terms
of achieving the objective of the transition plan.
The Council recently received for its consideration
the report of the Chairperson of the African Union on
the fifth African Union-United Nations joint review of
AMISOM under the African Union Peace and Security
Council’s 9 May communiqué. As highlighted in both
of those documents, AMISOM has recorded significant
progress in implementing the transition plan. In order
to maintain that progress and ensure a comprehensive
approach to security based on the outcomes of the 2018
joint review, AMISOM has deployed its civilian sector
teams. The teams are now augmenting AMISOM’s
contribution to institutional capacity-building in the
regional states, as well as broader stabilization and
area recovery.
This new civilian effort must be supported and
sustained in terms of human resources and logistics
to be able to adequately support the transition
implementation in the regional states. Similar to
AMISOM civilians, the police component has also
expanded its presence, providing operational support
and training and mentoring to federal and regional
police forces. Two additional formed police units and
67 individual police officers, as recommended by the
fifth AU-United Nations joint review of AMISOM, will
continue to enhance AMISOM’s role in training and
mentoring and, importantly, to support the elections in
2020-2021.
During the joint review in March, both the
African Union and the United Nations took stock of

19-149137/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

the implementation of the transition plan and agreed
that, while AMISOM had made progress, outstanding
tasks of the first phase still had to be completed before
commencing the second phase in June. In that regard,
it remains important that the Council take into account
the joint review’s option 1 proposal when considering
AMISOM’s future troop reductions. Allowing
AMISOM to maintain its current troop level will
enhance Somalia’s security and consolidate the security
gains achieved since the beginning of the transition.
Consideration of option 1 will also create an enabling
environment for the political process, including the
provision of adequate security for Somalia’s upcoming
universal elections.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I appreciate this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the humanitarian situation
in Somalia.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
among the most protracted crises in the world. Ongoing
armed conflict and violence, as well as recurrent
climatic shocks, continue to drive humanitarian
needs. Governance challenges and underdevelopment
compound fragility and make it difficult for
communities to develop robust coping mechanisms. The
2019 humanitarian response plan, launched in January,
identified 4.2 million Somalis — one third of the
population — as being in need of life-saving assistance
and protection. That shows a decline in needs from 2017,
when famine was averted, raising hope that resilience
activities led by the Government and development
partners could make further gains. However, current
humanitarian indicators across the country are showing
deterioration. I would like to highlight three key areas
of concern — first, the humanitarian impact of the
ongoing drought; secondly, the situation of internally
displaced persons; and, thirdly, protection.
On my first point, the humanitarian situation is
rapidly deteriorating due to severe drought conditions
that have spread from northern and central areas
throughout the country. Two consecutive rainy seasons
have failed, resulting in critical water shortages,
widespread crop failure and diminished conditions
for livestock. At this point in the season, any rainfall
that is received will be too little and too late to reverse
the impact of the drought.
8/25

22/05/2019

Since February, acute food insecurity has already
increased by 10 per cent. The situation is expected
to worsen. By July, 5.4 million people — including
1 million children — will be unsure of where their
next meal is coming from. This projection was made
based on the forecast that Gu rains would rebound
in May and June. But the rains did not rebound, and
undoubtedly the number of people in need will continue
to rise. Severe acute malnutrition rates among children
are increasing rapidly, particularly among internally
displaced persons. With limited access to clean water,
there is a heightened risk of outbreaks of diseases.
We must act now to avert a major humanitarian
crisis. Humanitarian partners stand ready to deliver aid
to those most in need and are capable of rapidly scaling
up responses, as was proven during famine-prevention
efforts in 2017. But significant funding shortfalls are
constraining response and leading to a reduction in
assistance in critical areas, including health, nutrition,
food security, water, sanitation and hygiene. More
needs to be done.
To address needs arising from the drought, a
scale-up in key life-saving areas is needed. On 20 May,
the humanitarian country team for Somalia launched the
2019 drought response plan, which seeks $710 million
to respond to drought-induced needs between now
and December. The majority of programming in the
drought response plan is already included within the
annual humanitarian response plan. The priorities of
the humanitarian response plan are being reorganized
and revised to account for the additional resources
required to respond to the drought.
Donors have been contributing to the humanitarian
response plan, which is today 20 per cent funded. I
want to take this opportunity to thank donors for their
continued support. In April, the Central Emergency
Response Fund and the Somalia Humanitarian Fund
allocated almost $46 million towards the delivery of
aid and scaling up of activities in drought-impacted
areas in northern Somalia and towards the provision
of life-saving assistance and protection in the southern
and central regions of the country.
I believe I was invited to brief the Security Council
today to draw attention to the elevated risk of a major
humanitarian crisis unfolding on the horizon. The
immediate scaling up of the humanitarian response is
essential to mitigating the impact of the drought and
to preventing the further breaking up of communities
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

that continue to be fragile from the drought in 2017.
I encourage the international community to urgently
increase support for life-saving drought-response
efforts and to protect gains made in 2018. It is my hope
that immediate resources will be received to help us
prevent a dramatic crisis from escalating.
The repetitive nature of climatic shocks is a stark
reminder that Somalia is becoming increasingly
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. To address
the drivers of crisis in Somalia, greater investment is
needed to strengthen the nexus between humanitarian
action and development programming. We must focus
our efforts on urgent life-saving responses, but we
cannot lose sight of the fact that development efforts
are critical to reaching the goal of ultimately bringing
an end to the negative impact of these cycles.
Internal displacement is the second area of concern
that I would like to address. There are more than
2.6 million internally displaced persons in Somalia,
which ranks fourth in internal displacement globally.
Displacement continues to be driven by ongoing armed
conflict, climate shocks and the search for livelihood
opportunities. As the severity of humanitarian needs is
projected to worsen over the coming months, there will
be a higher risk of drought-induced displacement and
worsening protection challenges, particularly among
women and children, as people are forced to leave their
homes in search of aid and livelihood opportunities.
To minimize drought-related displacement, where
possible, systems and structures are already in place
to enable a rapid scale-up of response nearer to the
hardest-hit regions. Conflict-induced displacement may
also increase as a result of the drought because there
is greater potential for communal and clan conflicts to
arise over competition for scarce resources. Displaced
communities are among the most vulnerable. They
face multiple acute needs and are exposed to higher
protection risks. Family separations make displaced
women and girls especially vulnerable and exposed to
sexual and gender-based violence.
Internally displaced persons are at increased risk
of being evicted by force from settlement areas by
landowners. In 2018, over 300,000 displaced people
were forcibly evicted, which is a 36 per cent increase
over the previous year. With the trends we have seen
so far this year, we expect the evictions to continue.
The forced evictions perpetuate cycles of displacement

S/PV. 8533

and consistently undermine efforts toward self-reliance
and resilience.
As to my third and final point, I would like to
highlight the fact that the humanitarian situation
in Somalia is a protection crisis. For years, Somali
civilians have borne the brunt of ongoing armed conflict
and violence that has continued to drive humanitarian
needs and perpetuate internal displacement. Civilians
are exposed to targeted assaults, assassinations
and indiscriminate attacks. In grave violations,
children continue to be killed and maimed. In 2018,
Somalia recorded the highest rate of forced child
recruitment globally.
There are increased protection risks in connection
with the ongoing security reforms and implementation
of the transition plan, including risks resulting from
changes to the strength and posture of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Although the aim of the
transition plan is the transfer of security responsibilities
from AMISOM to Somali authorities, the success of
the transition will depend on other important factors
as well. It is essential that the Government of Somalia
develop sufficient capacity to address the protection of
civilians, implement appropriate governance structures
and mechanisms, and strengthen civil authorities to
ensure the delivery of basic services to communities.
Somalia continues to be a challenging operational
environment for humanitarian organizations. Conflict,
insecurity, bureaucratic constraints and limited
logistic infrastructure hamper our ability to reach
those in need. Targeted violence against entities with
political, development and humanitarian mandates
have to stop. So far this year, 18 violent incidents have
affected humanitarian organizations, resulting in three
deaths, two injuries and seven abductions. I encourage
the Government of Somalia, with the support of
international partners, to advance efforts that facilitate
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need,
especially at this critical time.
Responding to the worsening humanitarian
situation with life-saving interventions and protection
remains a priority, but I must stress that the chronic
vulnerabilities that underpin the crisis in Somalia
cannot be addressed by the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Progress in State-building and security, as well as
greater investments in development initiatives aimed
at building resilience, are essential to ultimately lifting
Somalis out of need.

19-149139/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I now give the floor to members of the Council who
wish to make a statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I extend a huge
thank you to our briefers Mr. Zenenga, Mr. Madeira
and the Assistant Secretary-General. It is very good to
have them, as those are the first briefings that we have
had since the mandate renewal of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) (see S/PV.8494).
I would like to start by saying that when we had
the last meeting, many of us noted that 2019 would be
a very important year for Somalia. I might even go as
far as to say that it could set the trend for Somalia’s
development for years to come. I think an important
signifier of that is the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and we hope that he can assume
his post soon. We also hope that, in turn, that becomes
an opportunity to reset the United Nations-Somalia
relationship and to find a way forward on the Panel
of Experts.
The restoration of cooperation with the United
Nations and the international community is very
important. I know that the Somali Government has been
thinking about that as well, and that is very welcome.
The Assistant Secretary-General’s last point shows
why that is so critical. Somalia needs the guidance and
technical capability of the United Nations to help it with
some of the detailed issues that the Assistant SecretaryGeneral mentioned. I would like to thank Mr. Zenenga
for standing in and holding the fort down in the
interregnum between the two Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General.
It is important that, on an occasion like this,
something be said about the bravery of AMISOM
in Somalia, as well as the great efforts made by the
African Union, which we appreciate. The United
Nations, Somalia and international partners there
need to work in tandem to deliver the transition plan.
Working in tandem, in cooperation and coherently
together is a vital part of the prospects for success, and
we all want to get to a stage where Somalia leads on
providing security for its people. The United Kingdom
therefore really welcomes efforts to build the impetus
in the AMISOM mandate renewal that is currently
ongoing. But I would just stress that, in my experience,
those things work best when troop numbers are aligned
to the tasks that the troops must do, and not the other
way around.
10/25

22/05/2019

As I said, 2019 is important. In fact, the next 12
months are probably going to be critical to making
progress on political, economic and security reforms
ahead of the elections in 2020-2021. We all know that
political agreements between the Federal Government
and the federal member states are going to be at the
heart of Somalia’s stability and prosperity. In order
to bring that about, it is very important that there be
regular and constructive dialogue between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, particularly
on the constitutional review, the electoral law, the
implementation of the security pact and the delivery of
the transition plan.
I was interested to see the prospects for the Somalia
Partnership Forum, which will meet this summer. I
believe that the Council would find it useful to have
regular meetings and briefings so that we can help
chart progress. It is important that we think about
how we can support all sides being able to fulfil the
agreed partnership principles in the Forum. It would be
very good to have a sense of where the United Nations
sees the key priorities there and how they relate to the
national development plan.
I would like to say a few words on the humanitarian
situation. We wanted to have a humanitarian briefing
because of the deterioration resulting from the drought.
In some ways, the early warning indicators we see are
worse than those we witnessed two years ago. We are
about to announce additional support; we hope that
others might be able to do likewise.
We all know that there is a real opportunity here
to help Somalia get back on track, but it has many
components, one of which is cooperation with the
United Nations. Obviously, the transition plan is
important — in fact, critical. Anything AMISOM can
do to support transition priorities is also very critical.
Mr. Mpanyane (South Africa): South Africa
wishes to thank Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Raisedon Zenenga, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia Francisco Madeira and
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for their
briefings, as well as the Secretary-General António for
his report (S/2019/393).
My delegation commends Secretary-General
Guterres and the role that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS)
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

have been playing in facilitating State-building and
peacebuilding processes in Somalia, in line with the
mandate provided by the Security Council. It is without
a doubt that UNSOM and UNSOS, as well as the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), have
contributed positively to the prevailing development
trajectory in Somalia.
South Africa welcomes the comprehensive reform
agenda of the Federal Government of Somalia, which
includes four road maps aimed at maintaining progress
on inclusive politics, security and justice, economic
recovery and social and human development.
Despite the efforts of AMISOM, UNSOM and
UNSOS, together with the Somali security forces
and international partners in the security sector, we
note with serious concern that Al-Shabaab and other
armed groups continue to be a source of instability
in some parts of Somalia, including Mogadishu. The
continued atrocities perpetrated by Al-Shabaab against
civilians, Government facilities, Government officials,
the Somali security forces and AMISOM personnel are
alarming and must be condemned.
While we agree that, in the long term, Somalia
needs to be able to take ownership of addressing its own
security challenges, we also realize that the Federal
Government of Somalia cannot do so on its own, given
the capacity limitations of the Somali security forces.
The area of capacity-building is one that requires
sustained and coordinated international support. In
that regard, South Africa calls for the continuation of
the implementation of a comprehensive approach to
security, encompassing international coordination and
joint planning by AMISOM, the Federal Government,
the federal member states, UNSOM, UNSOS and
international partners, among others.
It is our firm view that sustained and inclusive
dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia
and the federal member states is imperative to resolving
their differences in order to move the State-building
and peacebuilding processes forward. Equally, there
is pertinence in resolving the current stalemate
between the two houses of the Federal Parliament.
Cooperation between the two houses is important for
the processing of the legislative framework envisaged
in the implementation of the transition plan. We
encourage State-building and peacebuilding processes
to be inclusive, with the meaningful involvement of
women and youth. We commend UNSOM for providing

S/PV. 8533

assistance to the Somali authorities in promoting
women and youth participation in the processes of
State-building and peacebuilding.
South Africa is pleased with the notable progress
made in the constitutional review process. We urge
the Federal Government of Somalia to finalize the
outstanding issues pertaining to the Constitution, with
a view to adopting it before the holding of elections.
The progress made towards finalizing a national
reconciliation framework — the guiding document for
nationwide reconciliation — is a welcome development.
Furthermore, we commend the National Independent
Electoral Commission for advancing preparations for
voter registration for the 2020-2021 holding of elections.
With respect to humanitarian issues, continued
support for the humanitarian situation in Somalia
remains paramount. In that regard, we urge the
international community to support the 2019
humanitarian response plan for Somalia in order for
the humanitarian community to deliver the necessary
services to civilians in need, including to ensure their
security, issues relative to State-building and resilience,
which Ms. Mueller mentioned earlier.
In conclusion, we want to commend AMISOM for
its role in supporting the implementation of the Somali
transition plan, as well as in training and capacitating
the Somali national security forces.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
today’s briefers.
Clearly, Somalia continues to face significant
challenges on its path towards building a safe, stable
and prosperous State. We strongly condemn recent
attacks by Al-Shabaab and other terrorist elements and
express our full support for the Somali Government,
the African Union and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) in that fight. We are pleased that
progress is under way through political, security and
constitutional reform efforts with support from the
United Nations, the African Union and international
partners. Advancing the implementation of those
reforms offers the country the greatest hope for
sustainable stability and economic growth. We note
that none of those reforms would be possible without
the contributions and sacrifices of AMISOM troop- and
police-contributing members, which have provided the
Federal Government of Somalia the necessary space
and stability for the Government to develop the national
security architecture and implement those reforms.

19-1491311/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

The transfer of security responsibilities from
the African Union Mission in Somalia to the Somali
national security forces is a top priority. We urge
the Federal Government of Somalia to continue the
efforts to generate and deploy security forces that will
allow for a timely and orderly implementation of the
transition plan. We underscore the need for all parties
to coordinate closely to avoid security coverage gaps
that could be exploited by malign actors.
With regard to Somalia’s 2020-2021 elections, we
urge the Government to finalize its draft electoral law
to define a fair and transparent electoral system. We
also emphasize the need for close coordination among
the Government, AMISOM and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia to ensure voter security
at each stage of the electoral preparation.
Concerning constitutional reform, we stress that
long-term political stability depends on defining the
relationships and divisions of power and responsibility
between the Federal Government of Somalia and federal
member states. As such, we urge all governmental
stakeholders to come together and finalize this
critical reform.

22/05/2019

of the African Union (AU) Commission for Somalia; and
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings.
Since the end of last year, with the concerted
efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia, the
United Nations, the African Union and the rest of the
international community, Somalia has seen positive
progress in rebuilding the State, in particular with regard
to security and capacity-building. China commends the
Federal Government of Somalia, the relevant United
Nations agencies on the ground and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for their efforts.
Somalia is an important country in the Horn
of Africa. Maintaining peace and stability there is
in the common interests of the region and the entire
international community. Currently, the overall situation
in Somalia remains complex and, looking forward,
it faces challenges on multiple fronts. The Security
Council, the United Nations and the international
community should draw on past experiences and
lessons in helping to address hotspot issues in Africa,
such as this one, and step up support and assistance.
China would like to highlight the following
three points.

With regard to the arms embargo, we have
encouraged Somalia to engage productively with the
Panel of Experts on Somalia and will continue to do so.
Somalia appears to believe that the Security Council
will eventually lift the sanctions despite a lack of
engagement with the Panel. The United States will
not support that view, which does nothing to address
the problems that the sanction regime was designed
to address and, indeed, undermines the actions of the
Security Council.

First, we should fully respect and maintain the
national ownership of the Federal Government of
Somalia in its domestic affairs. We should respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Somalia, help establish an authoritative and
capable Federal Government and optimize its federal
institutions. We should strengthen communications
and coordination with the Somalia Government, give
full play to its own initiatives and improve its ability to
achieve development independently.

Finally, as noted by Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller, the ongoing humanitarian crisis affecting
more than 5 million Somalis is an important backdrop
to the political and security reforms that we have
discussed. Since 2018, the United States has provided
more than $487 million in humanitarian assistance.
We are working with the United Nations and other
partners to provide critical food and nutrition
assistance for nearly 1.5 million people across Somalia.
We encourage continued international support on the
humanitarian front.

Secondly, we should continue to support the
efforts of the AU and other regional and subregional
organizations that help maintain peace and security
in Somalia. At present, Somalia continues to face
serious threats posed by Al-Shabaab. It is necessary
for AMISOM to maintain its deployment in Somalia.
China supports the Security Council’s extension of
the AMISOM mandate and maintaining the necessary
level of Mission forces in the country. We hope that
the United Nations and the international community
will provide stable, predictable and sustainable
financial support for AMISOM and help the relevant
troop-contributing countries build capacity in order to
combat Al-Shabaab more effectively. At the same time,
the international community should continue to help

Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Deputy Special Representative Zenenga;
Mr. Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
12/25

19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

Somalia improve its security capacity-building so as
to ensure that the Somalia security forces will be able
to assume security responsibilities from AMISOM in a
gradual and steady manner.
Thirdly, we should continue to increase
humanitarian assistance and social and economic
development support for Somalia. The social and
economic foundation in Somalia is weak. A relatively
large gap in the provision of international humanitarian
assistance remains. We hope that all international
partners will honour their commitments in good faith
and provide assistance in a timely manner. China will
continue to actively support the Somalia peace process
and play a constructive role in bringing peace, stability
and development to Somalia and the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this meeting on
the report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Somalia during the period from 14 December 2018 to
4 May 2019 and the implementation of the respective
mandates of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS).
We commend Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Officer-in-Charge of UNSOM; Mr. Francisco Caetano
José Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM);
and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
very informative briefings. Their briefings prompt
my delegation to comment on the political, economic,
security, humanitarian and human rights situations.
At the political level, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the recent initiatives to relaunch the political and
reconciliation process between the Somali Federal
Government and the federal member states, which had
been interrupted for several months owing to deep
differences. My country calls on the parties concerned
to maintain this positive momentum and accelerate the
implementation of the road map, including through
the conclusion of agreements on sharing power
and resources, the constitutional review and the
establishment of Somalia’s federal model. We also call
on both chambers of the Federal Parliament to resolve

S/PV. 8533

their disagreements and establish sincere cooperation
to order to adopt urgent legislation, in particular the
electoral law.
With regard to the economic situation, Côte d’Ivoire
notes with satisfaction the outstanding progress made
by the Federal Government in implementing its fiscal
policy, particularly the significant improvement in tax
collection through the expansion of the tax base and the
strengthening of collection capacities. We encourage
the Federal Government to redouble its efforts in the
context of the implementation of the staff-monitored
programme of the International Monetary Fund to
consolidate economic growth and improve the living
conditions of the Somali people.
With regard to the security situation, my delegation
is concerned about the prevailing instability in Somalia
and the continuing serious threat posed by Al-Shabaab,
which is increasing its attacks and targeted killings,
despite its setbacks. My country categorically condemns
those attacks and calls on the Somali Government
to intensify, with the support of the international
community, its efforts to eradicate the threat posed by
Al-Shabaab.
With regard to human rights, Côte d’Ivoire
remains seriously concerned about the increase in the
number of civilian victims and kidnappings attributed
to Al-Shabaab, summary executions, violations of
freedom of expression, sexual violence and violence
against children. It calls on all parties concerned to
respect, protect and promote human rights and calls
for those who are responsible for violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law to be held
accountable. In that regard, my country welcomes
the reaffirmation by the Prime Minister of Somalia,
on 4 March, of his country’s willingness to fulfil its
human rights commitments as a newly elected member
of the Human Rights Council as of October 2018.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, Côte
d’Ivoire notes with deep concern the growing need for
assistance and protection, which will affect 4.2 million
people in 2019. That situation, which is the result of the
ongoing conflict, food insecurity caused by a deficient
rainy season and the subsequent increase in the
number of displaced persons, calls on the international
community to act. It is therefore imperative to quickly
respond to the Secretary-General’s appeal for funding
for the 2019 humanitarian response plan, whose needs
for the next six months are estimated at $674 million. Our

19-1491313/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

mobilization would not only provide vital emergency
assistance to many Somalis in distress, but also support
them on the path to resilience and recovery.
In addition, my delegation is concerned about the
increasingly difficult operational context in which
humanitarian actors work, owing in particular to acts
of violence committed against them and the growing
number of obstacles along the main supply routes. It
urges all stakeholders to protect humanitarian personnel
and to promote the safe and unrestricted free passage
of assistance.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire commends UNSOM
for its indispensable role in providing strategic
advice, good offices, capacity-building activities and
coordination of the support provided by international
partners. We also pay tribute to AMISOM personnel
for the sacrifices made for security in Somalia. My
delegation also reiterates its support for UNSOS and
other international partners in Somalia. We encourage
them to strengthen their cooperation in order to
contribute to promoting reconciliation and peace in
that country.
Mr. Ndong Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for scheduling this important
meeting during the month of your presidency. I would
also like to thank all this afternoon’s briefers for
their informative and comprehensive reports, which
have given us a detailed overview of current events
in Somalia.
Our delegation has been following very closely
developments in the friendly and sisterly Federal
Republic of Somalia. We are aware of the political
impasse between the Federal Government and the
federal member states, a situation that is reflected
both in the previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1149) and in that which we are considering
today (S/2019/393). Somali politicians should make the
effort necessary to overcome this situation, which is
unworthy of a country in a process that is as delicate as
this one. We therefore encourage the Somali political
leaders to implement the reconciliation measures
adopted in Garowe on 26 January.
Similarly, we call on the members of the two
chambers of the Federal Parliament who stopped
cooperating on 1 January this year to fulfil their
obligations and resume cooperation in order to
implement the parliamentary agenda and enact the laws
14/25

22/05/2019

urgently needed by the Somali people and various areas
of Somali society.
We welcome the comprehensive reform programme
presented by the Federal Government in its effort to
build a functional federal State structured around four
road maps aimed at making further progress in the areas
of inclusive politics, security and justice, economic
recovery and social and human development. We urge
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union and other international partners to support this
important programme.
We hope that in the new phase in which the
Federal Government is entering, the limited political
participation of women and their reduced role in
decision-making areas will not continue as they are
today. In that regard, we urge the federal and regional
authorities, as well as civil society and the international
community, to seek the more visible participation
of women.
With regard to the issue of security, we deplore the
ongoing bomb attacks and killings that the extremist
group Al-Shabaab carries out regularly in Somalia,
posing a potential threat that could sow chaos in Somalia
and the Horn of Africa. We hope that the security reform
provisions negotiated with international partners will
be useful in diminishing that threat.
We regret the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in Somalia and hope that the reforms under
way will pay more attention to those priorities.
We welcome the strengthened relations between
Somalia and the other countries of the Horn of Africa,
and we hope that those relations will be developed to
promote sectors that are mutually beneficial for all
countries in the region, such as the security sector, which
is very important at this time of terrorist threats. We
also encourage the efforts of the Presidents of Somalia
and Kenya, who have begun the process of normalizing
their relations. We hope that their Ambassadors will
be able to return to their respective diplomatic posts,
as stated by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of both
States in Nairobi on 3 April.
Finally, I would like to thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) for its
willingness to continue providing strategic support
and advice to Somalia and the African Union Mission
in Somalia on peacebuilding and State-building in
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

the areas of governance, security sector reform and
constitutional review.
Given the fragile and unstable situation that
the country is still experiencing, such support from
UNSOM is crucial and will continue to be so in order
to consolidate the results being achieved in a lasting
and irreversible way.
Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Raisedon Zenenga,
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Officer-in-Charge of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), for his
important briefing on the efforts of the United Nations
represented by UNSOM to achieve stability in Somalia
and to support the Federal Government of Somalia in
attaining peace and development for the Somali people.
I also thank Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), for his valuable
briefing and the Mission’s endeavours to maintain
security and to rehabilitate the Somali national security
forces. That demonstrates the importance which the
Commission attaches to ensuring that Somalia is
successful. We look forward to the Mission’s renewal
next week following the current negotiations on a draft
resolution to extend its mandate.

S/PV. 8533

building a federal State capable of overcoming the
difficulties about which we have just heard from the
briefers. The resolution took into consideration the
special circumstances and the unique situation of the
Somali crisis. Allow me to highlight the following
main issues.
The first issue is the political developments. We
welcome the significant progress made by the Somali
Federal Government in ensuring stability, reconciliation
and State-building despite many challenges that
undermine achieving the required priorities. That is
reflected in the fact that the Somali Government is keen
to accelerate the implementation of the transition plan
to which it is committed. We note the Government’s
road map in implementing its comprehensive political
reform agenda, whose priorities are the review of the
Provisional Constitution by the end of this year, the
commitment to establish an electoral legal framework
during the current session of Parliament and the adoption
by the Council of Ministers of a temporary electoral
law and the political parties act, as well as the National
Independent Electoral Commission achieving progress
in registering voters by using a biometric system.

I also thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for her briefing, which reflected the scale
of human suffering faced by the Somali people for
decades as a result of poverty, marginalization, armed
violence, political instability, natural threats and
underdevelopment. All of that has led to an increase in
the humanitarian needs in Somalia, where one third of
the population needs assistance and protection in 2019.
In addition, food insecurity affects 4.9 million people
and the number of internal displaced persons reached
2.6 million.

The second issue is the security situation. The
Al-Shabaab movement remains the main threat, as
we have just heard from the briefers. We note the
recent increase in the attacks and we reiterate our
condemnation of such attacks, in particular those that
targeted the United Nations compound near the airport
in Mogadishu at the beginning of this year. In addition,
other attacks targeted a number of hotels and centres,
particularly those against the ministries of public works
and labour, in which the Deputy Minister was killed.
Such incidents show that it is important to step up efforts
to ensure the implementation of the general security
framework in order to promote the effectiveness of
AMISOM operations and combat violent extremism.
We welcome the joint United Nations and African
Union review, which resulted in a new AMISOM
concept of operations, in line with the transition plan
and national security architecture, accompanied by the
gradual decrease in Mission personnel.

In late March, the Security Council issued a clear
message that reflected once again its unity in terms
of supporting and assisting Somalia by extending
UNSOM’s mandate unanimously under resolution 2461
(2019) (see S/PV.8494). That resolution is seen as an
international instrument that demonstrates the support
of the Council and the United Nations for Somalia in

The third issue is the economic developments. We
welcome the progress achieved by Somalia in terms
of economic development. We hope that this positive
momentum will lead Somalia to meeting the required
conditions as a heavily indebted poor country. It is clear
that the Federal Government has started to produce
results through capacity-building in order to increase

19-1491315/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

its local resources and revenue, as recognized by the
International Monetary Fund. We look forward to
further progress through the adoption of accountability
and anti-corruption legislation, as well as the adoption
of the necessary structural adjustments of the Central
Bank after the recent appointment of its Governor. That
is an additional step towards achieving the goals of
economic reform.
In conclusion, we all know that this is in particular
an extremely important year in terms of implementing
pending political agreements and strengthening federal
institutions. That means that we, as Council members,
have a particular responsibility to implement our
common vision in order to help the Somalis build an
inclusive federal Somali State that upholds the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all its citizens.
Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank the briefers for their very detailed
presentations. I will make three key points.
First, in the context of a fragile security and
humanitarian situation, we are concerned about the
delays in implementing the transition plan and the
commitments made in the security agreement signed
in London in May 2017, as well as in the integration of
regional forces into the national security architecture,
as highlighted in the report of the United NationsAfrican Union (AU) joint review of the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The resumption of a constructive dialogue between
the Somali Federal Government and the federal member
states is also necessary in order to bring to a successful
conclusion as soon as possible the work on federalism,
the constitutional review and the preparation of the
elections scheduled for 2020 to 2021. The economic
progress made by the Somali authorities shows that
when there is the political will, genuine progress is
possible. We would have liked that political will to
have been more clearly reflected at the recent Garowe
meeting in Puntland, which we nevertheless hope will
pave the way for the resumption of an effective dialogue.
Secondly, for the security transition to be
successful, we believe that AMISOM must continue its
reconfiguration in support of the transition plan. I take
this opportunity to pay a warm tribute to the work of
AMISOM, whose staff are deployed in a particularly
difficult context. The ongoing Badbaado operation, in
which AMISOM is supporting the Somali army in the
liberation of areas in southern Mogadishu, is an example
16/25

22/05/2019

of good cooperation in support of the implementation
of the transition plan.
In that context, we believe that it is possible
and necessary to continue a moderate reduction in
the AMISOM troop ceiling in order to continue to
encourage implementation of the security transition. It
is not a matter of withdrawing troops from particularly
sensitive areas or from Mogadishu but from more
stable areas. We also believe that it is essential that new
partners, in particular those identified in the report of
the United Nations and African Union Special Envoys
on the financing of AMISOM, commit themselves
and participate in the such financing. Given with the
number of requests for support from the African Union,
the European Union cannot continue to finance the
salaries of AMISOM soldiers alone.
Finally, and this is my third and last point, I would
like to return to the issue of the cooperation of the Somali
authorities with the United Nations. If the international
community is to continue to support Somalia, that
support must be in the context of cooperation based
on shared commitments and mutual respect. That
is the approach adopted by the European Union and
its member States. We therefore look forward to a
resumption of the full cooperation of the Somali federal
authorities with the United Nations, as requested by
the Council in resolution 2461 (2019) on UNSOM, in
particular when the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is appointed, an appointment that
we hope will soon be made.
I would to conclude by asking our briefers a
question. Can they inform us of the prospects for
implementing the transition plan and for integrating
regional forces into the national security architecture?
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting.
We also thank Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Ms. Ursula
Mueller and Mr. Francisco Caetano Madeira for their
important briefings.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/393) highlights the important steps taken
by the Federal Government of Somalia to build a
functioning federal State. We hope that the reform
programme presented by the Government will make it
possible to move towards an inclusive policy, achieve
security and justice and bring about economic recovery
and sustainable development. We commend the
Government’s financial management, which in recent
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

years has resulted in increased revenue. However, it is
worrisome that a large part of the population remains
vulnerable to poverty and food insecurity and that
90 per cent of households lack access to basic services,
such as education, water and sanitation.
Those challenges are compounded, inter alia, by
the persistence of violent extremism, terrorism and
armed conflict. We note with concern that Al-Shabaab’s
improvised explosive device attacks increased in recent
months. We firmly condemn such terrorist attacks and
pay tribute to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali security forces for their
courage and sacrifice. We must remember that only
through cooperation and reconciliation will the people
of Somalia be able to confront those challenges. In
that regard, the recent steps taken by the Federal
Government and the federal member states to promote
dialogue and reconciliation, such as the meeting
in Garowe, Puntland, in January, are encouraging.
We hope that those steps will mark the beginning
of sustained political dialogue that will allow for
further progress in the implementation of political
priorities, such as the holding of elections according to
schedule, the constitutional review process, federalism
and reconciliation.
We reiterate the importance of promoting the active
participation of women in the political life of the country,
as well as in the social and economic spheres. We hope
that the reforms to be undertaken by the Government
will include provisions with a gender perspective.
We are concerned about the grave humanitarian
situation of millions of Somalis, in particular internally
displaced persons and marginalized communities,
which could be exacerbated by the expected drought.
We believe that the international community must
increase its financial support and that it should be
complemented by predictable aid for building resilience
and for recovery efforts.
With regard to the AMISOM joint review to assess
progress in the transition to security in Somalia, our
country supports the recommendations of the joint
review team. We believe that, at this stage, it will be
important to maintain AMISOM’s troop strength, while
taking into account the current security conditions and
delays in the implementation of the transition plan. The
reconfiguration of AMISOM and the transfer of sites to
Somali security institutions must be conducted while

S/PV. 8533

taking into account the humanitarian consequences and
ensuring the protection of the civilian population.
I would like to conclude by highlighting the work
of AMISOM, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia and the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia in support of the efforts of the Somali authorities
and people to achieve peace and stability. I would also
like to highlight the efforts of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
United Nations.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to begin
by thanking our briefers today for their very
informative presentations.
Poland welcomes the progress achieved so far in
Somalia towards peacebuilding and State-building
and commends the ambitious reform agenda set by the
Federal Government. At the same time, we are aware
of the fragility of the situation. We are deeply worried
about the growing number of Al-Shabaab attacks and
the increased presence in Somalia of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant.
We are concerned as well about the political
impasse between the Federal Government and the
federal member states and the suspension of cooperation
between the two houses of the Federal Parliament.
The ongoing stalemate puts at risk the gains made to
date in Somalia and threatens the timelines for crucial
reforms, as well as the whole federalization process.
We call on all political actors in Somalia to undertake
reconciliatory and confidence-building steps and
engage in a constructive dialogue for the benefit of the
Somali population. We also call on foreign and regional
actors to provide impartial support for the national
reconciliation process. At the same time, we request
that Somali authorities cooperate with United Nations
actors based on mutual trust and respect.
The protection of human rights and freedoms is
an essential part of democracy. We note with concern
reports on human rights violations committed not only
by Al-Shabaab but also by Government and regional
forces and clan militias. We are particularly worried
about reports concerning the recruitment of children.
We find it unacceptable and call on authorities to
intensify efforts aimed at raising awareness on child
protection and strengthening policies for preventing the
recruitment of children into Somali forces.

19-1491317/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

Poland believes that the success of the ambitious
reform agenda and the development of Somalia
require the concerted efforts of all actors, as well as
international coordination. We see the comprehensive
approach to security as an important framework for the
alignment of donor support with the priorities set by
Somali authorities.
Let me conclude by expressing Poland’s appreciation
for United Nations actors and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) for their everyday efforts and
sacrifice. On the eve on AMISOM’s mandate renewal,
we believe that AMISOM’s drawdown plan should
include specific steps and a realistic timetable for
the transfer of responsibility from the Mission to the
Somali National Army. At the same time, the need for
burden-sharing with regard to AMISOM’s financing
has become more pressing than ever.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Zenenga,
Ms. Mueller and Mr. Madeira for the information they
provided today.
We welcome the efforts of the Federal Government
of Somalia to develop and approve the draft framework
for national reconciliation, with the goal of ending the
violence and restoring trust among communities in
order to overcome differences. Therefore, we ask the
parties, in particular Somali leaders, to make every
effort to find a peaceful and lasting solution to their
political differences.
We note the political stalemate between the
Federal Government and the federal member states.
We understand that breaking the impasse should be the
priority objective to support the national reconciliation
process taking place in Somali society. We also express
our deep concern about the fragility of security in
Somalia and condemn the attacks perpetrated by the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab.
We welcome the progress made in the constitutional
review process and urge actors to continue to make the
necessary efforts to ensure that its review is inclusive
and transparent and guarantees the participation of all
sectors of society. In that regard, more progress must
be made in approving the draft electoral law based on
the principle of proportionality and inclusion, including
adding provisions that provide more opportunities for
women. We realize that it is essential to continue working
together to increase women’s political participation and
share of power so that they are involved at every level,
18/25

22/05/2019

which is why increasing the electoral law’s gender
quota is crucial to achieving a minimum of 30 per cent
seats for women in the 2020 elections.
With regard to young people in Somalia, we note that
70 per cent of the population is under the age of 30 and
that the youth unemployment rate is one of the highest
in the world. The lack of job opportunities and social
and recreational activities makes young people even
more vulnerable, driving young people into conflicts
and participation in radical groups or piracy as a way to
survive. We encourage the continued implementation of
programmes that promote comprehensive change in the
lives of young people so that they can find opportunities
and achieve their potential.
The Dominican Republic urges the parties to
continue working to end the recruitment and exploitation
of children, to secure their release, reintegration
and appropriate compensation, as well as pardoning
children who have been sentenced to prison for their
association with armed groups. We urge all the entities
concerned with the protection of civilians in Somalia to
redouble their efforts to create the mechanisms needed
to protect the most vulnerable among them, particularly
the internally displaced and women and children, who
are exposed to high levels of insecurity and violence.
The effects of climate change, manifested in
a serious drought, continue to be a challenge for
Somalia. Added to communities’ vulnerabilities and
lack of resilience, those effects have resulted in a
worrying increase in humanitarian needs in a country
where a third of the population needs assistance to
survive. Food insecurity, caused largely by adverse
weather conditions and the loss of crops and livestock,
continues to threaten the lives of 1.5 million people,
mainly children. In that regard, we are very concerned
about the difficulties that humanitarian actors are
encountering in their efforts to access vulnerable areas,
where they increasingly end up becoming victims of
violence, kidnappings or movement restrictions both
within and outside the areas where humanitarian
assistance is needed. We welcome the efforts of State
and local authorities in monitoring and implementing
humanitarian programmes, and we understand that it
is essential to ensure that the international community
redoubles its cooperative efforts, which is why we
suggest that those who are in a position to do so
contribute to the Somalia Humanitarian Fund, with
a view to alleviating the greatest humanitarian needs
in Somalia.
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8533

Lastly, I would like to highlight and acknowledge
the roles that the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
have played. I would also like to acknowledge all the
actors who have been working alongside the authorities
in order to achieve lasting and sustainable peace and
stability in Somalia.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Somalia, Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller
and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), for their briefings.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank all the speakers for
their briefings.

The situation in Somalia continues to be
problematic. We are concerned about the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab’s increasing activity. It still
controls broad areas of the country, and its fighters
are infiltrating cities. According to expert reports, the
group has managed to set up an independent production
facility for explosives. Al-Shabaab represents a threat
at the regional level as well, and the terrorist attack in
Nairobi in January was a frightening reminder of that.
Suppressing the threat of terrorism is a top priority.
Effective cooperation in the work of building a national
security architecture between the central and federal
authorities, with the support of the United Nations and
the African Union Mission in Somalia, is especially
vital. Here the most important task is ensuring the
gradual transfer of responsibility for the country’s
security to the Somalis themselves. We hope that the
process will be carried out in accordance with the
existing plans and will also take into account concrete
developments on the ground.

Despite the fact that Somalia is going through
difficulties, we should also acknowledge the positive
developments there and the efforts that have been
undertaken. For example, we can probably call the
meeting held in Garowe from 4 to 12 May between
the Federal President and the regional presidents
encouraging even if the hoped-for results have not yet
been materialized. I salute President Farmajo for his
commitment to resuming dialogue and encourage him
to follow up on the Garowe meeting as soon as possible.
The report of the Secretary-General (see S/2019/393) lists
other positive points, such as the Federal Government’s
commitment to economic reforms and the biometric
registration of Somali National Army troops.
Since Belgium is also a federal country I cannot
overemphasize the importance of maintaining close and
constructive relations between the Federal Government
and the federal authorities. That kind of cooperation
is crucial to making federalism an effective system
that can address the needs of citizens in a framework
of good-faith dialogue among the various levels of
governance. Unfortunately, electoral issues remain a
source of discord and tension. The elections in Jubaland
are rapidly approaching, and we must therefore be
particularly watchful.
The Somali National Army has decided to launch
operations to secure the Lower Shabelle region, which
should be accompanied by stabilization measures. I
welcome the creation of an interministerial task force
to prepare for that, and I would be interested in having
more information on the next steps. The scope of
international support for Somalia is remarkable, but we
must ensure that the support provided is coordinated
and transparent, particularly with regard to bilateral
cooperation programmes. It is essential for all partners
of Somalia to work together to the same purpose.

AMISOM continues to play a key role in dealing
with security challenges. Its reconfiguration should go
hand in hand with the formation of Somalia’s military
and law-enforcement bodies. The plan is to have
AMISOM participating actively in the preparation and
holding of the general elections planned for 2020 and
2021. In the run-up to the elections, so decisive for the
country’s future, it would not make sense to sharply
reduce the number of African peacekeepers in Somalia.
In spite of all the difficulties, we would like
to point to some encouraging trends in Somalia’s
institution-building, including Mogadishu’s efforts to
build bridges, figuratively speaking, with the federal
States. There is progress in the area of constitutional
reform, the positive momentum in the plan for creating
a legislative basis for the upcoming election cycle
continues, and reform of the financial and economic
sectors is proceeding fairly effectively.
The Horn of Africa is experiencing major changes.
We believe firmly that the steps being taken by all the

19-1491319/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

countries involved, including Somalia, to re-establish
good-neighbourly relations will ultimately bring the
stability and prosperity they desire. However, we should
caution that achieving that goal will be possible only
by ensuring strict respect for Somalia’s sovereignty
and non-interference by external players in its internal
affairs. We hope that those principles will guide the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Somalia in his work. And in that connection, we
welcome the determination of the country’s authorities
to continue to cooperate productively with the United
Nations presence.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would first like to thank
the briefers for their comprehensive presentations. I am
still thinking about Mr. Zenenga’s description of the
demoralized United Nations staff after the attack on
the compound on 1 January, the expulsion of Special
Representative Haysom and, also with regard to the
United Nations staff, the treatment of the Coordinator
of the Panel of Experts. I hope that the morale of the
United Nations troops and staff and their cooperation
with the Government have improved. For our part, I
want to affirm Germany’s commitment to Somalia and
to all of the United Nations and international efforts
there. I would like to make six brief points.
First, I want to echo what several speakers, including
my Belgian colleague, said with regard to federalism.
Both Belgium and Germany are federal countries, and
we know about federalism. We also know that a strong
federal Government does not preclude the possibility
of strong federal member state Governments. On the
contrary, in Germany we have a strong Government
in Berlin and a strong Government in Munich for
Bavaria, and I am sure that is also possible for Somalia
and Puntland or Somaliland. I believe it can work. It is
unfortunate that the first meeting in Garowe was not
successful, and I would like to know if a second meeting
is scheduled, because we believe those conversations
must be had and must see results. That is important for
my next point.
Secondly, I want to emphasize the importance of a
successful constitutional review, the establishment of
an electoral legal framework and security reform.
Thirdly, as several speakers, including the
representative of the Dominican Republic, have
mentioned, I want to highlight the importance of
the protection of women and children. The point I
specifically want to make in that context is about sexual
20/25

22/05/2019

violence in conflict. We encourage the Government to
strengthen the legal framework to protect victims and
prosecute perpetrators, which the Secretary-General
recommends in his report (S/2019/393) and which we
believe should also be reflected in the mandate of the
African Union Mission in Somalia.
Fourthly, the implementation of the security
transition plan is urgent. We need a comprehensive
approach with joint and coordinated planning, Somali
ownership and the buy-in of all stakeholders. In that
context, with regard to the first successful Somali-led
operation in Lower Shabelle, I would like to know what
lessons were learned in the operation. On the security
front we also want to plead for strengthening the police,
which is very important for the relationship between the
State and its population. A strong police also allows the
military to perform the tasks that it is supposed to do.
Fifthly, with regard to the various transition
processes, in general, we urge the Government to invite
and include women and young people.
Lastly, I was struck by what Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller said in her briefing in connection with
the humanitarian situation. She and the other briefers
emphasized the problem of the severe drought and its
consequences. It is not just that the number of people
in need of humanitarian aid has increased, it is that
the drought affects fragile communities and has the
potential to generate conflict. We therefore believe
that issues related to the consequences of climate
change should be incorporated into the Mission’s
future mandate.
The President: I would now like to make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
I would first like to join others in expressing
our appreciation to Mr. Zenenga, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Madeira,
Special Representative of the African Union
Commission Chairperson for Somalia, and Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for their comprehensive
briefings. I would like to bring three points to the
Council’s attention.
First, Indonesia stands by its believe that the
continued and proactive engagement of the international
community is essential to supporting peace and stability
in Somalia. We welcome the commitment of the Somali
Government and the United Nations to strengthening
their cooperation and deepening their partnership. The
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

relationship between the two should always be based
on the fundamental principles of sovereignty, national
ownership and mutual respect.
My delegation supports the essential role of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) in promoting the Somali Government-led
inclusive political settlement, the development of a
functioning Federal State and the implementation of
the transition plan. Strengthening UNSOM’s mandate
to support the 2020-2021 elections is a step in the right
direction. Those roles are especially pertinent as the
political impasse between the Federal Government
and the federal member states continues to threaten
the possibility of progress in key political and
security sectors.
Secondly, we are seriously concerned about the
ongoing threat and destabilizing activities of A1Shabaab, which extend beyond the Somali border. Its
attacks in Mogadishu have increased significantly over
the past two months, with incidents involving improvised
explosive devices taking place almost every day. Its
reported ability to manufacture home-made explosives
demonstrates that even if they are not actively fighting
they continue to come up with other ways to commit
atrocities. It is high time that we effectively cut off
Al-Shabaab from its sources of weapons and financing.
Against that backdrop, the continued presence of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
as well as its need for predictable and sustainable
funding, cannot be overstated. Since the Council is
about to deliberate on the AMISOM draft resolution,
my delegation wants to emphasize that AMISOM must
be reconfigured in a way that does not create a security
vacuum and takes the potential humanitarian impact and
the safety of the civilian population fully into account.
The Somali security forces taking over AMISOM’s
security responsibilities must be adequately trained and
equipped. It will be vital to accelerate the necessary
capacity-building.
Thirdly, we must be aware that the efforts to promote
peace and stability are taking place against the tide of
a deteriorating humanitarian situation and yet another
severe drought, as Ms. Mueller mentioned. A third of
the population requires humanitarian assistance, some
5.4 million people are expected to experience food
insecurity and 1.2 million children are projected to be
malnourished in 2019. These are not simply numbers.
They are human beings.

S/PV. 8533

With 2.6 million internally displaced persons,
Somalia has one of the largest displaced populations
in the world. We are concerned about the fact that
the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia is
critically underfunded.
The international community clearly has no
magic wand to resolve the Somali situation, but it
could — and obviously should — do more to alleviate
the suffering of the Somali people. Understanding the
challenging operating environment for humanitarian
actors in Somalia, my delegation urges all parties to
respect international humanitarian law and remove all
impediments to the delivery of humanitarian relief.
I should like to close by commending the Federal
Government for assuming ownership and demonstrating
perseverance in executing its comprehensive reform
agenda, some of which is beginning to bear fruit. We
urge continued and sustained political dialogue between
the Federal Government and the federal member states
to resolve their outstanding differences.
Lastly, my delegation pays tribute to the
contributions of UNSOM, AMISOM, the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, and all other actors
working to bring peace and stability in Somalia.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I would like to
offer my prayers and heartfelt condolences to the families
and loved ones of the victims in today’s terrorist attacks
in Mogadishu in this holy month of Ramadan, which
injured or took the lives of innocent civilians, including
my mentor, former Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia and Senior Advisor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Hussein Elabe Fahiye. We
are now more determined than ever to fight the menace
of faceless borderless international terrorists.
Since this is the first time that I take the floor this
month, Mr. President, allow me to extend my heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May. We are
confident in your able leadership, Sir, and wish you
every success in fulfilling your mandate.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my
colleagues, the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Raisedon Zenenga,

19-1491321/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

and the Special Representative of the African Union
Commission Chairperson for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
Ambassador Francisco Madeira, for their long-standing
constructive contributions to peace and security in
Somalia. I would also like to acknowledge Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for her briefing this afternoon.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/393) and continue to renew our support for
and full cooperation with the Secretary-General in
this regard.
Even though it has only been just over two
years since the election of President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, Somalia has witnessed
transformational progress. Thanks to its strong political
will, Somalia is on track to fulfil the key benchmarks
it has set for itself, which is gradually bearing the
fruits of prosperity and stability for all Somalis. We
are encouraged by key positive developments such as
collecting record tax revenues through automation and
enhanced compliance, which is helping us to meet our
economic reform goals.
However, there is a cost to any reform, and though
we have managed it to the best of our abilities, the
Government has since lost some political capital in the
ongoing reform process. It is with continued resolve
and a robust outlook that the Government has taken
on the ambitious reform agenda it set for the security
sector. We have worked tirelessly to ensure that all our
officers and other military personnel are biometrically
registered as part of the electronic payroll reform to
eliminate corruption and ensure that they are paid
on time, as has been the case for the past 25 months.
This reform process will enhance the capability of the
Somali National Army operationally and in terms of
the implementation of the ambitious national security
architecture and transition plan. To answer the question
raised by my colleague, the Ambassador of Germany,
regarding the lessons learned from the Bariire operation,
if the Somali forces are properly funded, equipped and
trained, they are capable of fulfilling their duties.
Nevertheless, Al-Shabaab continues to be a threat
undermining our efforts to deliver security. As part of
the transition process, we have made significant gains
against Al-Shabaab in the past eight weeks, having
retaken from Al-Shabaab control the strategic towns of
Sabiid and Bariire in the Lower Shabelle region.
22/25

22/05/2019

I would like to express my gratitude to countries
that have contributed troops to AMISOM for their
commitment and sacrifices. The deployment of their
troops has created a space for the political process
and for humanitarian-relief corridors. But we cannot
effectively implement the transition plan with one
hand tied to our back owing to the long-standing arms
embargo. Regrettably, the decisions made here at the
Security Council and at United Nations Headquarters
continue to negatively affect the military capabilities
of our security forces in the fight against such terrorist
groups as Al-Shabaab, which gives comparative
advantage to Al-Shabaab.
In Somalia, we have shown that, while exercising
pragmatism and political maturity, contentious and
sensitive issues can be debated. In the last month,
the Federal Government of Somalia has succeeded
in passing a petroleum bill in the Lower House that
incorporates a revenue-sharing formula agreed by the
Federal Government and the federal member states. In
addition, the Prime Minister’s Cabinet approved a new
draft election law, which is an important step in the
political process towards holding elections. The Federal
Government is clearly committed to the road map on
inclusive politics, which is crucial to sustaining peace
and preventing conflict.
The Somali Government remains fully committed
to the promotion of human rights and the realization of
equality for all its citizens. Despite the great challenges
that we face, combined with a drastic reduction in
assistance in the area of human rights promotion to
less than half of what it has been in the last two years,
the Government of Somalia has taken significant
steps towards promoting human rights values with
specific objectives, including reducing violence against
women through Somalia’s first dedicated legislation on
sexual offences, which was unanimously approved by
Cabinet in May 2018. On 2 October 2018, the Federal
Government of Somalia signed the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
and since then, the Somali Parliament ratified it. A bill
for the establishment of a national disability agency
was also passed in December 2018, and the national
disability law is being drafted.
Investing in youth is the most effective way to build
the Somali nation and counter the ideology of violent
extremist groups such as Al-Shabaab. As SecretaryGeneral Guterres once said, “I do not agree that young
people are the leaders of tomorrow. More and more, they
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

are the leaders of today”. Our young men and women
have been the leaders of our change throughout our
history. Therefore, today, more than ever, we need to
equip our youth with the skills required in sectors of high
growth and high employment potential. We encourage
United Nations agencies to train and recruit locally
in order to give hope and opportunity to our capable
young population in their nation-building process.
I would like to turn the attention of the Council
to the recurring humanitarian situation in my country,
which, for the past few years, has continued to be of
concern. As the Secretary-General’s report correctly
states, and as the Assistant Secretary-General has
reported in her briefing before the Security Council
today, limited rainfall in the past three months has
compounded existing dry conditions, just as it did last
year, with as many 3.4 million people facing crisis
levels of food insecurity as a result of water shortages
and deteriorating crop yields, according to United
Nations specialized agencies,.
We strongly believe the humanitarian situation
must be addressed as a matter of urgency to avert a
humanitarian catastrophe. However, we must also invest
in implementing and evaluating long-term solutions that
put our people on the path to sustainable development.
By taking a comprehensive, prevention-oriented
approach, we can together strengthen the nexus between
humanitarian and development assistance.
The Federal Government of Somalia is on an
upward trajectory and has made significant strides in
a number of critical areas. Extraordinary challenges
remain as Somalia enters a critical juncture of
State-building, federalization and democratization. The
Federal Government of Somalia would like to reiterate
its commitment to maintaining accelerated progress on
processes involved in implementing the road maps. We
welcome the United Nations commitment to supporting
the Federal Government in its efforts to achieve peace,
stability and sustainable development for all Somalis.
The Federal Government of Somalia is confident
that the recently established relations of mutual respect
and cooperation will be stronger in deepening its longstanding partnership with the United Nations so as
to enable it to deliver on its mandate to support the
Federal Republic of Somalia in its peacebuilding and
State-building efforts.
The Federal Government of Somalia would like
to underscore that it has strengthened its national

S/PV. 8533

institutions and national capacities that will bring about
lasting peace and development. We urge our partners
to work closely and execute Federal Government-led
policies, under the Federal Government’s mandated
bodies and institutions, in order to engender greater
ownership and leadership.
Lastly, the Federal Government would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his able leadership and the
Security Council for its continued support to Somalia.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller
to respond to questions and comments.
Ms. Mueller: I thank members of the Council for
their interest in the humanitarian situation at this critical
time. I also thank them for the support they indicated to
fund the upscale humanitarian response to prevent the
further deterioration of the drought situation.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira
to respond to questions and comments.
Mr. Madeira: The representative of Somalia
responded to the question asked by the German
representative on the lessons to be learned from the
Sabiid and Bariire operations and the future need to
empower the forces that must continue to sustain
operations like those two.
He spoke of the need to ensure the ability of the
Somali National Army (SNA) to generate forces; a
properly trained and well-equipped SNA; and an SNA
whose members’ salaries are paid, guaranteed and
predictable. Most importantly, he spoke of an SNA, like
the one we saw in Sabiid, that respects human rights,
protects the population and their property and does not
erect roadblocks and checkpoints, among other such
obstacles. Those are the things that we saw, and that we
are seeing, in Sabiid. That is an army that we want to
see multiplied in terms of numbers. For that to happen,
as the Somali representative said, we must continue to
fund, support and equip the Somali national security
forces. That way, they will have many more successes
and there will be a transition that can preserve the gains
so far accumulated.
Another important lesson we must draw from
Sabiid and Bariire is that the Government is present and
holding onto the recovered areas. The presence of the
Government is allowing it to win the hearts and minds
of the people and keep the population on its side, while
preventing Al-Shabaab from reaching and recruiting
those populations.

19-1491323/25

S/PV.8533

The situation in Somalia

The other question raised was on the prospects
for the implementation of the transition plan. We are
implementing the transition plan. It will be recalled
that when we adopted the transition plan, the issue was
that the transitional drawdown should be gradual and
responsible, with the capacity to ensure that the gains
made were not lost. But what we are seeing now is the
time limit of the continued drawdown, without taking
into account the aspects of responsibility, graduality and
the need to preserve the gains. It is important that there
be a correlation with the need to preserve the progress
made. I want to insist however that the African Union
Mission in Somalia will be guided by the evolution
of the situation, and we are ready to comply with any
decision that the Security Council sees fit to make.
The other issue is with respect to the integration of
regional forces. Council members can see that Bariire
was recovered and captured by an integrated Somali
force — an integration that has since sought to impede
the regional force being transferred into the Somali
National Army as a clan army or clan group. It should
be integrated into the Somali National Army as part of
a multi-ethnic, multi-clan component, with the proper
profile of command and control. I have seen and am
still seeing that this is a strategy that the Government
is undertaking to ensure that the regions contribute
with forces. Those forces, however, should not become
clan-based groups that try to push for their own clan
interests, but rather a force that abides by the Republican
principles of an armed force. That is the way go. If that
persists, with time integration will become part and
parcel of a force that will be able to operate anywhere
in Somalia.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Zenenga
to respond to questions.
Mr. Zenenga: I thank Council members for their
statements of support and for the questions that they
have raised. The questions raised by the representative
of France have been addressed by previous speakers. I
think I will therefore focus on only the questions from
the United Kingdom and Germany.
The question raised by the representative of
the United Kingdom was about the prospects of the
Somalia Partnership Forum. All partners in the Federal
Government agree that holding that Partnership Forum
is very important, and we are working towards that.
There is a preparatory committee that is putting the
technical preparations in place. However, as long as
24/25

22/05/2019

cooperation between the federal member states and the
Federal Government leaders is not restored, it might be
very difficult to convene that meeting. We are therefore
continuing to encourage the resumption of dialogue
and the scheduling of another meeting between the
respective leaders of the federal member states and the
Federal Government. It is important that they have a
prior meeting ahead of the Somalia Partnership Forum.
The representative of the United Kingdom also
asked about key priorities on which the Forum could
focus. The Federal Government has set out its priorities
in the four road maps, all of which are important.
However, we believe that the Somalia Partnership
Forum and, going forward, all of us should focus on
those key priorities that will propel progress across
the board in Somalia. These are what we have called
in our recent discussions the “must-not-fail priorities”
that would open up the prospects of further progress on
many fronts. I would cite the examples of the restoration
of cooperation between the two tiers of Government;
the completion of the review of the Constitution;
preparations for elections, including the passage of the
electoral law; and Somali National Army and police
force generation to support the transition process and
the ongoing related operations. There is also the issue
of achieving the cluster of benchmarks that have been
agreed under the economic reform process. We believe
that if we make progress in these areas, that would also
propel progress across the board.
On the question raised by the representative of
Germany on whether staff morale is improved, I will say
very briefly that the security environment is still very
difficult. The United Nations Support Office in Somalia
is doing its best to construct more accommodation
facilities, especially office accommodations, so that we
can decongest the areas where we have accommodated
staff who are working in soft-skin offices, and also
to construct areas for social gatherings that we had
closed down because they were in open spaces that
are vulnerable.
The visit by Ms. DiCarlo contributed immensely
to improving staff morale, as she engaged with them.
We now have a stock-taking review being conducted by
an independent team whose headquarters is deployed
here. They are also engaging staff over the course of
more than a week, and that is helping also to improve
staff morale. We have very active and very capable
staff counsellors who are helping in this difficult
environment, and we believe that the deployment of the
19-14913

22/05/2019

The situation in Somalia

new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
will also contribute immensely to the improvement of
staff morale. We continue to update the staff on the
progress we are making in repairing our relations with
the Federal Government, and that is also helping to
reduce tensions within the staff body.
Another question posed by the representative
of Germany was whether there had been a follow-up
meeting to the Garowe schedule. As I indicated in the

S/PV. 8533

briefing, there has been no agreement on scheduling the
next meeting, but the President and the Prime Minister
continue to reach out to the federal member states. We
are also encouraging them to resume their meetings.
I would add just one point to the lessons learned from
Operation Badbaado, which is that joint planning and a
comprehensive approach produced very good results.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

19-1491325/25
