Re1olution1 adopted on the reporte of the }'ourth Committee

932 (X). ProgreH achieved hy the Non-Self-Governing Territorie11 in punuance of Chapter XI
of the Charter
The General Assembly,
Considering that Chapter XI of the Charter of th~
United Nations contains various provisions regarding
the advancement of territories whose peoples have not
yet attained a full measure of self-government,
Considering that, by virtue of Article 73 e of the
Charter, the Secretary-General bas, since 1946, receivcd
information on the economic, social and educational conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territories and that, in
some cases, Members administering such Territories
have voluntarily submitted information on the development of the free political institutions of the peoples of
these Territories,
Considering further that, under the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly from 1946 onwards,
this valuable information transmitted by the Administering Members, indicating how and to what extent the
principle that the interests of the inhabitants of the NonSelf-Governing Territories are paramount has been implemented, has been analysed and summarized by the
Secretary-General and studied each year by the General
Assembly,
1. Expresses the opinion that an examination of the
progress achieved in the Non-Self-Governing Territories since the establishment of the United Nations,
based on the information received from the Administering Members under Article 73 e of the Charter, would
be highly desirable and should make it possible to ascertain the extent to which the peoples of the Non-SelfGoveming Territories are advancmg towards the attainment of the goals set in Chapter XI of the Chartér;

2. Considers that such an examination would require
careful preparation, with the assistance of the specialized agencies concemed ;
3. Invites the Secretary-General, after consultation
with the specialized agencies concemed, to submit to the
General Assembly, for consideration at its eleventh session, a report on the main points that might be useful in
such an examination.
541st plenary meeting,
8 N ovember 1955.
933 (X). Renewal of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Goveming Territorie11
The General Assembly,
Having considered the work of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Goveming Territories constituted by resolution 332 (IV) adopted by the Gerieral
Assembly on 2 December 1949,
Recognizing the value of further constructive work by
the Committee in the interests of the advancement of
the peoples of Non-Self-Goveming Territories and the
attamment of the objectives set forth in Chapter XI of
the Charter,
1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Goveming Territories on the same
basis for a further three-year period;

2. Decides that, as provided in resolutions 332 (IV)
and 646 (VII) of 2 December 1949 and 10 December

19

1952 respectively, the Committee should be composed
of those Members of the United Nations transmitting information in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter
and of an equal number of non-administering Members
elected by the Fourth Committee on behalf of the General Assembly on as wide a geographical basis as possible;
3. Invites the members of the Committee to continue
to attach to their delegations persons specially qualifi.ed
in the functional fields within the Committee's purview;
4. Invites the Administering Members to attach to
their delegations indigenous persons specially qualified
to speak on economic, social and educational policies in
the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
5. Instructs the Committee to examine, in the spirit
of paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 1 and of Article SS of
the Charter, the summaries and analyses of information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter on the
economic, social and educational conditions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories, including any papers prepared by the specialized agencies and any reports or
information on measures taken in pursuance of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly conceming
economic, social and educational conditions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories;
6. Instructs the Committee to submit to the reJU:lar
sessions of the General Assembly reports contaming
such procedural recommendations as it may deem fit and
such substantive recommendations as it may deem desirable relating to functional fields generally but not with
respéct to individual Territories;
7. Considers that the Committee should, without
prejudice to the annual consideration of all the functional fields enumerated in Article 73 e of the Charter,
give special attention to educational, economic and social
conditions in tum and should consider the information
transmitted in respect of these questions in the light of
the reports approved by the General Assembly on such
conditions in N on-Self-Goveming Territories;
8. Decides that, at its thirteenth session, the General
Assembly will reconsider the question of continuing the
Committee on Information from N on-Self-Goveming
Territories, together with the questions of the composition and terms of reference of this or any such future
committee.
541st plenary meeting,
8 N ovember 1955.

*

* *
At its 512th meeting on 17 Nwember 1955 the Fou,-th Committee, acting in the name of the General Assembly, in accordance with the terms of the above resolution, wa.s calletl .,,,,. to
fill the vacancies in the membership of the Committee on I,i/ormation from Non-Self-Governing Territories tf'eated by tM
expiration of the terms of office of BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA and
IRAQ.

The following· States were ,Iected for a three-year p,riod:
CHINA, INDIA, IRAQ and VENEZUELA.

934 (X). Voting procedure on questlom relatlnar
to reports and petitlom eoncernlng the Terr&:
tory of South West Afrlca I advhory opinion of
the International Court of Ju1tlce
The General Assembly,
Having requested, in its re~olution 904 (IX) of 23
November 1954, an advisory opinion from the Interna-

20

General Aasembly -

tional Court of Justice regarding the voting procedure
to be followed by the General Assembly on questions
relating to reports and petitions concerning the Territory
of South West Africa,

Ha,ving noted that, in its advisory opinion4 of 7 June
1955, the Court was unanimously of the opinion that the
rule 5 that decisions of the General Assembly on questions relating to reports and petitions concerning the
Territory of South West Africa should be regarded as
important questions within the meaning of Article 18,
paragraph 2, of the Charter was a correct interpretation
of the advisory opinion 6 of the Court of 11 July 1950,
Accepts and endorses the advisory opinion of 7 June
1955 of the International Court of Justice on voting
procedure on questions relating to reports and petitions
concerning the Territory of South West Africa.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.

935 (X). Petitions and communications relating
to the Rehoboth Community of South West
Africa
The Genera! Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion7 of 11 July 1950
of the International Court of Justice on the question of
South West Africa, including the opinion that petitions
concerning the Territory of South West Africa are to
be transmitted by the Government of the Union of South
Africa "to the General Assembly of the United Nations,
which is legally qualified to deal with them",
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28 November
1953, to examine petitions in accordance with the Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
H aving received a report from the Committee on
South West Africa dealing with a petition, undated,
from Mr. A. J. Beukes, Mr. P. Diegaard and Mr. A. van
Wyk, members of the Rehoboth Community of South
West Africa, and related communications from the
Rehoboth Community, received on 22 November 1954,
and from Mr. Jacobus Beukes, dated 27 November
1954, 8
N oting that the Government of the Union of South
Africa, by a letter 9 dated 25 March 1954, has informed
the Committee that it has "never recognized any obligation to submit ... petitions to any international body
since the demise of the League of Nations",
N oting that the petitioners request that their right of
self-government under the Constitutions of the Rehoboth Community of 1870-1874 be restored, and seek an
interpretation of the legal status of the Rehc:iboth Community; that they request that Proclamations Nos. 28
of 1923, 31 of 1924, 9 of 1928, 29 of 1929, 17 of 1932.
S of 1935, 20 of 1935, 16 of 1938 and 22 of 1941, issued
• South-West Africa-Voting Procedun, Advisory Opinion
of June 7th, 1955: I.C.J. Reports 1955, p. 67.
5 Special rule F adopted under General Assembly Tesolution
844 (IX) of 11 October 1954.
8 International status of South-West Africa, Advisory Opinion: I.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 128.
1 Ibid.
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Session,
Suppfement No. 12 (A/2913), chap. VIII and annex VI.
• Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/2666 and Corr.
1), annex I (c).

Tenth Session

by the Administrator of South West Africa and applied
to the Rehoboth Community, be declared null and void
in that Community, that the boundaries of the Rehoboth Community, as allegedly recognized by the German
Government, be restored and that certain lands allegedly
alienated unlawfully from the Rehoboth Community be
returned to that Community.

I. With respect to the status of the Rehoboth Com-munity:
N oting that a Treaty of Protection and Friendship
was concluded in 1885 between the German Government
and the Rehoboth Community, as an agreement between
two Governments, whereby the German Government
agreed to assume the protection of the Rehoboth Community, while recognizing the rights and freedom which
the Rehobothians had established for themselves,
N oting that the German Government abrogated this
Treaty in 1915, when the Rehobothians refused to join
German forces and to provide men to guard captured
Union of South Africa prisoners during the First World
War,
Noting that the Administrator of South West Africa
as representing the Government of the Union of South
Africa on the one part and the Kapitein and members
of the Raad of the Rehoboth Community for themselves
and their lawful successors as representing the Rehoboth Community on the other part concluded an Agreement on 17 August 1923 "regulating the future administration by the Government of the Union of South Africa
in its capacity as Mandatory of the territory situate
within the district of Rehoboth occupied by the said
Community known as the Gebiet", that this Agreement
was ratified and confirmed by Proclamation No. 28 of
1923 and came into force on 1 October 1923,
N oting further that this Agreement provides, inter
alia, that:
( a) Subject to the provisions of the Agreement, "the
Administration concedes to the Rehoboth Community
the right of self-government within the Gebiet according to the laws presently to be found in the Law Book
of the Raad of the Rehoboth Community and such additions thereto or amendments thereof as may from time
to time lawfully be enacted by the Raad of the Rehoboth
Community", subject to the assent of the Administrator
to any law passed by the Raad after 1 October 1923,
( b) "The Administrator shall, after consultation with
the Raad of the Rehoboth Community, possess the power
to legislate for the Gebiet and to extend thereto the operation of any law, whether at present in force in the
Territory of South West Africa or hereafter enacted,
if he considers such legislation or extension to be expedient or desirable in the interest of either the Territory
of South West Africa or the Gebiet",
Noting that in 1924 political dissension within the
Rehoboth Community gave rise to a situation which, in
the view of the Administration, seriously endangered
the maintenance of law, order and good govemment both
wit~in the Gebiet and in the Territory of South West
Afnca, and that as a consequence the Administrator
issued Proclamation No. 31 of 1924, declaring that the
Kap,itein and Raad and ail persans acting under their
authority should cease to fonction within the Gebiet
and vesting ail their powers, fonctions and duties in the
Magistrate of the Rehoboth District who was to èxercise
these powers, fonctions and duties "in accordance with
