UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/50
6 November 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH AND
RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3830th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 November 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Georgia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 28 October 1997
(S/1997/827).
"The Security Council regrets that, despite strenuous efforts to
reactivate the peace process, there has been no visible progress on the key
issues of the settlement - the future political status of Abkhazia and the
permanent return of refugees and displaced persons.
"The Security Council attaches particular importance to the more
active role for the United Nations in the peace process, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to that end, with the assistance
of the Russian Federation as facilitator, and with the support of the group
of Friends of the Secretary-General on Georgia and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The Council calls upon the
parties to cooperate fully with these efforts.
"In this context, the Security Council regrets that the adjourned
high-level meeting on the conflict in Geneva under the aegis of the United
Nations did not resume in October as initially planned. It welcomes the
intention of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to resume
this meeting on 17 November to map out the areas where concrete political
progress could be made, to take forward discussion of social and economic
issues in support of a comprehensive settlement of the conflict, and to
address the issue of return of refugees. The Council calls upon all
concerned to do their utmost for the resumption of this meeting with the
constructive engagement in particular of the Abkhaz side.
"The Security Council commends the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative aimed at achieving a comprehensive
settlement of the conflict, including on the political status of Abkhazia
within the State of Georgia, respecting fully the sovereignty and
97-30375 (E)

061197

/...

S/PRST/1997/50
English
Page 2

territorial integrity of Georgia, and the efforts undertaken by the Russian
Federation as facilitator, in particular the initiative put forward by the
President of the Russian Federation on 1 August 1997 and the GeorgianAbkhaz negotiations held in Sukhumi on 9 and 10 September with the
participation of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The
Council welcomes the meeting of the President of Georgia and Mr. Ardzinba
in Tbilisi on 14 August 1997 facilitated by the Foreign Minister of the
Russian Federation, and the continuation of direct dialogue between the
parties and calls upon them to intensify the search for a peaceful solution
by further expanding their contacts.
"The Security Council further encourages the Secretary-General to take
such steps as are necessary, in cooperation with the parties, to ensure a
prompt and safe return of the refugees and displaced persons to their
homes, with the assistance of all relevant international organizations.
"The Security Council welcomes the decision of the Council of Heads of
State of the Commonwealth of Independent States mentioned in the report to
extend the mandate of the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS peacekeeping force) until
31 January 1998.
"The Security Council welcomes the good cooperation between the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the CIS peacekeeping force
and their efforts to promote stabilization of the situation in the zone of
conflict. The Council calls upon the parties to cooperate fully with
UNOMIG and the CIS peacekeeping force.
"The Security Council expresses concern at the continuing violations
of the Moscow Agreement of 14 May 1994 on a Ceasefire and Separation of
Forces (S/1994/583, annex I) and calls upon the parties to ensure the full
implementation of this agreement.
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continuing
unstable and tense security conditions in the Gali and Zugdidi sectors and
in the Kodori valley. The Council strongly condemns the kidnapping of
personnel of UNOMIG and the CIS peacekeeping force.
"The Security Council also condemns the continued laying of mines,
including more sophisticated types of mines which has already caused
several deaths and injuries among the civilian population and the
peacekeepers and observers of the international community. It calls upon
the parties to take all measures in their power to prevent mine-laying and
intensified activities by armed groups and to cooperate fully with UNOMIG
and the CIS peacekeeping force in order to honour their commitments to
ensure the safety and the freedom of movement of all personnel of the
United Nations, the CIS peacekeeping force and international humanitarian
organizations.

/...

S/PRST/1997/50
English
Page 3

"The Security Council supports the additional measures envisaged by
the Secretary-General in the report to improve the safety of UNOMIG
personnel and to create conditions for the effective performance of its
mandate.
"The Security Council welcomes the continued efforts by the United
Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations to address the urgent needs
of those suffering most from the consequences of the conflict in Abkhazia,
Georgia, in particular internally displaced persons, encourages further
contributions to that end, and reiterates its encouragement to States to
contribute to the voluntary fund in support of the implementation of the
Moscow Agreement and/or for humanitarian aspects including demining, as
specified by donors.
"The Security Council reminds the parties that the ability of the
international community to assist them depends on their political will to
resolve the conflict through dialogue and mutual accommodation."

-----
