Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Bearing in mind that a draft declaration on the subject13 has been submitted to the General Assembly at
its seventeenth session for consideration,
Having been unable to consider the item at its seventeenth session,
Decides to give priority to the item entitled "Measures
designed to promote among youth the ideals of peace,
mutual respect and understanding between peoples" and
to devote, at its eighteenth session, as many meetings as
possible to the consideration of this item.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1843 (XVII). Draft International Covenants on
Human Rights

A
The General Assembly
1. Decides to request the Economic and Social Council to refer to the Commission on Human Rights all the
proposals relating to an article on the rights of the
child, together with the records of the discussion thereon
at the seventeenth session of the General Assembly, for
a thorough study, taking into consideration all the legal
irrlplications of including such an article in the draft
Covenants;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to send to the
Governments of Member States and to the specialized
agencies the documents mentioned in paragraph 1 above
so that they may submit their comments thereon to the
Commission on Human Rights;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to report on its deliberations, through the Economic and
Social Council, to the General Assembly at its eighteenth
session.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

B
The General Assembly,
Having regard to the forthcoming discussion by the
Third Committee of the articles on the implementation
of the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Considering that the question of implementation raises
a number of issues which are urgently in need of clarification,
Noting that the Secretary-General's annotations 14 on
the texts of the draft International Covenants on Human
13 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 83, document A/C.3/L.1051.
14 Ibid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 28 (part II),
document A/2929.

35

Rights submitted by the Commission on Human Rights
in 1952 need to be brought up to date,
Believing that such clarification is necessary to facilitate an effective discussion of the problem of implementation,
Mindful of the fact that since 1952 the membership of
the United Nations has more than doubled and that not
all Governments of Member States have had an opportunity to participate in the drafting of the articles on
implementation,
Convinced of the desirability that all Member States
have before them a systematic account of all proposals
and suggestions concerning measures of implementation
and a review of the important issues involved,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, with a view to
clarifying the main issues involved in the implementation
of the International Covenants on Human Rights, to
prepare an explanatory paper bringing his annotations
up to date in the light of the developments that have
taken place since the publication of that document in
1955;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to forward the explanatory paper by 1 May 1963 to the Governments of
Member States in order that they may send to him any
observations thereon by 30 July 1963;
3. Invites the Governments of all Member States to
send to the Secretary-General the observations referred
to in paragraph 2 above, within the time-limit prescribed
therein;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the e.;_
planatory paper to the General Assembly at its eighteenth
session, together with such observations of Governments
thereon as he may receive.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

C
The General Assembly,
Noting that the Third Committee has adopted articles
2 to 5 of the draft Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and articles 3 and 5 of the draft Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights,
Considering however that the Committee has been unable to complete its consideration of the general provisions, the measures of implementation and the final
clauses relating to the two draft Covenants,
Decides to give priority, at its eighteenth session,
to the consideration of the draft International Covenants
on Human Rights.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.
