S/2014/203

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 March 2014
English
Original: French

Letter dated 19 March 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a copy of the letter from the Registrar
of the International Criminal Court dated 28 January 2014, trans mitting the decision
of Pre-Trial Chamber I, entitled Decision on the admissibility of the case against
Abdullah Al-Senussi, in the case of The Prosecutor v. Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi.
Pre-Trial Chamber I decided on 11 October 2013 that the case of Abdullah
Al-Senussi was inadmissible before the Court, owing to the principle of
complementarity set forth in article 17 (1) (a) of the Rome Statute.
By his letter, the Registrar conveyed the decision on the admissibility of the
case for transmission to the Security Council, pursuant to article 17 of the
Negotiated Relationship Agreement between the International Criminal Court and
the United Nations. The Registrar also informed the Secretary -General that the
decision had been appealed.
I should be grateful if you would have this letter and the summary of the
decision on admissibility transmitted to the members of the Security Council. The
full text of the decision (in English only) is available at the following address:
www.icc-cpi.int/iccdocs/doc/doc1663102.pdf.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

14-27065 (E)

260314

*1427065*

260314

S/2014/203

Annex
[Original: English]
I have the honour to refer to my letter of 15 October 2013 (see S/2013/649)
which transmitted the “Decision on the admissibility of the case against Abdullah
A1-Senussi” (ICC-01/11-01111-466-Red) issued by Pre-Trial Chamber I on
11 October 2013 for onward transmission to the Security Council in the case of The
Prosecutor v. Saif Al-lslam Gaddafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi.
In accordance with rule 59 (1) and (2) of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence,
I hereby transmit a summary of the Decision for the purpose of informing the
Security Council (see enclosure). I would like to add that the Decision was appealed
by the Defence of Abdullah Al-Senussi on 17 October 2013 (ICC-01/1l-01/11-468Red) and that the appeal is still pending.
The situation in Libya was referred to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court in resolution 1970 (2011) adopted by the Security Council on
26 February 2011.
(Signed) Herman von Hebel
Registrar

2/7

14-27065

S/2014/203

Enclosure
Summary of the Decision on the admissibility of the case against
Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi
Pre-Trial Chamber I of the International Criminal Court decided today that the
case against Mr. Al-Senussi is inadmissible before the Court under article 17 (1) (a)
of the Rome Statute.
The Chamber issued a warrant of arrest against Mr. Al-Senussi on 27 June
2011 for the crimes against humanity of murder and persecution under article
7 (1) (a) and (h) of the Statute, committed in Benghazi, Libya, from 15 February
2011 until at least 28 February 2011.
Libya filed a challenge to the admissibility of the case against Mr. Al-Senussi
on 2 April 2013 and the parties and participants to proceedings subsequently filed
written submissions.
Libya submitted that its national judicial system had been actively
investigating Mr. Al-Senussi since 9 April 2012. Libya argued that it had provided
evidence with a high degree of specificity and probative value, sufficient to prove
that it took concrete and specific investigative steps in relation to the same case as
that before the Court. The domestic case, it argued, is much broader in
subject-matter than the investigation of the Court, but encompasses it nonetheless.
The investigations at the national level were said to extend from the 1980s through
to the alleged attacks against civilians during the period from 15 February 2011, the
commencement of the revolution, until the fall of the Gaddafi regime on 20 October
2011. Libya spelled out the crimes under which, it anticipates, the charges against
Mr. Al-Senussi will proceed to trial and it argued that these charges are sufficient to
challenge the admissibility of the case successfully.
Moreover, Libya asserted that the investigation is not vitiated by
“unwillingness” or “inability”. It is suggested that logistical aspects of the trial have
been addressed and that an appropriate courtroom complex and prison facilities will
be available. The assistance and support received by Libya from a number of United
Nations agencies, the European Union and several national Governments, which
focused on the provision of transitional justice measures, were said to have had a
positive impact upon the prospective trial. Libya stressed that it has no reason to
protect Mr. Al-Senussi from investigation or prosecution; that the suspect is in
government-controlled custody; and that the necessary evidence and testimony are
being collected pursuant to the domestic investigations. Libya insisted that there is
no evidence to demonstrate that Libya is either unable or unwilling to carry out a
genuine investigation into the case.
Accordingly, the Chamber was requested to declare the case against
Mr. Al-Senussi inadmissible before the Court or, in the alternative, to consider
implementing a positive approach to complementarity by declaring the case
inadmissible subject to the fulfillment of express conditions or other ongoing
obligations.
Guided by the jurisprudence of the Appeals Chamber on the interpretation of
article 17 of the Statute, the Chamber concluded that, in considering an admissibility
challenge, two questions must be addressed:

14-27065

3/7

S/2014/203

(a) whether, at the time of the proceedings in respect of an admissibility
challenge, there is an ongoing investigation or prosecution of the case at the national
level; and
(b) whether the State is unwilling or unable genuinely to carry out such
investigation or prosecution.
The first requirement involves a consideration of whether the Libyan
investigation covers the “same case”, characterized by two components: the same
person and the same conduct. The Chamber noted that the Appeals Chamber has
interpreted the latter to mean that the investigation or prosecuti on must cover
“substantially” the same conduct. The Chamber stressed that the question of what
constitutes “substantially the same conduct as alleged in the proceedings before the
Court” will vary according to the concrete facts and circumstances of the ca se and
requires, therefore, a case-by-case analysis.
The Chamber identified the conduct attributed to Mr. Al-Senussi in the
proceedings before the Court, as set out in the warrant of arrest issued against him,
read in conjunction with the Decision taken pursuant to article 58, and compared it
with the conduct constituting the subject matter of the proceedings allegedly carried
out by the Libyan judicial authorities, as emerging from the evidence presented by
Libya in support of its challenge. The conduct alleged in the case before the Court
was found to concern the individual criminal liability of Mr. Al-Senussi for killings
and acts of persecution, by reason of their (real or perceived) political opposition to
the Gaddafi regime, carried out against civilian demonstrators and political
dissidents. The crimes were alleged to have been committed directly by
Mr. Al-Senussi or through the Libyan security forces during the repression of
demonstrations in Benghazi from 15 February 2011 until at least 20 February 2011,
as part of a policy designed at the highest level of the Libyan State machinery to
deter and quell, by any means, the revolution against the Gaddafi regime occurring
throughout Libya.
The Chamber noted that the Decision taken pursuant to article 58 contains a
list of particular “incidents” or “events”. However, because they do not represent
unique manifestations of Mr. Al-Senussi’s alleged criminal conduct but are rather
illustrative and non-exhaustive samples, the domestic proceedings need not concern
each of those “incidents”. Instead, the fact that the national proceedings encompass
some of these “incidents”, including those that are particularly violent or that appear
to be significantly representative of the conduct attributed to Mr. Al-Senussi, was
considered an indicator that the same case is being investigated.
The Chamber considered that the evidence submitted by Libya is sufficient to
conclude that concrete and progressive steps are being taken by the domestic
authorities in the proceedings against Mr. Al-Senussi. The Libyan authorities
interviewed witnesses, obtained documentary evidence (such as medical reports,
death certificates and written orders), and requested that external sources provide
information relevant to the investigation. Multiple lines of investigation were
pursued, witnesses were asked to clarify and elaborate on certain parts of their
testimony, as well as requested to comment on information provided by other
witnesses and on documentary evidence in the investigative rec ord. The
investigators inquired about issues of a potentially exculpatory nature, and the
resulting information has been duly recorded. Victims reporting the commission of
crimes were required to substantiate their assertions with documentary evidence.

4/7

14-27065

S/2014/203

The Chamber found that Libya had properly substantiated its assertion that the
domestic authorities are seeking to clarify, through the concrete and progressive
steps outlined above, the following relevant factual aspects:
(a) the existence of a policy to deter and quell, by any means, the
demonstrations against the Gaddafi regime;
(b) the mobilization of militias and equipment, recruitment of mercenaries,
incitement of individuals to kill the demonstrators, provision of supplies to the
security forces and other arrangements for the repression of the civilian
demonstrations, including the role of Mr. Al-Senussi and his alleged accomplices in
these activities;
(c) Mr. Al-Senussi’s command over the security forces, and his presence in
Benghazi immediately after the outbreak of the revolution to manage the situation;
(d) the carrying out by the security forces of numerous attacks on civilian
demonstrators in many areas of Benghazi between 15 and 20 February, causing the
death of and serious injuries to countless civilians, as well as similar attacks
conducted in the country throughout the period of the repression of the revolution
against the Gaddafi regime;
(e) Mr. Al-Senussi’s direct involvement in the shooting of the civilian
demonstrators in Benghazi between 15 and 20 February 2011;
(f) the arrest of journalists, activists and civilians demonstrating against the
Gaddafi regime and the role in some of these events of Mr. Al-Senussi and his
alleged accomplices; and
(g)

instances of detention and torture of civilian dissidents.

On this basis, the Chamber was satisfied that the Libyan investigations include
the relevant factual aspects of Mr. Al-Senussi’s conduct as alleged in the
proceedings before the Court, and concluded, accordingly, that Libya h as
demonstrated it is undertaking domestic proceedings covering the same case as that
before the Court within the meaning of article 17 (1) (a) of the Statute.
In relation to the second limb of the test, whether the State is unwilling or
unable genuinely to carry out the investigation or prosecution, the Chamber recalled
that the State challenging the admissibility of the case is required to substantiate all
aspects of the admissibility challenge to the extent required by the concrete
circumstances of the case. The Chamber recognized, however, that an evidentiary
debate on Libya’s unwillingness or inability will be meaningful only when doubts
arise as to the genuine nature of the domestic proceedings. Indeed, although Libya
carries the burden of proof, factual allegations raised by any party or participant
must be sufficiently substantiated in order to be considered properly raised.
The Chamber’s decision took into account, holistically, a broad range of
factual allegations raised by the parties and participants that were considered both
relevant and sufficiently substantiated. These included the quantity and quality of
the evidence collected as part of the investigations related to Mr. Al-Senussi, the
scope, methodology and resources of the investigation into Mr. Al-Senussi’s case,
the recent transfer to the Accusation Chamber of the case against Mr. Al-Senussi and
his 37 co-defendants, the example of certain judicial proceedings conducted to date
against other former officials of the Gaddafi era, and the efforts made to resolve

14-27065

5/7

S/2014/203

certain issues in the justice system through recourse to international assistance. The
Chamber took into account the lack of legal representation for Mr. Al-Senussi, the
serious security difficulties currently experienced across Lib ya, the absence of
protection programmes for witnesses in the context of this precarious security
situation and the difficulties faced by the national authorities in exercising control
over certain detention facilities.
The Chamber considered that there is no indication that the proceedings
against Mr. Al-Senussi are being undertaken for the purpose of shielding him from
criminal responsibility such as would warrant a finding of “unwillingness” within
the meaning of article 17 (2) (a) of the Statute. It also concluded that the national
proceedings cannot be considered tainted by any unjustified delay which, in the
concrete circumstances of the case, would be inconsistent with an intent to bring
Mr. Al-Senussi to justice within the meaning of article 17 (2) (b). In addition, the
Chamber found that the investigations into Mr. Al-Senussi’s case are not being
conducted in a manner inconsistent with the intent to bring Mr. Al-Senussi to
justice, such as to justify a finding of unwillingness under the cumulative
requirements of article 17 (2) (c). In the Chamber’s view, the fact that
Mr. Al-Senussi’s right to benefit from legal assistance at the investigation stage is
yet to be implemented did not warrant a finding of unwillingness under that
provision, because there was no indication that this is inconsistent with Libya’s
intent to bring Mr. Al-Senussi to justice, rather it appeared to be a consequence of
the current security situation in the country. Accordingly, the Chamber concluded
that Libya is not unwilling genuinely to carry out its proceedings against
Mr. Al-Senussi.
In relation to the “ability” of Libya to investigate and prosecute the case
against Mr. Al-Senussi, the Chamber first addressed the possibility that Libya was
“unable to obtain the accused” as a result of a total or substantial collapse or
unavailability of its national judicial system within the meaning of article 17 (3) of
the Statute. The Chamber found no reason to believe in this aspect of inability,
because Mr. Al-Senussi is already in the custody of the Libyan authorities.
The Chamber went on to consider the ability of Libya “to obtain the necessary
evidence and testimony”, bearing in mind the evidence already gathered and the
stage of the proceedings reached at the national level. The Chamber considered the
effects of the current security situation across Libya, in particular the absence of
effective witness protection programmes, as well as the fact that certain detention
facilities are yet to be transferred under the authority of the Ministry of Justice.
However, unlike the case against Mr. Gaddafi, where Libya did not satisfactorily
demonstrate that it had collected more than a few sparse items of evidence as part of
its investigations, the domestic proceedings against Mr. Al-Senussi have so far not
been prejudiced by these challenges. Indeed, Libya has provided a considerable
amount of evidence, including several relevant witness and victim statements, as
well as documentary evidence such as written orders, medical records and flight
documents. At least one of the witnesses was interviewed while in detention, and
several prospective witnesses are currently detained in the Al -Hadba prison of
Tripoli, which is under the control of the Government of Libya. Thus, the Chamber
concluded that these factors cannot be said to render Libya unable genuinely to
carry out its proceedings.

6/7

14-27065

S/2014/203

Taking into account all the relevant circumstances, the Chamber found no
other way in which Libya was “otherwise unable to carry out its proceedings” as a
result of a total or substantial collapse or unavailability of its national judicial
system, which would have satisfied the residual aspect of inability in article 17 (3)
of the Statute. The Chamber observed that Mr. Al-Senussi’s lack of legal
representation in the national proceedings did not lead to such inability. In contrast
to the case of Mr. Gaddafi, for whom attempts to secure legal representation have
repeatedly failed, in the present case it was submitted that several local lawyers
from Mr. Al-Senussi’s tribe recently indicated their willingness to represent
Mr. Al-Senussi in the domestic proceedings, although they have not yet been given a
formal power of attorney.
The Chamber concluded that the case against Mr. Al-Senussi is being
investigated by Libya and that Libya is not unwilling or unable genuinely to carry
out the investigation. Thus, the case against Mr. Al-Senussi was considered
inadmissible before the Court pursuant to article 17 (1) (a) of the Statute.
Finally, the Chamber noted article 19 (10) of the Statute which provides that:
“If the Court has decided that a case is inadmissible under article 17, the Prosecutor
may submit a request for review of the decision when he or she is fully satisfied that
new facts have arisen which negate the basis on which the case had previously been
found inadmissible under article 17.” The Prosecutor may therefore seize the
Chamber with a request for review of the present decision as appropriate.

14-27065

7/7
