S/PRST/2018/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 March 2018
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8205th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 March 2018, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the
Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions 2014 (2011), 2051 (2012),
2140 (2014), 2201 (2015), 2204 (2015), 2216 (2015), 2266 (2016), 2342 (2017),
2402 (2018) and presidential statements of 15 February 2013, 29 August 2014,
22 March 2015, 25 April 2016, 15 June 2017, and 9 August 2017.
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Yemen, and the devastating
humanitarian impact of the conflict on civilians. The Security Council
recognises with concern that the UN estimates that 22.2 million people are now
in need of humanitarian assistance in Yemen; 3.4 million more than last year.
The Security Council expresses deep concern about the acute vulnerability of
civilians to outbreaks of cholera and diphtheria, in light of a cute malnutrition,
the threat of famine and the weakness of Yemeni institutions including the health
system, and calls upon all parties to facilitate vaccination programmes for
affected populations by UN agencies and humanitarian organisations.
“The Security Council expresses grave distress at the level of violence in
Yemen, including indiscriminate attacks in densely populated areas, and the
impact this has had upon civilians, including large numbers of civilian casualties
and damage to civilian objects. The Security Council calls on all parties to
comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law, including
to respect the principle of proportionality and at all times to distinguish between
the civilian population and combatants, and between civilian objects and
military objectives, and by taking all feasible precautions to avoid, and in any
event minimise, harm to civilians and civilian objects and infrastructure, and to
end the recruitment and use of children and other violations commit ted against
them in violation of applicable international law, in order to prevent further
suffering of civilians. The Security Council calls on all parties to respect and
protect schools, medical facilities, and personnel. The Security Council
underlines the need to ensure the security of humanitarian and United Nations
personnel. The Security Council condemns in the strongest possible terms
ballistic missile attacks by the Houthis against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
with particular concern for the 4 November and 19 December 2017 attacks
which deliberately endangered civilian areas. The Security Council reiterates its

18-04043 (E)

160318

*1804043*

S/PRST/2018/5

call on the parties to agree on the modalities for a durable Cessation of
Hostilities.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to the conflict to allow and
facilitate the safe, rapid and unhindered access for humanitarian supplies and
personnel to all affected governorates. The Security Council further notes with
great concern the impact that access restrictions on commercial and
humanitarian imports have on the humanitarian situation, and calls on the parties
to immediately facilitate access for these essential imports into the country and
their distribution throughout in order to reach the entire civilian population. In
this regard, the Security Council calls for the full and sustained opening of all
Yemen’s ports, including Hodeida and Saleef ports, and stresses the importance
of keeping these functioning and open to all commercial and humanitarian
imports, including food, fuel and medical imports. The Security Council also
calls for increased access to Sana’a Airport for lifesaving humanitarian supplies
and movement of urgent humanitarian cases. The Security Council reaffirms
that denial of humanitarian access can constitute a violation of international
humanitarian law. The Security Council also stresses that the operation of the
UN humanitarian air and sea services and related services for staff of
humanitarian agencies should proceed unhindered. The Security Council
underlines the need to ensure accountability for violations in Yemen.
“The Security Council emphasises the need to respect the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality and independence for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, and stresses the importance of such assistance being
delivered on the basis of need, devoid of any political prejudices and aims, and
commends the efforts of the United Nations and all humanitarian and medical
personnel in Yemen.
“The Security Council also stresses the need for hu manitarian assistance
to be gender and age sensitive, and to remain responsive to women and
children’s differentiated experiences and needs. Women and other groups are
particularly at risk in periods of humanitarian crisis and food scarcity.
“In light of the worsening crisis, the Security Council welcomes the United
Nations’ 2018 Yemen Humanitarian Response Plan, which requires $2.96 billion
to assist more than 13 million people. The Security Council calls upon Member
States to immediately disburse outstanding pledges and provide additional
donor support ahead of the upcoming Geneva Pledging Conference for Yemen,
hosted by the United Nations together with the Governments of Sweden and
Switzerland, and in this regard welcomes the pledge made by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to contribute nearly $1 billion to the
UN appeal, and both countries’ commitment to raise an additional $500 million
from other donors in the region. The Security Council encourages all Member
States to channel their pledges through the UN 2018 Yemen Humanitarian
Response Plan as part of a coordinated international response to the crisis.
“The Security Council notes with appreciation the recent announcement
of a ‘Yemen Comprehensive Humanitarian Operations Plan’ by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia-led Coalition, the recent delivery of four World Food Programme
cranes to Hodeida port, as well as plans to install four additional cranes in
Mokha, Aden and Mukalla ports, and to deposit US$2 billion into the Central
Bank of Yemen. The Security Council further notes the intention of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia-led Coalition to establish an air-bridge to Ma’rib to facilitate
the delivery and distribution of aid.
“The Security Council expresses concern about the challenges facing
Yemen’s economy. The Security Council notes the Government of Yemen’s
2/3

18-04043

S/PRST/2018/5

announcement of its first budget since 2014 and calls upon the Government of
Yemen to develop a transparent budget process, which consolidates revenues
and prioritises spending on salaries for the 1.25 million public sector employees
across the country, particularly in the health, sanitation and education sectors.
The Security Council further recognises the need to strengthen the capacity of
the Central Bank of Yemen to develop and implement a transparent national
monetary policy.
“The Security Council calls on all Member States to fully implement the
arms embargo as required by the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
Security Council underlines its support for the UN Verification and Inspection
Mechanism (UNVIM), which facilitates commercial shipping to Yemen,
including by carrying out inspections of commercial vessels over 100 metric
tonnes. The Security Council recognises in this regard that Member States
undertaking cargo inspections pursuant to paragraph 15 of UNSCR 2216 (2015)
are required to submit written reports to the Yemen Sanctions Committee as set
out in paragraph 17 of UNSCR 2216 (2015), stressing the need for all parties to
prevent any adverse effects on the delivery of commercial or humanitarian
goods. The Security Council calls on all Member States to ensure that, if
inspecting vessels already cleared by UNVIM, this is done in an efficient and
timely manner and in accordance with the terms and conditions of paragraph 15
of UNSCR 2216 (2015).
“The Security Council takes attempted attacks by the Houthis against
shipping around Bab al-Mandeb, a strategically important shipping passage,
extremely seriously and stresses that the continued exercise of navigatio nal
rights and freedoms in and around Bab al-Mandeb strait in accordance with
relevant international law must be upheld. The Security Council condemns the
use of sea mines by non-nation state actors, including Houthi forces, and
expresses deep concern that mines are prone to break free of their moorings and
drift into international shipping channels, and thus represent a threat to
commercial shipping and sea lines of communication.
“The Security Council emphasises that the humanitarian situation will
continue to deteriorate in the absence of an inclusive political solution, as called
for in the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and implementation mechanism
agreement, the outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference
and relevant Security Council resolutions and statements, including Security
Council resolution 2216 (2015) and the Presidential Statement of 15 June 2017.
The Security Council calls upon all parties to the conflict to abandon
pre-conditions and engage in good faith with the UN-led process, with the
meaningful participation of women and other underrepresented groups at all
levels, in order to overcome obstacles and reach a political solution to the
conflict. The Security Council welcomes the appointment of Martin Griffiths as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and affirms its support for
his Mission. The Security Council calls on all parties to allow the UN Special
Envoy full and unhindered access to all relevant parties in Yemen.
The members of the Security Council reaffirm their strong commitment to
the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen. ”

18-04043

3/3
