United Nations

A/RES/66/143

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 March 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 67 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2011
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/66/460)]

66/143. Inadmissibility of certain practices that contribute
to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 3
and other relevant human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2004/16
of 16 April 2004 4 and 2005/5 of 14 April 2005 5 and relevant Human Rights Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 7/34 of 28 March 2008 6 and 18/15 of
29 September 2011, 7 as well as General Assembly resolutions 60/143 of
16 December 2005, 61/147 of 19 December 2006, 62/142 of 18 December 2007,
63/162 of 18 December 2008, 64/147 of 18 December 2009 and 65/199 of
21 December 2010 on this issue and resolutions 61/149 of 19 December 2006, 62/220
of 22 December 2007, 63/242 of 24 December 2008, 64/148 of 18 December 2009
and 65/240 of 24 December 2010, entitled “Global efforts for the total elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action”,
Recalling also the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal and the Judgement of
the Tribunal, which recognized, inter alia, the SS organization and all its integral
parts, including the Waffen SS, as criminal and declared it responsible for many war
crimes and crimes against humanity,
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
7
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
2

11-46740

*1146740*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/143

Recalling further the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, 8 in
particular paragraph 2 of the Declaration and paragraph 86 of the Programme of
Action, as well as the relevant provisions of the outcome document of the Durban
Review Conference, of 24 April 2009, 9 in particular paragraphs 11 and 54,
Alarmed, in this regard, at the spread in many parts of the world of various
extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and
skinhead groups, as well as similar extremist ideological movements,
Recalling that in 2010 the international community celebrated the sixty-fifth
anniversary of victory in the Second World War, and welcoming in this regard the
special solemn meeting of the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, held on
6 May 2010,
Recalling also that the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly coincides
with the sixty-fifth anniversary of the Judgement of the Nuremberg Tribunal,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance submitted to the
Human Rights Council in accordance with the request contained in General
Assembly resolution 65/199, 10
1.
Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration8 and of the
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference,9 in which States condemned
the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neo-Fascism and violent nationalist
ideologies based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena
could never be justified in any instance or in any circumstances;
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur on
2.
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance prepared in accordance with the request contained in General Assembly
resolution 65/199; 11
3.
Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for her commitment to maintaining the fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance as one of the priority activities of
her Office;
Expresses deep concern about the glorification of the Nazi movement
4.
and former members of the Waffen SS organization, including by erecting
monuments and memorials and holding public demonstrations in the name of the
glorification of the Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo-Nazism, as well as by
declaring or attempting to declare such members and those who fought against the
anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement participants in
national liberation movements;
Expresses concern at recurring attempts to desecrate or demolish
5.
monuments erected in remembrance of those who fought against Nazism during the
Second World War, as well as to unlawfully exhume or remove the remains of such
_______________
8

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
10
A/HRC/18/44.
11
See A/66/312.
9

2

A/RES/66/143

persons, and in this regard urges States to fully comply with their relevant
obligations, inter alia, under article 34 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949; 12
6.
Notes with concern the increase in the number of racist incidents in
several countries and the rise of skinhead groups, which have been responsible for
many of these incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and xenophobic violence
targeting members of national, ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities, as observed
by the Special Rapporteur in his latest report to the General Assembly;
Reaffirms that such acts may be qualified to fall within the scope of
7.
activities described in article 4 of the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination3 and that they may represent a clear and
manifest abuse of the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association as
well as the rights to freedom of opinion and expression within the meaning of those
rights as guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
8.
Stresses that the practices described above do injustice to the memory of
the countless victims of crimes against humanity committed in the Second World
War, in particular those committed by the SS organization and those who fought
against the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement, and
poison the minds of young people, and that failure by States to effectively address
such practices is incompatible with the obligations of States Members of the United
Nations under its Charter and is incompatible with the purposes and principles of
the Organization;
Also stresses that such practices fuel contemporary forms of racism,
9.
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and contribute to the
spread and multiplication of various extremist political parties, movements and
groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and in this regard calls for
increased political and legal vigilance;
10. Emphasizes the need to take the measures necessary to put an end to the
practices described above, and calls upon States to take more effective measures in
accordance with international human rights law to combat those phenomena and the
extremist movements, which pose a real threat to democratic values;
11. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur, made in his latest
report to the General Assembly, to introduce into domestic criminal law a provision
according to which committing an offence with racist or xenophobic motivations or
aims constitutes an aggravating circumstance allowing for enhanced penalties, and
encourages those States whose legislation does not contain such provisions to
consider that recommendation;
12. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of
education, including human rights education, as a complement to legislative
measures, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur;
13. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur regarding the
importance of history classes in teaching the dramatic events and human suffering
that resulted from the ideologies of Nazism and Fascism;

_______________
12

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.

3

A/RES/66/143

14. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed
at bringing communities together and providing them with space for genuine
dialogue, such as round tables, working groups and seminars, including training
seminars for State agents and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising
activities, especially those initiated by civil society representatives which require
continued State support;
15. Underlines the potentially positive role that relevant United Nations
entities and programmes, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
16. Reaffirms that, according to article 4 of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, States parties to that
instrument are under the obligation:
(a) To condemn all propaganda and all organizations that are based on ideas
of racial superiority or that attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and
discrimination in any form;
(b) To undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designed to
eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination, with due regard to the
principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the rights
expressly set forth in article 5 of the Convention;
(c) To declare as an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas
based on racial superiority or hatred, and incitement to racial discrimination, as well
as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons
of another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist
activities, including the financing thereof;
(d) To declare illegal and prohibit organizations and organized and all other
propaganda activities that promote and incite racial discrimination, and to recognize
participation in such organizations or activities as an offence punishable by law;
(e) To prohibit public authorities or public institutions, national or local,
from promoting or inciting racial discrimination;
17. Also reaffirms that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or
religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
should be prohibited by law, that all dissemination of ideas based on racial
superiority or hatred, or incitement to racial discrimination as well as all acts of
violence or incitement to such acts shall be declared offences punishable by law, in
accordance with the international obligations of States, and that these prohibitions
are consistent with freedom of opinion and expression;
18. Expresses concern about the use of the Internet to propagate racism,
racial hatred, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related intolerance, as outlined
in the latest report of the Special Rapporteur to the General Assembly, and in this
regard calls upon States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights to implement fully articles 19 and 20 of the Covenant, which guarantee the
right to freedom of expression and set out the limitations thereto;
19. Underlines, at the same time, the positive role that the exercise of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression, as well as full respect for the freedom to
seek, receive and impart information, including through the Internet, can play in
combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;

4

A/RES/66/143

20. Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
to give serious consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a matter of
priority, as stressed by the Special Rapporteur in his report to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fifth session; 13
21. Notes the importance of strengthening international cooperation at the
regional and international levels with the aim of countering all manifestations of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular
regarding issues raised in the present resolution;
22. Encourages States parties to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ensure that their legislation
incorporates the provisions of the Convention, including those of article 4;
23. Recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights, in its
resolution 2005/5,5 that the Special Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue,
make relevant recommendations in his future reports and seek and take into account
in this regard the views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
24. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the
General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session and to the Human Rights Council at
its twentieth session, reports on the implementation of the present resolution, in
particular regarding paragraphs 4, 5, 7, 8, 13 and 14 thereof, based on the views
collected in accordance with the request of the Commission on Human Rights, as
recalled by the Assembly in paragraph 23 above;
25. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that have provided
information to the Special Rapporteur in the course of the preparation of his report
to the General Assembly;
26. Also expresses its appreciation to civil society actors that contribute to
the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in
an impartial and unbiased manner;
27. Stresses that such information is important for the sharing of experiences
and best practices in the fight against extremist political parties, movements and
groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, as well as extremist ideological
movements;
28. Encourages Governments and non-governmental organizations to
cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the exercise of the tasks outlined in
paragraph 23 above;
29. Encourages Governments, non-governmental organizations and relevant
actors to disseminate, as widely as possible, information regarding the contents of
and the principles outlined in the present resolution, including through the media,
but not limited to it;
30.

Decides to remain seized of the issue.
89th plenary meeting
19 December 2011

_______________
13

See A/65/323.

5
