United Nations

893rd

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING

ASSEI\fBL1~

Friday, '1 October 1960,
at3p.m.

FIFTEENTH SESSJ'ON

Official Records

NEW

CONTENTS
Agenda item 20:
Admission of new Members to the United
Nations (continued). • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ••

521

President: Mr. Frederick H. BOLAND (Ireland).

YORK

Federation of Nigeria will bring a most notable and
valuable contribution to our work, and we assure them
of our sincere good wishes for the future prosperity
and progress of their country.
6. :r propose now to call in turn on the sponsors of
the resolution proposing the Feclerati<?n of Nigeria
fer membership, and I call first on the Secretary of
state for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom.
7. Lord HOME (United K~"lgdom): The birth of a

AGENDA ITEM 20

Admission of new Members to the United Nations
{cootinuedj*
1. The PRESIDENT: In connexion. with the admission of new Members, the usual procedure will be
followed. After the delegation of the Federation of
Nigeria has taken its place on the floor of the Assembly, representatives will no doubt wish to express
their welcome to the new Member. Twenty-six representatives have inscribed themselves for this purpose. After they have taken the floor, the Prime
Minister of the Federation of Nigeria, who is here
for only one day, will wish himself to address the
Assembly. In orde:t' to enable him to do so at an
appropriate hour, I would ask the Speakel"S who have
inscribed their names to be good enough to restrict
their interventions to a maximum of four minutes. I
hope that delegations wlll be good enough to accept
this arrangement too as an exceptional measure reqUired by the circumstances.
2. Coming now to the matter before the Assembly,
the admission of a new Member, the Federation of
Nigeria, the Securi.y Council hasunanimouslyrecommended!! to the General Assembly that the Federation
of Nigeria be admitted to membership in the Organization.

3. I shall now ask the Assembly to vote on the draft
resolution sponso!"ed by Australia. Canada, Ceylon,
the Federation of Malaya. Ghana, India, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Tunisia, the Union of SO'.~th Africa and the
United Kingdom [A/L.3I8].
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

4. The PRESIDENT: I hereby declare the Federation
of Nigeria admitted to the United Nations.
The delegation of the Federation of Nigeria was

escorted to its place in the General Assembly hall.
5. The PRESIDENT: Now that the representatives of
the Federation of Nigeria. have taken their seats, I
woUld like, on behalf of the Assembly as a Whole, to
express to them very briefly a very cordial wel~me to the United Nations. We are confident that the
• Resumed from the 876th meeting.
!L Official Records of the Security Council. Fifteenth Year, 90cith
meeting.

nation is an event which stirs our emotions and
kindles the imagination, and I know that the membership of Nigeria in the United Nations will be anclaimer. by the representatives who are present with
full hearts and high hopes for the future; and with
reason, because Nigeria is a great country. It is
great in area~ Nigeria is half the size of Western
Europe. It is great in population: Nigeria had nearly
40 millions of people. It is great in prospects, because Nigeria has all the resources to maintain a
powerful and a prosperous nation. And we in the
United Kingdom, who know the Nigerians well, would
add. great in nharacter, for Nigerians are a happy
people. They have the gift. of laughter; the priceless
gift of being able on occasions to laugh at themselves.
They are a vigorous, self-resl)6cting, self-disciplined
people, with that backbone of moral integrity which
is the secret of wisdom and the secret of human
relations "lY.lth individual and international.
8. The Prime Minister of Nigeria will perhaps allow
me today to share a little of his pride in today's
achievement, because together the United Kingdom
and Nigerians have sought to build a nation. Nigerians
for many years have played a full part in the local
government of Nigeria, in the regions and in the provinces, because Nigerians l'ecogniz(\d, with us, that
democracy cannot be imposed from above, but must
have its roots in instituiions which the people understand and which the p(~ople can manage for themselves.
9. It was in 1922 that the first elected Nigerians
took part in the Legislative Council of their country.
It was in 1950 that the process of discussion began on
the federal constitution of Nigeria. It was debated in
the divisions, in the provinces, in the regions and at
the centre until everybody was satisfied that the
constitution would fit the internal needs of a very
varied country and would take the strain of independence when Nigeria was launched as an independent
country in a competitive and a sometimes dangerous
world. The Nigerians and the United Kingdom took
time and patience, because it was realized that if
independence was to be real and if independence was
to endure, then Nigerian society must be seen to rest
fi'rmly on law and order and justice; for those are the
foundations of national stability and those are the
standards which Nigerians would wish to follow in
international conduct.
521

A/PV~893

1

:t

""-~

--....--_

...... -

Genera l Assem bly - Fifteen th Session - Plenar y Meetings
the Hausa Kingdom, a civiliza tion which has prepar ed
10. No doubt we, the United Kingdom, in the buildin g
its people s to accept discipl ine in their national life
the
but
es;
mistak
of this great nation, have made our
all their energi es to secure the welfar e
facts of econom.ic progre ss and politic al stabili ty and to devote
s in the ilolitic al, social and economic
people
their
of
tions,
founda
the
suppor t the claim that we have laid
same time, to join hands with all
the
at
and,
with the Nigeri ans, of a prospe rous and powerful fields
nity to bring about the advent
commu
tional
interna
the
pdevelo
ic
nation. I could call in eviden ce the econom
securit y.
and
peace
tional
of interna
ment, the ports and the railwa ys, theexp anding cities,
ground
the
,
the palm oil forests , the cocoa groves
17. To us it is a pleasu re to welcome the Federa tion
nuts areas, the school s, the hospita ls, and the rest.
of Nigeri a as an addition to the Commonwealth, in
They are great achiev ements . Of course , they raise
which there are alre~dy ten independent countr ies
of
pment
great proble ms, too, for the future develo
er in an invisib le bond of friends hip, but
this great country . But when you think of the prob- joined togeth g togeth er for those causes which we
worldn
always
in
llege
lems you then turn to the great univer sity-co
all hold so dear. We, therefo re, have not the slighte st
Nigeri a, where young people are being trained by the
doubt that Nigeri a will give strengt h to this Organi..
as
m,
Kingdo
thousa nds, and come home to the United
zation, that Nigeri a will stand by the Charte r of the
I do, and see the 5,000 Nigeri an studen ts who are at
Nations and that Nigeri a will contrib ute to all
United
this
run
presen t with us, eager to learn and to help to
r, are
interna tional causes Which, under the Charte
countr y which is now comple tely -a.nd absolu tely their
to achieve freedo m, prospe rity and suooes s
d
intende
own.
in the world.
last
the
in
s
debate
these
to
d
listene
have
I
11. While
18. On behalf of my Government and the p~oples of
few weeks, I l).ave heard a numbe r ofthing s said about
my country , who had the hon01.U' to send a speoial
British colonial policy and about the independence
delega tion to join in the independence celebra tions on
that we have given to our 'dependent territo ries. I
1 Octobe r in Nigeria , we would like to expres s our
heard it once describ ed as "fictiti ous". I was tempte d,
st congra tulatio ns and to wish the Nigerian
heartie
perhap s, to claim my right of reply. But Why should
Government and the Nigeri an people and, partiou larly,
I? Becaus e if ever I saw a fact of indepe ndence disting uished Prime Minist er who has honoured
the
robust, colourful, indeed indom itable- it is here in
us with his presen ce here today, prospe rity and
the Nigeri an delegation, which for the first time
succes s, and the happin ess of all their peoples.
repres ents their countr y at this Assem bly today.
19. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (transl ated from Frenoh);
12. After 100 years, at midnight on the last day of
For the third time this session , I have the signal
Septem ber, the British flag, which had flown over
honour and the great pleasu re of coming to the rosNigeri a for a11 that time, was lowere d and the Ni- trum to welcome a new Membe r, the Federa tion of
gerian flag W/LS prOUdly raised in its place. There
Nigeri a, with which my countr y has long had the most
was, on the part of the United Kingdom and all of its
y and fratern al relatio ns. As the repres entafriendl
people , no hilnt of regret in that· ceremony; on the
tive of a nation which was one of the first in Africa to
contra ry, a c()mplete sense of satisfa ction and of fulrecove r its freedo m and its independence, I feel that
filmen t of a missio n, that we and the Nigeri ans tothe p;rivUege given to me this year of sponso ring the
gether had been able to do someth ing which was very
candid atures of the new African states has a special
much to the good .of the world.
value and signifi cance.
13. In welcoming the Prime Minist er and his dele20. Our dream, the hope which inspire d all of us
gation here today, on behalf of the United Kingdom I
of coloniz ed countri os, of one day seeing our
sons
should like to wish them every succes s in their new
brothe rs recove r their freedo m and dignity, is thus
and complete independence and many happy return s
materi alizing throughout the world. The hope, born
.
of this most auspici ous day.
at San Franci sco in 1945, of one day seeing the
the
of
l
Mindfu
);
(Ceylon
entativ es of all nations seated in this plaoe
COREA
repres
14. Sir Ulaude
words
many
and maldng their loyal contrib ution to the building of
Presid ent's admonishment, I feel that
deleuished
disting
the
assure
better world, now becom es a reality . Like a "peau
to
a
d
are not require
de chagrin ", colonial rule is everyw here shrinking,
gation from the Federa tion of Nigeri a of the warmt h
liberat ing vast stretch es of territo ry and tens of
of the welcome that has been accord ed them already
million s of human beings . From your chair, Mr.
and of the enthus iasm with which we shall look for..,
this
cr~
work
the
in
tion
Presid ent, you see before you ninety-nine nations,
ward to a close associa
in their diversi ty by a common attachment
united
zation.
Organi
to the princip les of the Charte r and by a oommon
15. The people of Nigeri a come to this Organi zation
devotion to the cause of peace and freer!tlm; is this
well equipped in many respec ts to fulfil their obliga not a wonderful and encour aging sight? There are
tions under the Charte r and to strengt hen the Organ istill seats to be filled here; those, especia lly, of l'te
zation itself. Their presen ce here today is a source
Africa n people s who, both in the north of the continent
of great gratific ation to all their friends becaus e it
and in the south and south- east, are still fighting,
indicat es, for one thing, a closer approa ch to the
someti mes dramat ically and painfully, for their freetheory of univer sality of the Organization, which all
dom, dignity and independence. My delegation, neverof us so ardentl y desire . It also indicat es the onward theless , hopes and expect s that, throug h the earnes t
march that is taking place of people s, not only of
endeav ours of our Organization, we shall in due
Africa but of all other parts of the world, toward s the
course see them seated here in their rightfu l plaoes.
goal of freedo m and liberty , which is the deares t and
the deepes t wish of all humanity.
21. And so it is most gratify ing to my delegation and
to all of us, especi ally in these distres sing days when
16. Nigeri a comes to us fully eqw.pped :also becaus e
stormy debate s give us so few occasio ns for reit is constit uted of a people wru nave a long oultura l
joicing, that throug h shoal and tempes t our Organizaof
days
t
ancien
the
civiliza tion, which goes back to

522

tion holds its c
organization e
equal in rights
tinotion as to l'
bel' of Memb er
chanoes of peac
22. The Feder
among us toda.
glorious past
anoient civiliz a
size of its popul
riohes make Ni
Afrioa. TM pol
ability of its ~
demooratic Stat
its destini es a
g"l'eatness of a
in respec t for 1
them within it
justice and frat
oontribution to
peace and secur
oonvinced that t
to its national
There is no d
oatalytic eleme
African people s
Side by side
doubtedly apply
for which it is
people and of i
the return or
basis of law an
international c
valuable.
23. On behalf 0
Bourguiba, we e
of Nigeria and
part in this nobl
jl.1Stice, which is

24. Mr. MENZI
tralia, very war
oome. We are
have becom e a
already expres s
Prime Minist er
sion in his coun
of independence:
oiroumstances in
25. We know th
African continen
pointed out, it i
oommunity. Its s
be very great,
we did not kno
most of us didyears a new and
World, and ther
may look forwa
affairs not Only 0
26. We have all'
geria, in partic
sentatives who
think that, whate
have on other m
here they will b
find themse lves

893rd meeting - 7 October 1960
tion holds its course towards its objective: a universal
organization embracing all the nations of the world,
equal in rights and in responsibilities, without distinction as to raCil or religion. The greater the number of Members of this Organization, the greater the
ohances of peace and stability.
22. The Federation of Nigeria, which we welcome
among us today with joy. is a great nation with a
glorious past which was the cradle of a noble and
anoient oivilization. The extent of its territory. the
size of its population and the immensity of its natUi'al
riohes maIw Nigeria one of the greatest countries in
Afrioa. The political maturity of its people and the
ability of its ~lite will make it a modern and truly
democratic State. But the able men who preside over
its destinies are fnlly aware. I am sure, that the true
gl'eatness of a nation resides essentially in st~bility,
in respect for law and order and ability to maintain
them within its frontiers, in harmony, tolerance.
justice and fratel'nity. It resides also in a country's
oontribution to preserving or restoring international
peace and security. The Tunisian delegation is firmly
convinced that the Federation of Nigeria will be equal
to its national and international responsibilities.
There is no doubt that it is destined to become a
catalytio element of liberty for .the less favoured
African peoples and a stabilizing factor in Africa.
Side by side with its elder brethren, it will undoubtedly apply itself to that great work of justice
for which it is marked out by the patriotism of its
people and of its leaders. Nigeria's contribution to
the return or maintenance of peace in Africa, on the
basis of law and justice, and to the strengthening of
international co-operation. will certainly be most
valuable.
23. On behalf of the Tunisian people and of President
Bourguiba, we extend our welcome to the Federation
of Nigeria and invite it, in brotherhood, to take its
part in this noble endeavour of 'Yorking for peace and
justice, which is the task of the United Nations.
24. Mr. MENZIES (Australia): My own countrY,Australia, very warmly associates itself with this welcome. We are delighted indeed that Nigeria should
have become a fully independent nation. We have
already expressed our delight, as the distinguished
Prime Minister knows, by opening a diplomatic mission in his country. We like to extend the boundaries
Cof independence; that is on(" of the great and happy
ciroumstances in the world in our own time.
25. We know that the significance of Nigeria in the
African continent will be very great. As has been
pointed out, it is a large, powerful and responsible
community. Its significance, therefore. in Africa will
be very great, and as we all have reason to know if
we did not know it before-although I am sure that
most of us did-Afrioa itself has achieved in recent
years a new and singular significance in the entire
world, and therefore the great country of Nigeria
may look forward' to paying a notable pRl't in the
affairs not only of Africa but of the world.
26. We have already learned that the people of mgeria, in particular their \'ary distinguished representatives who are here today, are friendly people. I
think that, whatever differences of opinion we might
have on other matters, we may all say to them that
here they will be friends among friends. They will
find themselves COluplet-aly at home.
.

5~3

27. The only other thing that I want to add-because
I am respecting your command, Mr. President, to be
brief-is that I hope that I shall be permitted to express. as the Prime Minister of a Common~alth
country, my own particular satisfaction in recording
the fact that not only has Nigeria now been admitted
to the United Nations but that, jf my electors tolerate
me sufficiently long, I shall look forward to seeing
the Prime Minister of Nigeria at the next Conference
of Commonwealth Prime Ministers in London.
28. Mr. NESBITT (Canada): In company with the
other members of the Commonwealth. I am. very
pleased to congratulate and warmly welcome Nigeria
on its admission to the United Nations. It is a most
fortunate md happy circumstance that the Prime
Mi'nister of that country and the members of his
Cabinet ha've been able to be present here in the Assembly on this great occasion.
29. I think it most appropriate that I should recall
the record of Nigeria's progress towards independence. This record reflects the responsibility and high
statesmanship shown by the Nigerian leaders and the
harmony and co-operation existing between Nigeria
and the United Kingdom. These two countries together have thus contributed much to the United
Nations, and indeed to the world~
30. In extending its welcome to Nigeria, Canada
offers its sympathetic interest and affirms its faith
in Nigeria's future as a great African state and as a
staunch supporter of the United Nations.
31. It must be a source of justifiable pride to the
people of Nigeria that the transformation from colony
to statehood has been accomplished in an atmosphere
of dignity and good will. reaching its culmination last
Saturday on Independence Day. The Canadian delegation to that celebration has sent back a glowing
account of the occasion. On achieving independence.
it happens that Nigeria has chosen to remain. within
the Commonwealth. This is an important event in the
post-war evolution of the Commonwealth association
of free and independent nations. This is indeed a
further development of the pattern which was established almost 100 years ago in the period of Canada's
evolution to independence within the Commonwealth.
32. In t.he United \Tations all countries have an
opportunity to express the concern of their peoples to
promote the objectives of the Charter, and countries
such as Nigeria and other middle Powers have a
particularly important contribution to make.
33.' This is a time when unusually heavy demands
are being placed on the leadership of the African
states. Nigeria is fortunate in having statesmen.
legislators and administrators whose personal qualities, training and experience will enable them to
serve it so very well. Nigeria also has the population
and the resources to enable it to maintain and further
develop its strength and stability. The voices of the
independent states of Africa, to which Nigeria's is
now added•. will be heard with growing attention in
meetings of the General Assembly and of other bodies
of the United Nations. This will be a fitting reflection
of Africa's increasing importance in international
affairs.
34. To meet the varying needs of its national life,
~: ;eria has adopted a federal system not unlike our
own in Canada. We 'are aware of t.he complexities of

Genera l Assem bly - Fifteen th Sessio n - Plenar y Meetin gs
s to the Nigeri an delegation seated here
such a Constitution and of the proble m of reconc iling we expres
st congratulationso We look forwar d
heartie
our
today
nationa l unity with diversi ty.
with the keenes t antioipation io a happy associa tion
35. Canada has already establi shed close links with
with it and to having, with abundance, the vitality and
firm
a
sh
establi
Nigeri a. Last April, in order to
of its contrib ution to the tremen dous task
foundation for future relatio ns with independent Ni- wisdom
before us for the welfar e and happin ess of
.
:~:
Lagos
geria, Canada appointed a represe ntative in
who on Independence Day becam e our High Comm is43. Mr. ADO-ADJEI (Ghana): My delegation, the
sioner in that capital..
delega tion of the Republic of Ghana, was grea'C1y
36. From time to time the Government and people of
ed and privile ged to join the sponso rs of the
honour
Canada have been very happy to welcome to our
draft resolut ion for the admiss ion of Nigeri a to mem..
countr y a numbe r of eminen t Nigeri an leader s. The
of the United Nations. It gives us the greates t
Canadian Government looks forwar d to the opport uni- bershi pre and sense of pride to be associa ted with this
pleasu
a
Nigeri
of
ment
ties for co-ope ration with the Govern
on which the Assem bly unanimously adopted
which the United Nations and the Commonwealth ocoasio n ion admitti ng the Federa tion of Nigeri a to
resolut
the
this
of
ion
associa tions will open to us. The admiss
in the United Nations.
newest nation to United Nations membe rship is a step membe rship
which today we are all markin g with the warme st
44. In the view of the Ghana delegation, the first day
enthus iasm and the highes t expectation.
of Octobe r 1960 is a day of momentous importance.
We do not look upon that day as markin g the birth of
with
is
It
37. Dato' KAMIL (Feder ation of Malaya):
a nation; we prefer to look upon it as the date ma;rksincer e joy and a sense of great honour that my
ing the beginning of the re-eme rgence , the rebirth of
the
of
ion
delega tion joins in sponso ring the a-dmiss
an ancien t people, an ancien t culture whioh has h~~
Federa tion of Nigeri a into this great family of nado:rmant ovo.ing to an accidl3nt in history for r .lore
n,
tions. Our two countr ies have many things in commo
than a century .
not the least ofwhioh is our heritag e of parliam entary
mem..
as
which,
with
law
of
rule
the
and
racy
democ
45. Thia .is part of the rebirth of Af!"ica, a !'ebirth,
bers of the Commonwealth nations , we are endowed
a liberat ion which began with the birth of Ghana, my
and on which foundation we aspire to build our nation.
own country . All Africa will take p't'ide in the fact
The backgr ound of our two nations are very simila r
that the people of the Federa tion of Nige!'ia, numbertoo, for Vie have divers ities of raoe, culture and
ing perhap s more than 40 million , have today assumed
we
ty,
diversi
and
religio n. And yet, throug h unity
their rightfu l place in interna tional life. Too long
have each attaine d independent nationhood in tolerhave the Federa tion of Nigeri a an~ other parts of
ance and tranqu illity.
Africa been delayed, too long has the 'W,:;rld been used
38. The independence of the Federa tion of Nigeri a is
to looking at itself fl'om a selecte d vantage point on
a stupendous landm ark in the history of the gloriou s
the face of the earth, and too long has this resulte d
resurg ence of the Africa n people s. The liberat ion of
in a distort ed view of what is actuall y happening, .
is
rule
l
colonia
British
from
a
Nigeri
of
the people
what the people s of the world want and what is to be
a shining examp le of the emerge nce of a dependent
done in the interna tional oommunity.
people into sovere ign nationhood by peaceful, oonsti 46. Perhap s I do not have to remind represe ntative s
tutiona l means for Which, I am sure, everlas ting
of
people
and
s
leader
the
to
both
due
that a large part of the ancien t empire of Ghana which
credit must be
flouris hed in the Wester n Sudan during the mediaeval
Nigeri a as well as to the British admin istrato rs a.."ld
•
period formed part of the territo rial area which now
Government.
s
compr ises the Federa tion of Nigeri a. On an occasion
st&.ilce
39. I can recall simila r very happy circum
like this, our minds go back into the glory of the
when my own countr y attaine d its independent sovehistori c past. Mocllarn Ghana salutes the Federation
reign status three years ago. No hatred nor enmity
of Nigeri a.
slept in its wake, bu.t friends hip, good will and mutual
respec t, which make the Commonwealth nations what .47. The people of Nigeri a and of Ghana enjoy close
they are today.
relatio ns. Having been colonie s under the same colonial Power , Gree-It Britain , Ghana and Nigeri a very
40. To the many million s of people s in Africa and
ion,
liberat
in their politic~l and constit utional lives shared
own
their
early
to
g
elsewh ere now still aspirin
common ideas, comm.on institu tions and common
the independen;::e of the Federa tion of Nigeri a must
tion.
inspira
and
aspirat ions. It is pertine nt to mention here that one
nt
surely be a source of encour ageme
of the foremo st politic al leader s of Nigeria , Mr.
Let us hope that this event will make a deep impres and
tible
irresis
Nnamdi Azikiw~ started his politic al life in my own
is
sion that the force of nationa lism
country , then known as the Gold Coast, whel'e he was
the sooner this is recogn ized the happie r the ciroum find
will
ms
a source of inspira tion to us, the modern youth of
stance s in which these outstanding proble
, in our' struggl e for Afrioa n emanoipation and
Africa
final solution.
independence. Contac ts between our respeo tive politi41. For the United Nations this is a day of boundl ess
leader s during that period .were fostere d through
oal
joy. With the admiss ion of the Feclera tionof Nigeria ,
such platfor ms as the Congre ss of· West Africa, the
this family of nations is the rioher by nearly 40
West Africa n studen ts Union of Great Britain and
million free people whose r-epresentation here will
Irelan d-of which I had the privile ge of being presicertain ly bring added wisdom and counse l, new
dent some time ago-an d other politic al organizations.
streng th and prestig e to this Organization.
More recent ly,suc h contac ts have been cemented not
only directl y by exchanges of visits but also through
42. On behalf of the Gover'nment and people of the
such forums as the All-Af rioan People s' Conference
Federa tion .of Malaya, my delegation warml y welthe Conference of Independent Africa n states.
and
oomes the new Federa tion of Nigeri a to our fold, and

524

. ~:

48. On the
have not
in continuot
such unde
searoh Inst!
Institute an
Large num
dents, busin
ful, happy a
My Govern
co-ope ratio
mutt,al inte
common asp
the Federa t·
African stat
African pe
affairs .
49. When
hope that 0
to the colon
of managin
inoopendenc
nail bas bee
ism and col
rejoicing, w
are still mi
.~rk<t. 80
been, SI) oft
the rE'd'~lt 0
some of us
of the event.
of colonial
years the sI
an Englishm
50. This oc
course of a
which is in
the Federa ti
can states t
meaningful
other parts
Africa, in
Angola-have

51. J wish t
cu-oun.,stance
aoverei~ st
wilUngn"ss
destined and
affairs. O!llce
Federation 0
United Nation
52. Mr. I<~i
privileged t
wealth count
Government
expressed fr
Government
ment of G~'3
present ocoa
dependent co
speaking on
Burma and N
53. We from
fled on this 0
evolution whi
India-t he op
dependent un

893:rd meeting - 7 October 1960

~e

~d

In

ld
3k
of

ie
ly
lie
n1St

!l;

~:

lis

ed
to
~i

lay

i

"'l~
~i

:)e.

.,
\

.of

1

~k-

10£

~!:.

lre

th,
my
act

3r-

Iled

[lng

of
sed
;on
,ted
lng,
lbe

'~i

. .~!

.

.vas
lich
9val
now
~ion

the
tion
lose
corery
Lred
mon
one
Mr.
own
was
~h of
.and
Uti-

ough
, the

and
'esiIons.
hot
ough
ence

",i

~:

j~

}(

T

,;1

,:~

48. On the praotioallevel. contaots and oo-operation
have not been wanting. Ghana and Nigeria have been
in continuous and mutually benefioial co-operation in
such undertakings as the West African Cocoa Research Institute, the West African Building Research
Institute and in other fields of scientific endeavour.
Large numbers of our respectivs countrymen-students, businessmen and ordinary people-lead fruitful, happy and full lives in our respective countries.
My Government is detarmined that these contacts and
co-operation should be further developed for our
mutt\al intereEit and benefit and in the interest of our
common aspirations. We shall continue, together with
the Federation of Nigeria and the other independent
African states, tQ ~!'ess on with the projection of the
African personality on the plane of international
affairs.
49. When we became independent in 1957, it was our
hOpe that our indepelldence would be one more proof
to the colonial Powers that the African was capable
of managing his own affairs. By the acoession to
independence of the Federation of Nigeria, another
nail has been hammered into the coffin of imperialism and colonialism. While this is an occasion for
rejoicing, we cannot be oblivious to the fact that there
are still millions of people who ~e not yet free in
.4.fr!::<t. So peaceful has the emergence of Nigeria
been, SI) often do we hear the process described as
the result of enlightened colonial administration that
some of us m:ay be tempted to forget the wal meaning
of the event. Some people talk of the past 100 years
of colonial administration. We forget that for 400
years the slave trade, which was in fact initiated by
an Englishman, John Hawkins~ was carried on•
50. This occasion is a victory, a real victory, in the
course of a long and difficult struggle, the end of
which is in fact not yet in sight. The independence of
the Federation of Nigeria, like +hat of all the African states that are now free, wj.ll only become truly
meaningful when all our brothers and sisters in the
other parts of Africa-in East· Alrica, in Central
Africa, in the Union of South Africa and also in
Angola-have become free and independent.

~j

il.

..:1
~;

x.>

51. I wish to say that the history of Nigeria lUld the
cb:cun.\stances of the emergence of Nigeria as a
sovereign state have established beyond doubt the
wilUngn"ss of the people of Nigeria to play the~.r
destined and significant role in modern international
affairs. O!l1ce agaj.n, the Republic of Ghana salutes the
Federation of Nigeria 8J\.j weloumes Nigeria to the
United Nations.
52. Mr. K:rishna MENON (India): My delegation is
privileged to be associated with other Com.,uonwealth countries and to be associated on behalf ef the
Government and people of India in the good wishes
expressed from this rostrum both to the people and .
Government of Nigeria and the peoples aud Government of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for the
present occasion when Nigeria has become an independent country. I have also the great privilege of
speaking on behalf of our neighbour countries of
Burma and Nepal, who asked me to do 130.
5S. We from India have special reason to feel gratifled on this occasion, because the current of political
eVolution which was released by the emancipation of
India-the oppressed colony of conquest-to be independent under cbe British Empire at that time,

525

that process, though sometimes obstructed by the
smaller-minded administrators, has progressed, and
today we have large numbers of these territories
which were formerly colonial countries that have
become independent. Not only have they become independent, but they have t . come independent on the
one hand, by the process of resistance, and, at the
same time, by following that resistance along routes
that are not violent.
54. In Africa, lhis curJ~ent manif{!sted itself in the
liberation of the colon:; of the Gold Coast, now the
great Republtc of Gha';la, which regained its territories that it had a thousancJ, years ago in the great
ELlpire of Ghana.
55. Now, Nigeria, though its nl:Ul1e and its pr~,~~mt
geographical boundaries art the result of those pages
of history which we desire to forget for the four
hundred years that preceded British settlement, and
though its territorial boundaries are the result of
imperial ocoupation and conquest, that land and its
peoples who were then resident there C2me into the
context of international relations in the first millenium before the birth of Christ. From the p<>rts of
Egypt and India sailed the ships of the Phoenician
Empire into Nigeria in order to conduct trade, and so
did the Carthaginians. So from all times there have
been relations.
56. And while one does not want to be romantic about
it, it is well to remember that when these new countries come into the context of what is popularly called
Western civilization, they come in, as my Prime
Minister described it the other da.y, with roots struck
deep into their own soils. Even in the history of the
last six or seven hunc:h'e-d yeal s, there have been
relations between established dynasties or :r~gimes
for the conduct of the new commerce.
57. There is at tha present moment a comparatively
unknown period between the Phoenician traders and,
so far as I know) the later period when the French
made an incursion into these te:rritories, only halted
by internal troubles in ~France itself. I woUld like to
draw the ourtain over the pel'iod that follows, because this is not the occasion for it. Then comes the
challenge to the R~~1;uguese monopoly, when the
Portuguese protested to King Edward IV of England
because some of his men had gone on to the coast of
Guinea and they said they had a Portuguese monopoly
in this area and no one should go there. So began the
conflict between empires, which is always the hope of
dependent peoples.
58. Then came the great liberal movements in England which were responsible-and I say this deliberately-which were responsible for the overthrow of
slavery and the liberation of a IU'gfl number of African peoples from the status they then had either in
their own homeland 01' in o~he):: parts of the world.
The . British Empire settled. Nigeria: the present
boundaries began gradually to emerge. It is a matter
for '1gratulation to the British people and a matter
of s....,03faction to the Nigerian people that, unlike
some ntllerparts of the world, their many institutions; tribal systems, and so on, for various reasons
which we nead not go into now, were left comparatively free and intact. The liberal administra~onof
West Africa enabled the emergence of the p:te.:'~nt
Federation with its territorial particularity and, at
the same time, a great sense of unity. I think, if the

..:a-,.

526

,._.~.,

...'

General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenary Meetings

United Kingdom will forgive me. it is an occasion nat
only to pay tribute to the British Government and
British state as such, and to the Nigerian people. but
also to the large number of liberal administrators of
West Africa-who are different from. the administrators in 8Qme other parts of the Empire who advocated the policy, though perhaps paternalistically. of
the participation of the peoples themselves.
59. Thus, we do not need to impose upon the secretary-General or anybody else the kind of burden that
the United Nations has had to undertake in the Congo.
because here are people educated. trained. and, perhaps, made to look forward to the assumption t'f
responsibility.
60. Nigeria is the largest o.f the 'dependent territories of West Africa in population and extent.
61. The relations of our own country with Nigeria

have been of an economic character. It is singular
that that area, like the rest of West Africa. is surprisingly free from any trace of racial discrimination. It is a happy thing that those countries of the
former British Empire which are now independent
and entirely independent members of an association
which we call the Commonwealth, where all power
and authority derives solely from their own people,
there is no racial discrimination in reverse. My own
countrywould dislike to see, either on account of past
history or on account of a newer form of colonialism, the emergence in any of these territories of a
practice against a non-indigenous minority which
recalls the "apartheid" practice in the Union of South
Africa. Discrimination ill one direction or another
is against the principles of the Charter and all elementary conceptions of human relationships.
62. Together, therefore, we welcome into this community of nations another great African territory, its
boundaries shaped perhaps by pages of history of
which everybody need not necessarily b~ prOUd-but
progress always has diverse elements in it-and they
come here through· progress made by their own
efforts very largely responded to, as tIleir leaders
said in the Conference in London, by the peoples and
the Government of the metropolitan country in various degrees. The number of the population liberated
in Mrica reached a total of 178 millions in the past
twenty years.
63. In 1950, there were only four independent countries in Africa-that is, counting the Union of South
Africa as an independent country by virtue of its
membership in the United Nations, not in the sense
that the majority of peoples are independent. Since
then have come some twenty-five countries, making
altogether a liberated population of 178 million out of
an estimated total of 220 .million. OUt of the older
colonial Empire of France. of four and a half million
square miles, and the colonial Empire of Britainsmaller in· extent, but larger in population-only
three-quarters of a milUon square miles remain.

64. This leads us to •the political aspects of this
case. because it is neither a credit to Britain, nor
to Nigeria, nor to Ourselves, to treat this occasion
merely as a sentimental expression of our views. The
liberation of Nigeria-indeed, as of the rest of the
countries-teaches us the lesson that there are no
people anywhere in the world who are not fitto govern
themselves.

65. Over a hundred years of peaceful administra..
tion have brought into existence a federation-and a
federation is a far more difficult political structure
to work than a unitary government-which is today
functioning. la the continent of Africa the struggle for
that independence has been carried on comparatively
peacefully. What justification on earth oan exist for
the continued domination and suppression of vast
territories either by one country over another?
66. The United Nations. therefore, can point to all
these territories as witness of the success of its
gospel and also as justification for the demand that it
must make upon other colonial countries.
67. At the end of the year perhaps others also will
join until on that great continent which has now become so significant in the history of the development
of peoples there alone will remain the empires of
Portugal and of South Africa dominating other peoples.
We have not the slightest doubt that the sense of
liberty and the passion for freedom that rests in the
minds of peoples. the example of the greatness of
these nations, their proximity, and the developmenteconomic. social and spiritual-they will make will
be a force which no empire in the world can resist.
This is the hope that we must have today, and I, on
behalf of my Government and the people of India and
of my colleagues of Nepal and Burma, tender congratulations to Nigeria and to the Government of the
United Kingdom, and to the United Nations itself. for
being able to welcome to our ranks a new nation with
new contributions to make.
68. The PRESIDENT: There are still sixteen names
on the list of those who wish to express their welcome to the Federation of Nigeria. For the benefit of
those who were not present when the meeting began,
may the Chair again express the hope that speakers
will endeavour to limit their interventions to a maximum of four minutes so as to leave sufficient time
for the speech of the Prime Minister of the Federation of Nigeria, who will address the Assembly after
the speeches 6f welcome have been concluded.
69. Mr. SHANAHAN (New Zealand): The advent of
new Members to membership of this Organization is,
I believe, one of the most distinguishing features of
this Assembly, but the entry of our newest Member,
Nigeria. is an occasion of particular pleasure to the
New Zealand delegation. It is a pleasure, first, because it has attained its independence in such conditions of harmony, good will and maturity and a
pleasure also because it has chosen the road of interdependence as a member of the Commonwealth. I
emphasize "inter-dependence" because, while proper
emphasis is, and must be, placed on nationalism,
the road of inter-dependence, which our own United
Nations symbolizes in a special way. is, 1 believe,
the highest expression of nationalism.
70. Nigeria is a nation of great material power,
being among the most populous and relatively most
developed in the continent of Africa. Nigeria has
attai:led its independenoe in good order, an order,
indbed,· which gives evidence of those moral qualities
of which Lord Home spoke. qualities which give us
the fullest assurance that Nigerill will not only be a
colourful ornament to this Assembly, but a country
which v.1.11 make a thoughtful and valued contribution
to the wider councils of this Organization. Nigeria is,
I believe. born to greatness, and that is true not only

baoaus
try wit
geria i
world
mark 0
71. Fi
again 0
Zealan
enee b
hopes f
of Nige
72. M:;
is my
behind
73. It
of a nat
great
admiss
doing I
the del
the run
vestige
eats in
duty bo
zation.
74. Th
ment ~
large f
aspect,
the ema
turn ou
of the
very ha
the a
United
Nigeria
togethe
It is a
share
is a na
largest
that its
progres
will ena
Africa a
75. Th
this Org
for whi
equally
numero
nation.
76. Wit

hearing
nations.
with it i
Nations,
about an
and they
improvi
people.
77. We
tion wit
that uniq
out reg
On this
responsi
half of

893rd meeting - 7 October 1960

straand a
loture
today
le for
tively
st for
vast

to all
of its
~hat it

0 will

'Wbe-

pment

res of

oples.

nse of

in the
of
nente will

~ss

~esist.

d I, on
la and
~ oonof the
U, for
In with

names
r welLefit of
began,
eakers
maxi-

It time
ederayafter
rent of
;ion is,
lres of
~mber,

I to

the

st, beh con. and a
, interlalth. I
proper
lalism,
Uni~ed

,elieve,
power,
y most
~ia has

order,
Llalities
give us
11y be a

country
~iblttion

aria is,
lot only.

because the Federation is a vast and populous country with great natural wealth, but also because Nigeria is rich. in human resources and steps onto the
world stage with a poise and maturity which is the
mark of true nationhood.
71. Finally, I welcome this opportunity to expl'ess
again on behalf of the Government and people of New
Zealand our pleasure at the attainment of independ..
ence by Nigeria and to express also Ot':i' warmest
hopes for the well-being and happiness of the peoples
of Nigeria and the greatness of their country.
72. M:;,'. BHUTTO (Pakistan): The President's wish
is my command, and in deference. to it I have left
behind a substantial part of my speech.
73. It is true that on 1 October there was the rebirth
of a nation, as history is rich in evidence of Nigeria's
great and glorious past. Today, we rejoice in the
admission of Nigeria to the United Nations, and in so
doing I speak not only for my delegation, but also for
the delegations of Turkey and Iran. Colonialism. is on
the run in Africa, and we are confident that soon no
vestige of it will remain. It is a malignancy which
eats Into the vitals of human values and mankind is
duty bound to eradicate it from the fair face of civilization.
'
74. This has been a year of crisis as well as fulfilment for the United Nations. The crisis may loom
large fo:!' the time being and over-shadow the other
aspect, but ultimately and in the larger perspective
the emancipation of many millions of people may well
turn out to be of greater significance than the crisis
of the moment. Therefore, the Pakistan delegation is
very happy to join other Member states in welcoming
the admission of the Federation of Nigeria to the
United Nations. We are especially happy to welcome
Nigeria because of the numerous ties that bind us
together. Nigeria is a member of the Commonwealth.
It is a country with whose p.eople my countrymen
share a common spiritual and cultural heritage. It
is a nation of approximately 40 million people, the
largest in the continent of Mrica. We are convinced
that its political stability, its economip potential, its
progressive outlook and the quality of its leadership
will enable it to play that great role in the affairs of
Mrica and the world which all of us expect it to do.
75. The Vitality and the wisdom which it brings to
this Organization, the high moral and spiritual values
fOr which it stands, will enrich the Organization as
equally they will enable Nigeria to overcome the
numerous problems which face a newly independent
nation.
76. With great interest, we will look forward to
hearing the voice of Nigeria in the assembly of
nations. We look forward to closer co-operation
with it. in the numerous tasks which face the United
Nations, foremost among them the need for bringing
about an atmosphere of peaceful existence so that we
and they may be able to devote our full energies to
improving the social and economic conditions of our
people.
77. We look forward at the same time to co-operation with Nigeria in the Commonwealth of Nations, in
that unique association of free countries united without regard to limits of geography, creed or colour.
On this occasion, when Nigeria assumes the solemn
responsibilities of.. membership, may I again, on behalf of the people and Government of Pakistan aJ,ld

527

also on behalf of the delegations of Turkey and Iran,
extend our warmest good wishes.
78. The PRESIDENT: The Chair announced a few
minutes ago that there were still sixteen speakers on
the list. Of that number, two have since spoken and
twenty-two other delegations have inscribed their
names. It will be clear to the ASSEmbly that if all
those delegations were to speak, the Prime Minister
of the Federation of Nigeria would not have an oppvrtunity of addressing the Assembly this evening. I
would therefore suggest to the delegations who have
put their names on the list the possibility of comerring among themselves and grouping their .interventions in such a way as to enable the Prime Minister
to take the floor not later than six o'clock this
evening.
79. Mr. LOUW (Union of South Mrica): I shall keep
well within the generous limit of the foUi" minutes
which the Preatdent allows for speeches on an occasioD. of this kind.
80. The present session of the General ASl:!embly
has written a new chapter in the history of the United
Nations by admitting sixteen new Members, of which
fifteen are from our continent of Africa. The Assembly today unanimously approved the admission of yet
another new Member from Africa, the Federation of
Nigeria, which is not only a leader among the African
states but also a member of the Commonwealth. My
delegation was glad to be able to be a co-sponsor of
the draft resolution submitted to the Assembly•. We in
South Africa have followed with great interest the
growth of Nigeria to nationhood and independence.
It has been a sure and steady growth in which the
people of Nigeria have been acquiring the political
experience, the skills and the technique and also the
economic viability which are so necessary for ~he
exercise and enjoyment of true freedom.
81. May I at the same time congratulate the United
Kingdom on the very important part it has played in
Nigeria's evolution to nationhood and independence.
Todri.y is a proud day not only for Nigeria but also
for the United Kingdom.
82. We are .confident that Nigeria will make a'VaIu...
able contribution to the work of this Organization
and, consequently, to the attainment of that much
desired goal, the peace of the world and, in particular, of Africa. In welcoming the delegation of Nigeria
to this Assembly and in extending to the Government
and the people of Nigeria good wishes for the future,
the Government of the Union of South Africa looks
forward to continued friendship and also to fruitful
co-operation with this great African state in regard
to all matters of common concern.
83. Mr. WILCOX (United states of America): This
morning in the Security Council, Secretary of State
Herter, spoke at sOlne length about the reasons why
the United states considers this such an auspicious
day. It is Nigeria's day at the United Nations, and
there could not be very many better reasons for joy
than that. But as Secretary Herter said this .morning,
we believe that Nigeria's day here gives us also
the occasion to contemplate the truly remarkable
renaissance that is going on in all of Africa and.to
applaud the vital forces of liberty and national dignity
which are reaching floodtide tllere. Indeed, I Will gO
so far as to say that the rar,Jid'advanceof political
freedom in Africa constitl!tes one of themostim-

528

General Assembly - 'Fifteenth session - Plenary Meetings

portant developments of this twentieth century. Never
before in history have so many independent states
emerged upon the world scene in such a short period
of time. We in the United" states cannot help but be
profoundly moved by these developments. Many millions of our citizens have their racial origin in
Mriea. The United states itself is a young country.
We know from intimate experience what it means to
forge a nation from a population of diverse origin and
experience. We lmow also from first-hand experi\9nce
of the exhilaration which can come from hard work
and co-operative effort which newly-won independence can inspire.
84. Nigeria begins its national life with a great
many advantages and with a great many friends. We
ha\-e just heard warm speeches of welcome from
Nigeria's partners in the Commonwealth. The, United
states salutes the United Kingdom and the o;;her mem~
bel'S of the Commonwealth on this significant day
when the newest member enters tne_United Nations.
But most of all, we bid a w?~ili and cordial welcome
to Nigeria, to its people and to its leaders, and we
look forward to a \"aluable and co-operative associa~
tion with Nigeria in the important work of the United
Nations. In our country we have watched Nigeria's
progress towards independence with great attention
and admiration. We extend our hearty congratulations
and our sincere best wishes to the Government and
the people of that great land for continued progress
in the years that lie ahead.
85. Mr. SHUKAIRY (Saudi Arabia): In this turbulent
era of international tension, a moment of joy breaks
through into our midst, confirming man's faith in his
own liberty and dignity. At last the Federation of
Nigeria is with us, fully independent and fully aovereign. AnG how great it is to attain independence! How
great it is to achieve sovereignty! However, this
moment is to be enjoyed not only by the pl~ople of
Nigeria, but equally by all peoples represel1.ted in
this Organization. ·For the people of Nigeria, nlltional
independence is the greatest triumph ever ncored
in its. history. For the United Nations, it is one
victory in the battle for freedom, in th~ march to
universality, without which the United Nations cannot
lay claim to either its title or its name.
86. This is, therefore, a worthy occasion for all of
us in .the United •Nations to extend our greetings to
the Federation of Nigeria and to express our warmest
congratulations to its Government and its people.
Also, this is an occasion for the United Nations to
express its hope to see all the peoples of Africa fully
independent and fully sovereign. The.·Federation of
Nigeria happens to be the·ninety-ninth Member of the
United Nations: we pray that Algeria may be the
hunc:iredth Member oUhis Organization.
87. We are particularly glad, however, that the
Federation of Nigeria has given full testimony of its
independence just at the dawn of admission to the
United Nations. In an interview with The New York
'rimes this morning, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa,
the Prime Minister of Nigeria, .has declared that his
country has no intention of allying itself with any
bloc, East, West or neutral. This is dignified and
talented advice coming from a new nation to the old
nations. We rejoice that the Prime Minister of Nigeriahas emphasized that he does not even join with
the neutrals, for. the neutrals here in the United
Nations are not a bloc. Many partioular moment, on

any specific problem. the neutrals often find themselves in one camp for a worthy cause common to
all, and that is the nature of their grouping, and
nothing else.
88. As a matter oi fact, the policy declared by the
Prime Minister of Nigeria is so inspiring that it
could be made to become ilart and parcel of the
Charter of the United Nations. This policy of Nigeria
as stated. by the Prime Minister of Nigeria, whom
we are honoured to have. seated with us here in the
Assembly hall, has been phrased in tha foilowing
words: "We are against any blaoe. because the whole
pl'Xpose of the United ~:ra.nons is to establish the
Organization. to work for peace j\n the world and the
haTmin~ss of m.ankindll • This is independence in its
reallty. This is sovereignty in its purity. Independence is not a flag ho;~sted; sovereignty is not a national anthem to ~ chanted. But sovereignty and
independence mean independencEI of thinking and
sovereignty of action. We salute from this rostrum
the Prime Minister of Nigeria flor his independent
thinking and for his sovereign judgements. I have
stressed this point, for this is the burning issue now
in Mrica.
89. In the introduction to his annual report, the
secretary-General said the following:
" ••• in Mricll. the first beginnings. can now be
seen of those conflicts between ideologies and
interests which split the world. Africa is still .•• a
virgin territory which many"-and these are the
words I am stressing-"have found reason to believe can or should be won fer their aims and
interests." [A/4390/Add.1, p. 1.]
90. Nothing could be more grave and more honest
than these words of the Secretary-General. Althtmgh
lack of tact, lack of wisdom, on the part of the major
Powers of the West have unjustly brought the Secretary-General into the arena of the cold war with the
Soviet Union, this is an occasion for me to pay warm
tribute to the. Secretary-General for his admirable
evaluation of the situation in Mrica. This warning
uttered by the Secretary-General makes of. Mr.
Hammarskjold not only a worthy chief executive of
tha United Nations, but a great citizen of this world
of ours.
91. Mrica is really at the threshold of conflict between ideologies and interests. The Secretary-General, out of diplomacy or some other reason, did not
lSay what we can all say here, that Africa is now
caught in the conflicts of ideologies between the East
and the West. The Secretary-General has pronounced
a warning, and ·the Prime Minister of Nigeria has
provided the answer. We applaud the warning: we
applaud the answer,and we rest in the hope that
Mrica shall be neither West nor East, but shall be
always completely independent and fltllysovereign.
92. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (translated. froD!.
Spanish): The· admission of the Federation of Nigeria
to the United Nations has a special significance for
the Latin American group, because we believe that
its inclusion in the international community will help
to translate into reality the ideals of peace and JUStice that the Mrican and Latin American peoples hold
in common.
93. The Federation of Nigeria makes its entry into
international life with a firm and confident step. Its

94.

ence
eo-o
Fade
has
weal

ackn
cont
depe
of a
diet
95.
the p
geria
tions

893rd meeting - 7 October 1960

d themtnml)n to
ping, and

ed by the
g that it
el of the
Nigeria
a, whom
Ire in the
fi>l1owing
he whole
blish the
d and the
cein its
ndependnot a nagnty and
dng and
rostrum
lependent
~. I have
ssue now

~ort,

the

n !\ow be

gies and
ltill ••• a
~ are the
In to beaims and

re honest
Althbugh
;he major
le secrer with the
~ay warm
~dmirable
I warning

of Mr.
Icutive of
lits world
nflict beary-Genn, did not
ca is now
lthe East
'onounced
~ria has
rning: we
hope that
; shall be
~reign.

ed from
If Nigeria
cance for
lieva that
will help
land juslples hold
~ntry.into

; step. Its

constitutional Government has shown a degree of
seriousness, responsibility and foresight whi.Jh justifies the highest expectations with regard to its work
in solving the economic and socia! problems of the
Nigtlrian people. We believe also that its contribution
t.o the tasks of this Organization and its influence in
the solution of the grave problems ('f mankind will be
a most constructive one.
94. We welcome the fact that Nigeria's illdepende:nce has been attained through an orderly process of
co-operation between the United Kingdom and the
Federation of Nigeria, and that this sovereign entity
has decided to form part of the British Commonwealth of Nations, which has, as we cannot fail to
acknowledge on this occasion, made such valuable
contributions to the United Nations. .With the independence of Nigeria, Africa· hoists· one more flag
of a worthy and independent state for which we predict honour, progress and glory.
95. On behalf of the Latin Am.erican group, I have
the privilege of extending to the Government of Nigeria a warm welcome and the heartiest congratulations ll!y.Jn its admission to the United Nations.
96. Mr.KHEffi (SUdan): I request the President's
permission to repeat from this rostrUm to the
Government and people of Nigeria the heartfelt congratulations of the Government and people of the
Sudan, and also of the Government and people of Iraq,
which my friend the l"epresentative of Iraq has asked
me to extend.
47. I have another reason. That is, to compensate
myself personally for a missed opportunity. But for
the journey to the United Nations-, I would have jomed
!he enr>rmous crowds that rushed from Khartoum to
Lagos. SUdanese and Nigerians alike, led by the
Minister of Education of the Republic of Sudan, in
order ·to participate in the celebration· of the independence of Nigeria,which is-a thrilling occal~ion,
and particularly thrilling to the people of the Sudan.
The occasion is· partiCUlarly thrilling to us because
of the relations that started from time immemorial
between the two peoples. When caravans ,of Nigerians
passed through Chad into the Sudan on their way to
pilgl"image, the· motive was noble and the Meal-ion
was very social. The relations which grew between
the two communities were friendly and. everlasting,
so that a great number of. Nigeriap.s are now living
permanently .in the SUdan and a good number of them
have already become.natura.lized Sudanese.
98. In the United Nations, and also in the community

of African states which are independent, I am <:Jonfident that Nigeria· will play an effective and. constructive roleandlielp in the emancipation of Africa
and that it will also develop a\Tery constructt~e
policy. 1· have had the experience of seeing some of
their .statesmen, whether· in the ·Economic Commission for Africa or in one of theconi:ei'enees of
independent African states.
99. I hereby give my congratulations to Nigeria and
salute its people.
.
lOO.M;r.LOUTFl (United Arab Republic) (translated from· French): liis with the greatest pleasure
that. I take the rostrum today, on behalf of my OOle~tion and the delegations of Afghan.istan and Yemen,
to add o1U'congratulations to. those offered to the
Federation of Nigeria on the occasion of its attain-

529

ment of independence and its admission to the United
NatioIlG. The m.ore so since Nigeria is an African
state like ours. a great African state by reason of its
population, area and reaources~
101. The United Arab Republic and its people have
followed with great interest the progress of Nigeria
towards independence and the negotiations which
culminated in the proclamation of that independence.
102. We offer to the Federation of Nigeria and to
the people of Nigeria our warmest congratulations
and our best wishes for their well-being and prosperity. We are confident that the Federation of Nigeria will make a valuable contribution to the work
of the United Nations. especially in the settlement of
au.esUcns concerning international peace and securitv. We trust that the other African nations which
are still struggling for their independence will sOOn
take thf';irplaces in the international community.
103. Mr. TOURE, Guinea, President ()f the Republic
of Guinea (translated from French): Nothing could be
more natural than for the Head of state of the Republic of Guinea to pay tribute, on behalf of his people,
to the Nigarian people which .has just. acceded to
independence arid national sovereignty.
104. Nearly a. year ago, speaking from this rostrum
[837th meeting] on the political situation in Africa, I
pointed out that scarcely· a third of the population of
Africa was represented among us. How great must be
the joy of all Africans, and of all nations which love
justice, that Africa is now represented by morethan
two-thirds of its population. What an impetus ,thiS
gives to the dynamic movements,both in Mrica and
throughout the world. bywhich all the national entities
who~· voices could not be heard in the past can now
come here and make.the.tr contributions to the building of a new world.
105. If the development of that which is good, beautiful, tl'ueanduseful is universally considered as
constitutingp:rogress, we may also . maintain that
the development of art individualistic outlook into a
national outlook, with consequent .stronger cohesion
within each society, and the eventual transformation
of this national outlookilito a universal outlook,
binding together all .mankind, are· the· outward signs
of the progress of men and of nations. That is why
every political liberation ·ofa .people is not. only of
benefit to that people, but represents an element of
universal progress in the e\Tolution of mankind.
106. We must pay tribute to the Nigerian people, for
it is the author of.its own progress. The true protagonists .are the Nigerian people and its repl'esenta,.
Uves, who, •. as faithful interpreters of iheaspirations
of the Nigerien masses,have peen abl~ to establiSh
underst~nding. relations with the representatives of
other peoples.
107~ We are linked to Nigeria n.ot by subjective considerations of race, religion or colour, but by history,
by the ,necessitfesof our paststruggle,and by a
common hope in the destiny of our peoples.
108. Nigeria is a word taken from the name of a
river which flows through West Africaj this rivlilr,
4,700 kilometres in length,· rises in Guinean ,territory. I was .born at tb.e very source ofthisriver, in
the . district called Faranah. It Is lmown that a policy
of deforestation· in the Republic of Guinea has immediate repercussions on the rainfall, and., conse-

530

General Assembly -Fifteenth Session - PlenaTY Meetings

quently on economic conditions, in· the Sudan, the
Niger, Nigeria, the Republic of Senegal, the Upper
Volta, and other countries, as most of the rivers
flowing through thesa oountries rise on the natinnal
territory oi Guinea.
109. But geography alone does not suffice to explain
the joy which we feel on the occasion of the independence of Nigeria and particularly on its admission to
the United Nations.· What links us most closely is our
common experience of the hard realities of the world,
and of the cruelty-with which we were treated during
a dark period in OUT history. What liIlkg us further is
that our· message to 1ihe people of the world is a
message not of hatred, or of egoism, but of understanding and friendship,

110. Let us turn our backs on everything which
hindered our em.ancipation, which threatened the
normal exercise of our liberty; let us look with hope
to abetter future resulting from the establishment of
co-operative relationships between our ~oples and
all otherpeQplas, relationships transcending considerations of colour, race, or religious philosophy.
It is .our wish that the African, the European, the
A.,~an and the American should work to create the
universal man. This is the role, the historic mssion
of an assem.bly bearing suehgreat responsibilities as
yOlkS, namely the United Nations.
111. Today. independence is being celebratl:ld.not
only in Nigeria, b..>tl>:! seventeen countries whichhave
just gained their freedom. We send our fraternal
greetings to all these new independent and sovereign
states~

11~. Let. US remind everyone that the different
circumstances in which peoples accede to sovereignty
matter little. What matters, above all, is the way in
which the regained sovereignty is exercis.ed in the
name of the people and for the people; what matters
above all is the special qualities that each nation can
and must contribute to consolidate the foundations of
democratic progress in the world and ensure decisive
victory in the battle for peace. We may say therefore
that independence means "awareness" ~above all.
Awareness of a nation's responsibility to safeguard
its own personality and to develop its own civiliza.tion and culture, awareness of exercising the attributes .of sovereignty for the benefit of mankind, both
nationally and in a wider sphere.

113•. We are convinced that the .relative superiority
of nations can no longer be based on the colour oUhe
skin,~r on wealth,but rather on the quality oftheir
contribution to human happiness. Just as in a nation
men are. not .. graded by their height or size but by
their national·lInportance, ·we are a little snrprisedand we should. like others to recognize this-that
some people, Whilst applaUding Nigeria's independence, .do not emphasize.·the· victory of Africa as a
whole, the victory of all the peoples of the world. but
stress what is· peculiar to Nigeria as opposed to the
other African states.

114.. We read!Jl the press that this great colossus of
35 million people 'will soon enter theUnlted Nations
and .. take on. the role of leadership in Afriea. Some
say that Ghana is afraid of Nigeria; others that the
countries of the. French Community are also afraid
of Nigeria, and so forth.
.

lb. Those who speak of 3!l million Nigerians never
mention the 650 million Chinese, or demand that
China should be represented here. We are not COIl.cerned with numbers, but with quality, The evolution
of the world cannot be limited to an appreciation of
numbers, race or colour. W~ are seeking truth and
beautyi whether that truth be uttered by a European,
an American, an Asian or an African. Our dignity
requires that we approve the triumph of truth over
untruth, jl.\stice over strength, and equality over the
arbitrary disqUalifications which have diminished the
importance of men and of peoples up tothis day.
116. We welcome all the new states and we thank
. this great Assembly which has accepted them, thus
showing its high confidence in the common destiny
of all· peoples and in the· better future in store for
Africa. In the· sphere of political and moral thought,
as well as in economic and social development, our
continent can now voice its message, which cannot
but contribute to the harmonious development of
mankind.
117. Time is short and I will not weary you further, .
as I shall have the opportunity, during the general
debate, of discussing all these problems-problems
of the exercise of sovereignty in our cOtmtries, the
difficulties which still beset us and imperil the enjoyment of our young liberties, the agonizing· problems of Algeria and of the Congo and the views· of the
Republic of Guinea on the important subjects which
have been placed on the agenda of this session by
vat ious speakers and Heads of state.

1
e
c

e

I

118. In thanking the Assembly, we would expres!,! in
conclusiOn our great confidence in the destiny of our .
peoples and our high hope that the United Nations will
historically play an ever-increasing part in bringing
about the final triumph of justice, liberty and solidaJ"ity in democracy and peace.
119. Mr. M'HAMMEDI (Morocco) (translated from
French): I do not come to the rostrum in ,order to
welcome such a great nation as the Federation of
Nigeria; that would be presumptous on my part.. I
come to thank it for joining us, to express our joy at
finding again our brothers whose place was empty
and to celebrate with them freedom, dignity and
independence.
120. I need not emphasize-for others have done so
before me and others will do so after me-how much
we have gained and how much we are enriched. I need
scarcely mention the size, the population, the economic resources of the new state. But one elementary
factor must be mentioned: the human factor. As other
more authoritative voices have said before·me, N'igeria is noted for the public spirit of its population
and the maturity of its ISlite, and its accession to
independence is, in It sense, only a return to its
native climr.i;e of .libel\'ty; it crowns the struggleofa
people .wh:'.ch, 'since losing its independence, has
never ceased to strive towards it and has finally
regained it.
121. I cannot forget, as an African,that our continent is not fully represented here; that our continent,
which has felt a breath of freedom and independence,
must, with human dignity, tolerance. and frien4ship,
sweep away the laet traces of foreign occupation,I
welcome in anticipation the peoples who will soon
join us here to enrich both our heritage and the
United Nations.

i
r
c

s
p
~

893rd meeting - 7 October 1960

----------------,.--_.53]

gerians never
demand that
are not conThe evolution
ppreciation of
king truth and
by a European,
n. Our dignity
of truth over
uality over the
diminished the
this day.
and we thank
ed them, thus
)mmon destiny
r~ in store for
moral thought,
veIopment, our
, which cannot
levelopment of

122. Mr. MAZUROV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Rtmsian): The delegations
of Albania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Rome.nia, the
Soviet Union, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
and Czechoslovakia, as well as .myo"W'1l delegation,
have al;ked me to express on their behalf, tha~ is on
behalf of the sccialiat coum"ri.es, their warm satisfaction at the admission to the United Nations of yet
another independent African state, the Federation of
Nigeria,
123. It gives us great pleas1AI'e to welcome the
Federation of Nigeria, for the peoples of the socialist
countries have always supported the people of Nigeria
in their struggle for national liberation from the ageold slavery of colonialism. The emergence of a new
independent state in Africa once again demonstrates
beyond all doubt that the very existence of the in~
famous system of colonialism is historically doomed.
We are profoundly convinced that the day is not far
off when the long-suffering continent of Africa win be
entirely free of all forms of colonial oppression.

ry you further, .

ng the general

ems-problems
, cOl,mtries, the
.mperil the en.gonizing· prob:he views' of the
subjects which
this session by

I

ould express in
~ destiny of our .
:edNations will
)art in bringing
Jerty and soliranslated from
in .order to
l Federation of
on my part. I
lress our joy at
.ace was empty
m, dignity and

~Uln

rs have done so
, me-how much
mriched. I need
.ation, the ecoone elementary
:actor. As other
before me, Ni)f its population
Its accession to
a return to its
he struggle of a
ependence, has
and has finally
that our cQntiLt our continent,
d independence,
and friendship,
:n occupation. I
I who will soon
eritage andthe

124. Nigeria's road to independence has not been an
easy one. The Nigerian people will have many difficulties to OVE,rcome before they can put an end to the
economic backwardness resulting :n-om long colonial1st domination. Nigeria is an -ancient· country with a
rich cultural heritage. At the same time, It is a large
country, wilth a population of 35 million, and possesses rich natural resources and potentialities.
These resources must now belong to the industrious
people of Nigeria themselves. That is a prerequisite
for the existence and development of every people.
125. We are confident that the Nigerian people MU
soon overcome the difficulties that stand in the way
of eliminating the last vestiges of colonialist domination and in the way of developing their :t1ational economy and culture. We whole-heartedly ..l:;'lh t.he people
of Nigeria national prosperity "and democratic development. The socialist countries wish to assure
the' Government and people of Nigeria that in their
efforts to strengthen their independence, and to reinforce peace and co-operation among nations, they
'will always meet with understanding and friendly
support in the socialist countries.
126. The delegations of the socialist countries express the hope that through its participation in the
work of the United Nations the Federation of Nigeria
will .make a worthy contribution to the cause of
strengthening peace and security among nations.

127. Mr. LW (China): It is 1." mere sense offormality that· prompts the delegation of China to join
in extending a warm welcome to the Federation of
Nigeria•. Only a few days ago, and again in the general debate this mOl"ning, my dele~ation laid stress
on the emergence of the African states as' an event
of unprecedented importance. This important event
which stirs the imagination of free peoples everyWhere is now crowned bythe admission of the Federation of Nigaria, with all its attributes of a modern
democracy.
128. This is a proud moment indeed not only for the
great continent of Afri.ca and for the British Commonwealth, but also for the United Nations which, by
its Charter, emphasis on the progressive· development of free institutions and towards independence,
has in no smt111 measure helped to acceler"~te the

prQaess by which the peoples of Africa have been
ushered into full nationhood in rapid succession.
129. We::tre confident that the Federati.on of Nigeria
will bring added strengl:h to this Organization and
that it will c011tribute greatly toward the building of
a world order in which Illl peoples without distinction
as b race or religion will live together in peace and
plenty, and, above all, in freet1om.
Mr. Nesbitt (Canada), Vice-President. took the
Chair.

130. Mrs. MEffi (Israel): This is certainly a great
day for all of us, all the people in the world who love
freedom and wish mankind well. I wish, on behalf of
the people and Government of Israel, to congratulate
the Federation of Nigeria on its independence and its
entrance into the United Nations.
131. It is a great occasion for me personally because it was my particular privilege and pleasure to
have visited the great country of Nigeria two years
ago. As I saw and felt the joy and optimism of the
people of Nigeria, the extraordinary ability and the
absolute devotion of its leaders to the cause of
the people, led in this path by their great. Prime
Minister, as I visited their institutions of health and
higher learning, as I saw and felt the fervour of the
entire people for rapid development of the country,
I could not but carry away the feeling that this was a
country already free and independent in spirit. I feel
that thiS day is not only a great day for the- Nig-erian
people, and not only is it important for the contribution that the Nigerian. Federation will undoubtedly
make to the United Nations as a whole, but I am
convincf'd that Nigeria's membership in the United
Nations vill be a great factor in the acceleration. of
the independence and freedom of all the states that
are not yet with us in this Assembly.
132. I wish to congratulate the Federation of Niggria
and I wish to congratulate the United Nations and wish
it many and speedy retUl'ns of days like this.
133. Mr. BARNES (LiberiA): Theadm1ssion of
another African state. the Federation of Nigeria, to
the United Nations is a source of pleasure and great
pride to the Liberian delegation. The Federation of
Nigeria thus becomes tht' sixi:')enth African State to
be admitted to the United Nations this year.

134. Nigeria gained its independ6nce in an orderly,
calm and. peaceflll manner.' This in itself is' a fine
. tribute to the perseverance, tenaciousness and sagacity .of the Nigerian leaders and also to the United
Kingdom, its former administering Power. On behalf
of my country and i1:s people, I extend warm. sincere
and fraternal congratulations and felicitations to the
Government of the Federation of Nigeria and its
people orl this bold step. and my delegation extends
a hearty welcome to the Nigerian delegation.
135. Nigeria, v..1thit~lvastterritory, its large populati.on,and its wealth of resources, as well as its
histori~al and cultural heritage, will make an important addition to this Orgarl..i.zation by playing a
valuable and effective role in the fulfilment of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.Nigeria's admission represents another victory in the
relentless struggle in Africa and other continents for
equality, hu.-n.an dignity and justice. In rejoicing over
the fact that some of the principles enunciated in the
ChaTtel', partinma:r.ly as they affect the right of self-

532

General Assembly - Fifteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

determination, are . '''dnning to be achieved, we
recognize that, as Ml.~rs of the United Nations, we
have assumed very heavy responsibilities as Afrlcans. But I am confident that we will shoulder these
responsibilities.
136. We have a unique opportunity to create new
international relationships which will not be cast in
the old moulds created by others to deal with different
problems. I ::tave no doubt that Africans will seize
tlrl.s opportunity and that we shall make important
contributions to a better world and to international
peace and security. That is our hope. Let us set about
our task.
137. Again I extend a cordial welcome to the Prime
Minister of the Federation of Nigeria and his delegation, on behalf of President Tubman, his Government and the Liberian people.
138. Mr. FEKINI (Libya) (translated from French):
The admission of the Federation of Nigeria to the
United Nations is a happy event which is welcomed
with the greatest joy bY'the delegation of the United
Kingdom of Libya. I take this opportunity of expressing, in the name of the King of Libya, his people
and his Government, the warmest and most sincere
congratulations to the people and Government of Nigeria on the accession of a new brother African state
to independence and sovereignty. I also offer the
best wishes ;)f my country and my delegation to the
Federation of Nigeria on the occasion of its admission as a state Member of the United Nations. In
greeting the br.s.ve Nigerian people and in paying tribute to the deep sense of responsibility and maturity
which has brought them, in dignity and peace, to the
attainment of their national aspirations, the Libyan
delegation wishes the Federation of Nigeria continued
success in its future development as an independent
sovereign state and a Member of the United Nations.
Libya, which is bound b~' cultural, spiritual and economic links and by tradil:ional bonds of warm friendship to the Nigerian people,· hopes that Nigeria's
independence will strengthen still more these fraternal relations, firmly founded on a long and sincere
friendship, fruitful co-operation and thebe!:>'t neigh..
bourly sentiments.
139. In repeating our best wishes for the prosperity,
progress and peace of t1le Federation of Nigeria,
its people and Government, on their attainment of
national independence and on their admission to the
United Nations, the Libyan delegation hopes that this
happy and historic event will speed the process of
liberation of all remaining dependent peoples, in
AfrIca and thrOl.~ghout the world.
140. Mr. ENCKELL (Finland):· The delegation of
Finland has the great privilege and honour of extending, together with its own, the most cordial congratulations and fraternal wishes of welcome of the
delegations of Austria, Denmark, Iceland, Irelau.d,
Norway and Sweden, tu the delegation of a new feHow
Member, the Federation of Nigeria. Our seven delegations take much pleasure in looking forward to
friendly and fl'uitful co-operation with the Nj.geri~n
delegation j.n the promotion of the common g;.)als for
the attainment of which we have \mdertaken to work
in subscrIbing to our Chatter.
141. In deciding unanimously to ac'l..:..nit the Federation
of Nigeria to membership in the United Nations, the
General Assembly has paid a well deserved tribute

the world. Their
Among all the Afl
t.'u'Ough Wlity is
down to us by the
wish to escape thE
the river" says a ]

to its great aohievements and to Hs willingness to
pa:t'ticipate in the work which this Organization has
the duty to do for the sake of hun,anity and our com...
mon future. This year the General Assembly has
taken more action to increas~ our membership than
during any previous single session. We welcome this
development and take pride in it.
142. Great new vistas of possibilities and promise
are now opening before us, and we sincerely hope
that we will all of us, in the spirit of unity, the very
name that our Organization calls for, dedi~ate ourselves together with yo<tr delegation and taking ad...
vantage of your valuable contribution to our essential
task as fellow nations on our planat, where so much
that would be beneficial remains to be done.
143. Mr. RAKOTOMALALA(Madagascar) (translated
from French): Several states recently admitted to the
United Nations, namely, the Republic of Cameroun,
the Central African Republic, the Republics of the
Congo (Brazzaville), the Ivory Coast, Dahomey,
Gabon, Upper Volta, Niger, Senegal, Toga and Chad,
as Vlell as the Malagasy Republic, have done me the
honour of asking me to speak on their behalf today at
this moving ceremony. On behalf of these Republics,
their Heads of state, their Governments, their Parliaments and their peoples, I congratulate the Federation of Nigeria on its accession to independence and
its admission to the United Nations.
144. Four of these States have a common frontier
with the Federation of Nigeria.-Cameroun, Dahomey,
Niger and Chad. These states have pe.,~fect unclouded
relations with their neighbour; one oi them, Cameroun, already maintains diplomatic relations with the
Federation. I wish therefore especially to expr6ss
the great joy of those peoples who, by reason of
geC?graphical proximity, and consequently of closer
brotherly ties, have particularly friendly relations
with each other. Where Nigeria is concerned, these
relations rise from human and economic contacts of
the greatest antiquity. I have, then, been asked 'by the
twelve states that I havs mentioned to stress how
significant is the entry into international life of a
state which is great, not only on account of its size
and population, but for the moral aad spiritual values
which make it particularly deserving of independence,
the greatest prize which a nation can win.

145. Like us, the Federation of Nigeria has re~
covered its independence in an orderly, harmonious
and dignified manner. Like us, it has been able to
provide a respected Government, an active andefficient administration, and all the essential machinery
of a mOcfern state. Like US'" it has been able to inspire
those feelings of unity, national pri.de, love of liberty
and true democracy without which the forward march
of a nation cannot proceed in harmony. Like us, it
has been able to mould a national soul and to breathe
into it faith and enthusiasm.
146. Throughout Africa, today's events will cause a
stir. Its significance will not be overlooked in our
towns and villages; Nigeria's entry into· the concert
of nations, following the entry of fourteen other Afri- \
can states and of Madagascar, means that Black
Africa, whose influence has for so long been nonEustent and latterly relatively weak, will now make
itb voice heard and express the point of view of
millions of human beings aware of their rights, but
aware also of their obligations towards the rest of

147. We are SurE
understand how vi
hand and with eyE
future, they will
Nations to ensure
world in harmony!

148. Mr. SOEBA
privilege for me I
my delegation and
the Philippines, O'
ment and people a
people, to associa:
pressed by the s
welcome the admi
nations which is th
that, as a Member
contribute much i
solutions. We are
we will benefit fI
ingenuity of thougl
that their entranCE
vitality and speedie

149. From that w
an independent co'
lems, Nigeria in e
inspiration to all
inqependent count
is solving its prl
technically or soc
advantage to othe
independent count
developed countrief
,.,

150. Apart from
emel68nce of Nige
the admission of -1means that we are
ment of the univer
all, human civiliza:
technical civilizati
the craftsmanship
expression of its a
a reflection of the
they have a sense
of justice for thei
justice for their fe
admission of Niger
progress in achievi
zation for everyboc
it should be regarc
baric, for one nati
One nation to exploi
151. Mr. ROSSIDI
Government and tt
hearty and cordial
and the people of Ni
152. In response t
time, and their spec
message of welcom
Nigeria from Gree,
in Nigeria have cre~

538

ag8r!! meeting - 7 October 1950

-------------the world, Their unity will give them great strength. 153. The advent of Nigeria is a. source of inspiration
Among all the African peoples, this idea of strength
t.'u'ough unity is often found in the sayings handed
down to us by the wisdom of our ancestors: "If you
wish to escape the crocodile. be many when crossing
the river" says a Malagasy proverb,
147, We are sure that the new Airican states will
understand how vital this unity is and t..llat, hand in
hand and with eyes fixed not on the past but on the
future, they will work together within the United
Nations to ensure the peace and prosperity of the
world in harmony and brotherl~r unity,
148, Mr. SOEBANDRIO (Indonesia): It is a great
privilege for me and a great pleasure, on behalf of
my delegation and also on behalf of the delegation of
the Philippines, on behalf of the Indonesian Government and people and the Philippine Government and
people, to associate myself with the reflections expressed by the speakers before me. We heartily
welcome the admission of Nigeria into the comity of
nations which is the United Nations. We are confident
that, as a Member of the United Nations, Nigeria will
contribute much in bringing about speedy and wise
solutions. We are confident that in our deliberations
we will benefit from their wisdom and from their
ingenuity of thought iu tlrls Assenlbly. We are sure
that their entrance will give our deliberations more
vitality and speedier progress.
149. From that we are also certain that Nigeria as
an independent country, Nigeria in facing its problems, Nigeria in solving its problems, will also give
inspiration to all of us, 'especially to the newly
independent countries. The methods by which it
is solving its problems-politically, economically,
technically or socially-will certainly be of greet
advantage to other nations. especially the newly
independent countries and the technically underdeveloped countries.
150. Apart from that, we all recognize that the
emel68nce of Nigeria as an independent country and
the admission of Nigeria in this Assembly hall also
means that we are progressing towards the establishment of the universality of human civilization. After
all, human civilization is not only a reflection of the
technical civilization, it is not only a reflection of
the craftsmanship of 1.ts people. it is not only an
expression of its art, of its culture, it should also be
a reflection of the characteristics of mankind, that
they have a sense of justice for everybody, a sense
of justice for their fellow human, and a sElnse of
justice for their fellow m:.tiG~s. For this reason the
admission of Nigeria means also that we are making
progress in achieving the completion of human civilization for everybody, for every nation. In our time,
it should be regarded as archaic, perhaps. and barbaric, for one nation to colonize other people or for
one nation to exploit other nations.
151. Mr. ROSSIDES(Cyprus): On behalf of the
Government and the people of Cyprus, I address a
hearty and cordial welcome to the .Prime Minister
and the people of Nigeria.
152. In response to the President's appeal to save
time, and their special request, I convey also a. warm
message of welcome to the people and Government of
Nigeria from Greece, whose many nationals residing
in Nigeria have created specj.al bonds. of friendship.

and encQnragemEmt to the United Nations. We are
happy .... welcome here one mora voitle from emel'ging
Africt'., <lnd one so virile and vigorous. Nigeria has
its ancient and progressive traditions and a civilization dating back to the Songhai Empire and will, in
many ways, be a ~at asset to the United Nations.
154. There is much in common between the people
of Cyprus and the people of Nigeria. Many Cypriots
live happily in Nigeria as devoted citizens of that
country, and they do so in a spirit of real brotherhood. We· and the Nigerians have both emer~d from
a colonial status and attained' independence almost
simuJtaneously. Above all, we have, and cannot but
have, the same outlooks and aspirations for world
freedom and peace, the same dedication to the United
Nations and, I trust, ~he same independent and objective approach to international problems, an approach based on the rights of, and justice for, the
common good. In this spirit, I hail with joy and
warmth the dynamic entry of free Nigeria to the
United Nations.
155. Mr. ALEMAYEHOU (Ethiopia): The delegations
of Japan and my own country have entrusted to me
the privilege of extending a hearty welcome to the
Federation of Nigeria on the occasion of its admission to the United Nations.
156. It is a source of gratification and satisfaction
for the Government and people of Ethiopia to see the
Federation of Nigeria attain its independence and be
admitted to the United Nations. As I have said on
other occasions, the independence of nation and its
admission to the community of nations are not in our
view a privilege, but a right, an inalienable right of
every nation which is able to discharge its international obligations and duties. It is our sincere hope
that the right of. independence and admission to the
great family of nations which has so, far been denied
to many nations in Airica :and elsewhere will begiveli
in time, and peacefully.

a

157. I am sure not only that Nigeria,. the most populous country In Africa, with its vast hum&n and
material resources, actual as well as potential, is
able to discharge its international duties and obliga~
tions prescribed in· the Charter, but also that it will
contribute to the solution of the many problems facing
Airica in particular, and the world in general.

158. I should like, therefore, on behal10fthe delegations of Ethiopia and Japan, to extend the most
sincere and hearty welcome to the Federation of
Nigeria on the occasion of its admission to the United
Nations and to wish Nigeria every success.
159. Mr.VIDIC (Yugoslavia):- The process of liberation now taking place in Afric.a is a positive and essentially historical process which, nO doubt, strengthens to a considerable degree the for.ces of the
international community in itsstrllggle for peace,
international security and deVe10!lment of international peaceful co-operation.
160.. The emergenc,e on the international scene of
such an important country as Nigeria constitutes
anoth~r very significant ,step towards the final
liquidation of the colonial system and ,towards the
strengthening of the positive. role played by the. new
independent countries in international. relations.,

....

.~-~._ ... ,_.-

,

General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenary Meetings

534

161. The great spiritual and matel'ial potentials of
this new Member of the United NaUons will, no doubt,
enable it to make a major contribution towards the
solving of outstanding international issues with which
the contemporary world is faced.
162. I wish to express here the nlost profound
friendly feeling of the Government and peoples of
Yugoslavia towards the Government and peoples of
Nigeria. We wish them much success in our common
efforts directed towards the implementation of the
purposes and principles of our Organization.

163. Mr. SANZ BRIZ (Spain) (translated from
Spanish): On behalf of the people and the Government
of Spain, I wish to associate myself with the eloquent
and cordial congratulations that have been addressed
to the Nigerian delegation upon the memorable occasion of the new African state's entry, as a Membel'. into this great Organization, to which we are
sure it will make an effective and brilliant contribution. This new contribution to the Organization's work
in the interests of world peace is doubly welcome to
us, inasmuch as Nigeria attains full sovereignty at a
time when its political and economic maturity make
it one of the most advanced and progressive countries of the African continent.
164. May your delegation to the United Nations count
many successes in its mission, and may your people
and your Government, to which we express our sincerest wishes for their prosperity and well-being,
join in the work of the community of countries of
gclod will that earnestly wish for peace.
165. Mr.

AMMOUN (Lebanon) (translated from
French): It gives me great pleasure to welcome, in
the name of Lebanon, the independence of the great
Federation of Nigeria, especially as our two countries were already closely linked in friendship before
either had attained independence. In accordance with
the President's wishes, I will not refer to the period,
thousands of years ago, when people of my country
circled the great African continent, without however
colonizing it, and gave to it the name of Ifrikia
which has been handed down to us hysucceeding
generations.
166. Today, several thousand Lebanese, settled in
Nigeria for more than a generation, are enjoying the
hospitality of that country and are working with the
Nigerians themselves in furthering its development
and prosperity. The Lebanese have thus shared •....ith
the Nigerians the cUfficulties and the joys of this
new African state's recent hisiory. They have boen
admiring witnesses of the long effort and sacrifiees
of the Nigerian people in attaining its independence
and freedom. They know that the Nigerians are worthy
of this freedom· and that their great country will be
a useful member· of the g-.reat family of free and in~
dependent nations.
167. With the admission of Nige.i'ia, the process of
emancipation of peoples and their entry into the
United Nations, on the basis of the principle of sovereign equality, takes on an accelerated rhythm. Our
ardent· wish is that this fundamentally human process
should, in the very near future, attain the objective
envisaged by the Charter of the United Nations,
namely; the liberatIon of all nations, in whateve't' part
of the world they may be, and of all men, to wh~ltever
nation they may belong.

.

'

Mr. Boland, Ireland, resumed the Chair.
168. Mr. MARTINO (Italy): The Italian reprel!lenta..
tive on the security Counoil was very glad this morning to join his voice with those of his colleagues in
that body in recommending the admission of the
Federation of Nigeria to the United Nations. It is with
particular pleasure and gratification that I now tuke
the floor also, ~n behalf of Belgitilll, Franoe, LuxG"'n"
bourg and the Netherlands, in addition to my own
country, to welcome this new state into our Organization.
169. The prestige of the Federation of Nigeria, this
large, industrious and promising (lountry "f Afrioa,
the achievements it has already won in many fields,
its innumerable economic potentialities, and Elspeot..
ally the very high standing which the leaders of
Nigeria enjoy in Mrica and throughout the worl~-all
these oonstitl..'1:e elements pointing to a most important role that th6 Federation of Nigeria will be able
to play not only in the continent of Afrioa but also
within the United Nations at large. We are encouraged
in this conviction by the manner in which the Federation of Nigeria has attained the st~tUf.l of an independent and sovereign nation through a process
of democratic and peaceful progress, ma.king it now
a constructive element in the international community. This new state, which ia a harmonious, federated compound of free and peace-loving peoples, has
developed a political awareness, an administrative
structure and, finally, a constitntion which gtlarantees
to all that it will be able to meet the requirements of
a modern nation based on the principles of freedom
and justice.
170. For all this, I think we must also express our
cnngratulations and our appreciation to the United
Kingdom, which has made it possible, through invaluable contributions in the moral and material
fields as well as through its far-sighted wisdom, to
bring the people of the Federation of Niger.ia to
independence. The acL.-nission of the Federation of
Nigeria constitutes one more evidence of success on
the part of the responsible nations in that continent
in striving to take their destinies into their own hands
in full harmony and in compliance with the rules and
laws of the international community. Through this
achievement of the Federation of Nigeria we register
another eloquent success on the part of the people a
of Africa, who I am sure will all COntribute to the
welfare of mankind, within the framework of our
Organization.
171. Alhaji Sir ABUBAKAR TAFAWA BALEWA
(Federation of Nigeria): Last Saturday the country
which I have. the honour to represent, the Federation
of Nigeria, became independent and assumed the
rights and responsibilities of a sovereign state. Today
Nigeria has been admitted to the United Na.tions and
assumes still more responsibilities.
172. On behalf of my countrymenin Nigeria I thank
you all most sincerely for accepting us as a fellow
Member of this Organization. We are ,properly grateful for this recognition and for the generous and
friendly gesture made by so many Members who sent
very distinguished delegations to join us in oelebrating our accession to independence. I am particularly
pleased that so many important representatives· (jould
come to Nigeria on that· occasion,because they will
be able to inform their Governments of the genuine '

desire whioh !'l
with you all.
173. Before p
many questions
it is better to
have accepted
national relatio
3S I have said
with all nations
of the United N
a large and a
has absolutely
tions. Thirdly,
l.md we are prOl
of 'the British
do not intend to
with any of th
uphold the prin
is founded. Fo'
other African
to assist in 01'1
of responsible it

174. It is perh
Africa first. W
aohieving OUI"
bitterness, and
proposals which

175. The recen
Congo must be
about that count
fl'ankly admit t
seemingly intra
to me. I am in
which the Const'
country was dr
formerly admin
degree of cons
Congolese peopl
consultation was
the provisions 0
that country, 0
administration
vincial and to the
176. Many other

require to be an
to the present
Constitution imp
by the Congolesf~
in the. country;
ohinery is availa
be decided upon b
theless, with the
us, we in Nigeri
factors to be con
the problem.
177. The first
fillowed to becom
struggle.' For this
a matter to be de
at the political le
178. Sf Qondly,
problem of creat
tll:Y itself it will
by seeing that 1
established, while
tlle oountry•

893rd meeting -- 7 October 196Q
desire whioh Nigeria has to have friendly relations
with you all.
173. Before proceeding to deal in detail with the
many questions which are of interest to my COl£ltl'y,
it 113 better to state briefly the principl~s which we
have accepted as the basis of our policies in international relations. First, it is the desire of ~':'\geria3S I have said already-to remain on frien<:U~r terms
with all nations and to participate actively inthe wol'lc
of the United Nations Organization. Secondly, Nigeria,
!\ lal'ge and a populous cou-lltry of over 35 millions,
has absolutely no territorial or expansionist intentions. Thirdly, we shall not forget our old friends,
lmd we are prOUd to have been accepted as a member
of ·the British Commonwealth. But, nevertheleas, wu
do not intend to ally ourselves as a matt13r of routine
with any of the Power blocs. We are committed to
uphold the principles upon which the United Nations
is founded. Fom1:hly, Nigeria hopes to work wit'h
other African states for the progress of Mt'iea and
to assist in bringing all Airican territories to a state
of responsible independence.
174. It is perhaps natural that I should speak &bout
Africa first. We in Nigeria have been fortunate in
achieving 0UI." independence without bloodshed or
bitterness, and I hope that this will lend weight to the
proposals which I am about to set before you.
175. The recent tragic events in the Republic of the
Congo must be uppermost in all our minds, and it is
about that country that I wish to speak to you first. I
frankly admit that there are many features of this
seemingly intractable problem which remain obscure
to me. I am in some doubt as to the exact manner in
which the Constitution granting independence to that
oountry was drawn up by the colonial Power which
formerly administered the territory, and as to the
degree of consultation which there was with the
Congolese peoples themselves, and at what level that
oonsultation was carried out. I do not know how widely
the provisions of the new Constitution were known in
that country, or whether there is any pattern of
administration going up from the village to the prcvincial and to the national level.
176. Many other questions present themselves which
require to be answered if we are to find a solution
to the present problems. For instance. was a new
Constitution imposed from above, or freely accepted
by the CongoleSf!; and what are the human resources
in the country; and what sort of government maohinery is available to execute whatever policies may
be decided upon by the Congolese Government? Nevertheless, with the information which is available to
us. we in Nigeria feel there are several important
factors to be constantly borne in mind in dealing with
the problem.
177. The first of these is that Africa must not be
1i11owed to become a battleground in the ideoiogical
struggle; For this reason the Congo situation must be
a matter to be dealt with primarily by Airican states
at the political level.
178. Sfoondly, we believe that in dealing with the
problem of creating a real political life in the counh'y .itself it will be necessary to start at the bottom,
by seeing that local and provincial authorities aI'S
established, while maintaining the essential unity of
the country.

535

179. We also believe that the Congolese people were
right to appeal to the Uni!:ed Nations Organization for
help and advice in rebuilding their country, rather
than to turn to any individual Power. Until achieving
our own independence we have hesitated to add our
views to the general discussion about the Congo lest
we should merely add to the confusion. But now I feel
that it is my duty to put before you, and to ask for
your sympathetic consideration, the possible solutions which have suggested them~elves to us.
180. We warmly applauded the immediate response
of the United Nations to the Congolese disaster. The
speed with which troops were sent to maintain law
and order was most commendable. ~-;rt the mere
sending of armed forces is not enough. I consider it
essential that the United Nations should thoroughly
investigate the root causes of the troubles which have
arisen tbere, and I suggest the appointment of a fact~
finding commission to look into the circumstances
which caused the present crisis. Without a proper
and thorough analysis it is idle to pretend that an
effective remedy can be prescribed.
181. Here. I would say that to my mind it is most
important that none of the great Powers should be
represented on the fact-finding commission because,
however honest their intentions, it would be inevitable
that they would be regarded as having a particular
interest in the problem.
182. The first essential is tc find 3. Government
capable of governing, and for this it will probably be
necessary to hold new elections in the Republic of the
Congo. When these have been held, there willbe some
properly authorized leaders with whom the United
Nations Organization can co-operate. I think it is important that the United Nations should work only with
those whom I have termed the authorized leaders.
They may seem to some of us to be far from perfect,
and to some even objectionable; but if they are duly
chosen by a majority, then they must be supported.
it would be the height of folly to attempt to impose
a Government which was not founded on popular
support, and the result would only be even greater
confusion.
183. I have studied various suggestions which have
been put forward, and I can tell you that some of
those which appear at first sight attractive are really
quite impossible.
184. For instance, there can be no question of the
United Nations taking on the role of an administering
Power or of the Republic of the Congo being regarded
as a United Nations Trust Territory. That Republic
has been declared independent, and if a practicable
plan is to be worked out, we must accept the fact and
arrange for assistance and advice, which the. United
Nations can give on an agency basis without infringing on the sovereignty of the Government.
185. It is true that elections cannot be held overnight. It is an arduous and lengthy task to arrange
elections in. such a large territory, and some immediate action is required in the meantime. So· I
think that the United Nations must take a much firmer
l:1:ne than hitherto and quite firmly support the Central
Government in maintaining law and order and in
keeping the· machinery of day-to-day government
moving. This will entail giving additional powers to
the United Nations Force and to its other agencies,
but only for· a limited period, until·new elections have

536

General Assembly.- Fifteenth session - PlentU'Y Meetings

been held. Once the peoplEl have ohosen their representatives it will be possible to organize disoussions
to find out the form of government whioh will be
genel'ally aoceptable.
186. Will the result be a oonfederacy or a fecleration? The root of the problem will lie in revenue
allooation. And here the United Nations oan be of
the greatest assistance, by providing the necessary
experts to inquire and advise. In all of its aotivities
it is most essential that the United Nations make use
of only the most able and experienced experts. I am
not criticiZing any of the United Nations staff now
serving in the Congo, but I do want to emphasize that
if this problem is to be solved, it is absolutely neces,.
sary to procure the services of men who are really
acknOWledgeable and oapable of working out practicable means of dealing with the various questions.
187. I have said already that much of the present
situation in the Congo is obscure. But from what I
have hetu'd I believe that the situation is not so
desperate as is sometimes thought. I am told that the
lower branches of the civil service are efficient, that
the public utilities continue to function and that there
is a fair amount of executive capacity.
188. It seems to me important to ensure that the
ordinary day-to"day government is kept working, because if that is allowed to collapse, the difficulties
will b9 increased a thousandfold. In ordi:lr to man the
higher positions it will obviously be necessary to
train the Congolese. To this end, I propose that those
African states which hold the same views as Nigeria
combine With us to find places in secondary and
technical schools for some hundreds of Congolese
boys. I do not think that ignorance of the language of
instruction would be much of a problem, and I am
sure that· the effect of a large number of Congolese
seeing how other African countries manage their own
affairs would have a beneficial result and will help
the Congolese to take a wider view and to realize
fully the importance of not allowing a breakdown of
the constitution to take place.
189. African states can also help by taki~g a limited
number of Congolese for some professional train~ng in community development, co-operatives, agricultural ,,)xtension work, and 7he like, and by sending
short-term advisory missions to survey the requirements of the Congo in building up what already exists
there.
190. Nigeria is prepared to make its experience
available and to send technical experts· to assist in
planning and· development for the future. We can also
lend I',"ofessors and teaching staff from time to time
to give short courses and lectures, and I assure yuu
th.at many qualified Nigerians axe eager to take
part in such work during their school and college
vllcations.
H~l. Those are. but a few of the ways in which the
Ciongo can be helped. I am sure thai late though it
aliready is, it is not too late. We African states should
Cl)me together to assist the Congolese to solve their
p'roblems. Tfeel sure that we can do sO,but it must
be done collectively and not done merely as so many
ilndividual states. We must do it together and we must
be. entrusted with this responsibility by the United
Nations and be gJ:\fen its full backing. Nor would I
lbnit advice and assistance to African countries, but
wo'lJ1d welcome the partioipation of other states,

though. I repeat, 1: think it would be advisable to exolude the great Powers.
192. Now to deal with the more genaral problems of
Af:t'ica, problems whioh are bound to tu'lse when the
Powers whioh colonized Afrioa in the last century
are now relinquishing their oontrol and granting independence to their former oolonies. The most seri..
ous problem in those oases seems to me to be that in
itself politioal independenoe is totally inadequate if it
is not acoompMied by stability and economio security and if there is no genuine personal liberty, with
freedom to express one's views and to profess whatever faith one desires.
193. Economic weakness lays a new country open to
every kind of pressure and results in other countries
depriving its people of the freedom to choose a
form of government which they feel suits them best.
Spreading political propaganda. or more insidious
infiltration through technical assistance can Virtually
rob any under-developed oountry of its freedom. I
therefore feel that if the advanced nations of the
other continents are really desirous of seeing the
new African states stand on their own feet and make
their own particular contribution to the peace of the
world and to the happiness of mankind, they should
make a real effort to desist from fomenting trouble
in any of the African countries. The best way for
them to assist us in reaching maturity is not by
spreading ideological propaganda, in whatever form
it may be disguised, but by helping us genuinely, with
really good will, to develop our resources and to
edc:.oate our human material up to those standards
which are necessary for proper development.
194. Many of the new African states are, indeed,
potentially rich and should contribute to improving
the world but for the fact that they lack the technological knowledge and the financial capital necessary
to develop their resources, It is especially in this
field that I commend the many schemes which the
United Nations has sponsored for assisting the underdeveloped countries. Indeed, I wish that there were
many more of them. I would not necessarily limit
technical assistance to the United Nations, but I do
seriously suggest that it is in the best interests of
world peace for assistance from elsewhere to be
given only to those countries which, although still
under-developed, are politically stable and have a
properly constituted government which is capable of
undersl:anding the risks of accepting aid from another
country. I certainly deprecate direct assistance being
given by individual Powers to countries which aTe
not yet able to stand on their own feet and are piDlitically unstable, because such aid would only give rise
to suspicion and, in the enti, the receiVing cO'..mtry
may find itself involved in the ideological war, a
thing which, as I have already said, we in Africa mUl:lt
do everything in our power to prevent.
195•. I wish to make our position pXain beyond any
measure of doubt with regard to the African oontine11t. We in Nigeria appreciate the advantages whioh
the size of om country and its population give us,
but we have absolutely no aggressive intentions. We
shall never impose ourselves on any· other country
and shall treat e",ery African territory, big or small,
as our equal because we honestly feel that it is only
on that basis of. equality that paace can he maintained·
in our continent.

196. The c
tioned Afr!
and drew
groupings.

were at £1
come to

one anothe
sion to thi
therefore,
they are at
whatsoever.
atmosphere
proper rec
it will be
all mattel's
197. I ho
geographica
north and
about non-p
of the tran
search in
above all,
being freel
neighbourin
steps we sh
to station
I must say
political Wl
future. I d
Union, but f
cOWltries to
so recently
wrong to i
bring the c
follow as a
other fields.
be the great
try sets out
chosen lea
imposing po
trouble. In t
develop and
tween the st
union may
wrong eithe
process und
198. So far
Africa. Plea
in the probl
tensely inter
to assist in
Organization
concerned f
heighbourhoo
Nations as p
cilinery for
and gratefull
world body,
admission h
older and m
the objective
they sought t
purpose of t
cOWltries to
to procure t
this co-oper
nations, no
individual co
It, was also,

agard meeting - 7 Oc~ober 1960

do
ies
a
lst.

~us

Lily
1. I

the
the

ake

the
uld

ible
for

:by

IrM

nth
l to

rds

led,
'ing

no-

ary

:his

the
erere
mit
. do

s of
, be
ltill
·e a

eof
:her
ling

are

:itirise
ltry

r, a
ltll:!t

any
nti-

l1ioh

us,

We
[\try

mU,
only
Inad

196. The colnllizing Po~rs of the last centurypartitioned Afrioa in a haphazard and artificia.\ ma."l1lsr
and drew boundaries which cut right aoross former
groupings. Yet, however artifi.oial those boundaries
were at first the countries they have created have
come to regard thems~lves as units independent of
one another. We ha"i.1'e seen them all seeking admission to this Organization as separate States. It is,
therefore, our }X'lioy to leave those boundaries as
they are at present and to disoourage any adjustment
whatsoever. I hope that this policy will bring about an
atmosphere of trust, and that if eaoh oountry is given
proper recognition and redpect as a sovereign State
it will be possible to have Affective co-operation on
all matters of oommon concern to us.
197. I hope that priority will be given in the various
geographical groupinga -I refer to the west and the
north and to central Africa-to joint consultationfil
about non-political matters such as the co-ordination
of the transport and communication systems, research in connexion with natural resources, and,
above all, education. I should like to see students
being freely admitted into the universities of other
neighbouring territories, and I am sure that by such
steps we shall entirely eliminate any desire or need
to station armed forces on our frontiers. However,
I must say that I do not myself think that ideas of
political union are practicable in the immediate
future. I do not rule out the possibility of eventual
union, but for the present it is unrealistic to expect
cOWltries to give up the sovereignty which they have
so recently acquired, and I am quite sure that it is
wrong to imagine that political union could of itself
bring the countries together. On the contrary, it will
follow as a natural consequence of co-operation in
other fields. So I wish to state that I think that it will
be the greatest threat to peace in Africa if any country sets out to undermine the authority of the properly
chosen leaders of another state with a view to
imposing political union. That'way can only bring
trouble. In the fullness of time, as political relations
develop and there is more and more consultation between the states of regional groupings, then political
union may well be a natural result, but it would be
wrong either to impose it or to seek to hasten the
process unduly.
198. So far I have concentrated on the problems of
Africa. Please do not think that we are not interested
in the problems of the rest of the world. We are intensely interested in them and we hope to be allowed
to p,ssist in finding solutions to them through this
Organization. But, being human, we are naturally
concerned first with what affects our immediate
heighbourhood. We do indeed believe in the United
Nations as providing perhaps the only effective macilinery for inducing world peace. But while proudly
and gratefully accepting membership of this supreme
world body, may I frankly say that we who waited for
admission hav9 sometimes been concerned lest our
older and more powerful brethren are losing sight of
the objective which, in founding this Organization,
they sought to serve. If I think correctly, the whole
purpose of this Organization is to enable the different
ctluntries to work together in a friendly atmosphere
to procure the peace and progress of mankind p and
this co-operation is meant to link all the Member
nations, no matter what sort of Go'Vernment each
individual country enjoys within its own boundaries.
It was .also, I believe, the intention of the original

537

,-----------------

promOlers to B~ tbat COUl'ltries which are now backward should be assisted in evetl'y possible way to
develop ao that they beoome world assets and not
liabtUties. I do not think that it was ever the intention
of any of those countries which were responsible for
the creation of t}1js Orga,nization to turn it into an
~:rena where party politics could be played on the
highest leva' and where ideologioal differences would
obsoure the main objeotive of securing peace among
the natiO!lS and stability in the world at large.
199. Nigeria is a populous country. There fU'e about
40 millions of us and our territory ts relatively

large. We are willing to learn before we rush into
the field of international politics, but we
totally
unwilling to be diverted from the ideals which we
think true. That is the Nason we in Nigeria will not
be found to align ourselves as a matter of routine
with any particular bloc. Indeed, I hate the very idea
of blocs existing at all in the United Nations.
200. '1"he General Assembly, the s~premeconference
in the world, if the ideas on which it is based are
really accepted, then one 'Would expect every. :representative, no matter from where he comes, to feel
absolutely free to exp~ess the mind of the country he
represents, to feel that he is in no way restricted
either by the lobbying of other representatives or, in
the case of under-developed countries, by being put
under an obligation through technical and financial
aid. Each representative shoulc'! be strong enough to
resist all efforts to defleot him from the path of truth
as he sees it.
201. We in Nigeria honestly believe in the principles
of the United Nations. and we believe that with a
change of heart among the Members, and especially
among the more powerful nations, there is no reason
why there should not be !;)eace and happiness. I think
that all will agree that the present tension in the
world is due to mutual suspicion &ld the efforts made
by groups of countries to impose ideological notions
of one kind or another on their neighbours. I am
speaking frankly to you, Mr. President, because this
is the first occasion on which my country has been
able to speak out in the councils of the world. One
great advaI).tage whioh we new nations have is that
the accession to independence makes a clear cut with
our past and presents us with the opportunity to enter
the field of international relations untrammelled by
prior commitments. It is probably the one occasion
in the life of a nation when it is possible to choose
the policies with the inherent qualities of goodness.
And so, as we gratefully take the place to 'Which you
have invited us, we feel an immense responsibility to
the world which you represent. We see nation wrangling with nation, and we wonder how we can help.
202. Just one week ago the clocks were striking
midnight and Nigeria was on the threshold of independence. There was a brief ceremony at which
the leaders of three different faiths each said a brief
prayer. We then realized,all of us~ that howeveJ,'
much we might imagine ourselves to be responsibll~
for the happy accession to independence, we· realize
that, 3.bove all, there is a divine Providence, and. I
do honestly believe that one primary essential fl.)1'
international friendship and co-operation is for ea.ch
man to be true to his religious beUefs and to reaffirm
the basic principles of his particular creed. It may
be that then, when we hear "..he world crying out for
peace, we may receive the inspiration to deal With

are

538

General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenary Meotings

these intractable problems and be able really to
devote all our resourceS to the advancement of man..
kind by applying those eternal truths whioh will

inevitably pe:tsist long after we ourselves are utterly
forgotten.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

United

GE
ASS
FIFTEEN

Official

1. The

discussi
tion enti
Nations"
Assembl
this cont
recomm
in para
there ar
proposed
amendm
the se co
2. Mr.

ten cons.
sentation
attention
sion bein
At this st
at length
alreadyb
tions and
spoken b
yeurs th
lutlons f
the excl'
banning 0

of the ses
and appe
the Gene
posed by
states, r
the Form
puppets.w
3. Cuba'

session
the lacke
cide for i
of, an aUt·
"no" and
gramopho
£.ommerci
Litho in U.N.

nOOl-March 1961-2,225

*Resumed f
