V.

Resolutions adoptcd on the reports of the Second Committee

Development, to undcrtake cffective consultations with
Governmcnts with a view to implementing that resolution and appointing the members of thc Advisory
Committee, taking into account ínter ulia, the principie
of cquitablc geographical distribution.
103rd plenary meeting
15 Decemher 1977
32/156.

Agreement on Co-operation mul Relationships between the United Nations
aml the World Tourism Or~anization

The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council dccision 254 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977 and thc draft
agreement annexed thcreto on co-operation and relationships between the United Nations and the World
Tourism Organization,
Approves thc Agrcement on Co-operation and Relationships between the United Nations and the World
Tourism Organization as set forth in the anncx to the
present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
ANNEX
Agreement on Co-operation and Relationships between the
United Nations and thc World Tourism Organization

The General Assernbly of the Unite<l Nations, in its resolution 2529 (XXIV) of 5 Decernber 1969, decidcd, inter afia,
that an agreernent should be concluded which would establish
close co-operation and relationships between the United Nations and the future World Tourisrn Organization, define the
modalities of such co-operation and relationships and recognize
the dicisive and central role that the World Tourism Organization was to play in the field of world tourism in co-operation
with the existing machinery within the United Nations systern.
Artide 3, paragraph 3, of the statutes of the World Tourisrn
Organization provides that the World Tourism Organization,
in order to ,establish its central role in the field of tourism,
shall establish and rnaintain effective collaboration with the
appropriate organs of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies.
Therefore, the United Nations and the World Tourism
Organization agree as follows:
A rticle l
RECOGNITION OF RESPONSIBILIT!ES

l. The United Nations recognizes the World Tourism
Organization as being responsible for taking such action as
may be appropriate under its statutes for the accomplishment
of the purposes set forth therein, with due regard to the
competence and responsibilities of the United Nations and
its organs and of the agencies within the United Nations
system.

2. The United Nations takes note thal the World Tourism
Organization, in pursuing its aims, is concerned to pay particular attention to the interests of thc developing countries in
the field of tourism.
Articfe JI
RECOMMENDATIONS OF "I HE

lJNn U> NAT10NS

The World Tourism OrganizaLion. having regard to the
obligations of the United Nations to promot'e thc objectives
set forth in Article 55 of the Charter of the United Nations,
agrees to arrange for the submission as soon as possible to
its General Assembly or its Exccutivc Co11ncil, as appropriate,

of ali formal recommen<lations that the United Nations rnay
make to it and, in due coursc, to report to the United Nations
on the action takt~n bv it or its members in order to give effect
to such rccornmend,{tions or on the other results of their
consiJeration.
Articfc fil
RELA rIONSlll l'

AND

CO-ORDINATION

1. The United Nations and the World Tourism Organization agrce to striw for the maximum co-operation and the
elimination of unnecess:iry duplicaLion hdwecn th~m in thcir
rcsrcctiv_. activitie:; relatc<l to tourism.
,
The United Nations and the World Touri:;m Organization agrce that the activities of the World Tourism Organization and the activifres in respect of or related to tourism of
the United Nations and other organizations within the United
Nations system shall be co-ordinate<l by the Economic and
Social Council through consultations and recommendations.
lntersecrctarial co-ordination shall be ensured through the
machinery of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination,
in the opcration of which thc World Tourism Organization
shall participate in respect of rnatters of common interesl.
3. The World Tourism Organization will seek separate
arrangernents for co-operation with individual agencies within
the United Nations systern engaged in tourism or tourismrelated activities.
Aniclc IV
RITIPROCAL

REPRl'SENTAT!ON

1. The United Nations shall be invited to send representatives to attend in an observer capacity the rncetings of the
General Assernbly and the Executive Council of the World
Tourism Organization and any suhsidiary bodies which may
be established by the Workl Tourism Organization, as wdl
as such conferences as the World Tourisrn Organization may
convcne. and to participate. with the approval of the bo<ly
concemed and without the right to vote, in debates on questions of concern to the United Nations.
2. The World Tourism Organization shall he invited to
scnd representatives to attend in an observer capacity meetings
of the Economic and Social Council or its subsidiary organs,
conforences convened hy it and meetings of other United
Nations bodies which <leal with matters of common interest
and to participate. with the approval of the body concerncd
and without the right to vote, in debates on questions of
conccrn to the World Tourism Organization.
Article V
WRITTEN

STATEMENTS

The United Nations nrny subrnit written statements to
meetings of ho<lies of the World Tourism Organization and
other meetings organized by it on matters of common interest
which are relevan! to thc work of !hose bodies. The World
Tourism Organization may submit written statements to the
Economic and Social Council, to its subsidiary organs an<l to
confercnccs convencd by it. and also to the subsidiary organs
of the (jcncral Asscmbly of the United Nations. 011 matters
of common intercst which are relevant to the work of thosc
hodies.
Articlc VI
PROPOSAl

OF

AGE"IIJA

ITEMS

Subjcct to such preliminary consultations as may be necessary. thc secretaria! of the World Tourism Organization may
include in the provisional agenda of the General Assembly
and tite Fxccutivc Council of the World Tourism Organization
items prorosed to it hy the United Nations. Thc Sccretariat
of thc United Nations may include in the provisional agenda
of thc Economic and Social Council itcms proposcd by thc
World Tourism Organization. In this connexion, !he World
Tourism Organization rnay make recommcndalions and prorosals rclating to i nternation:il agrecments to be drawn up in
the ficld of tourism.

General Asscmhly-Thirty-second Session

94
A rticle VII
EXCHANGE

OF

INFORMA l ,ON

AND

llOt'Ui\lfo'-iT,;

Subject to such a,rangements as may be necessary for the
safeguanJing of confidc,ntial rnakriaL a Lill and prompt exchang~ of information ami documcnt, on mattcr.i concerning
tourism shall be madc betw;:;en thc Unitcd Natio'ls and th~
World Tourism Organization. The World Tourism Organiz:1tion agrees to transmit to the Economic and Social Council
reports on its activitics and prngrammes.
Ar;ic/e V'/
STAThTICAL

SI '!\ lCI ,

l. The World Tourism Organization takes note that the
United Nations is the central agency for the collection.
analysis, publication, standardization and improvement of
statistics on tourism as part of th~ statistics in respect of
international travel. national accounting and other general
statistical information.

2. The United Nations recognizes the World Tourism
Organization as the appropriate organization for the collecti-011, analysis, publication, standardization and improvement
of statistics within the sphere of the World Tourism Organization, without prejuJice to the right of the United Nations to
concern itself with such statistics in so far as they may be
essential for its own purposes or for the improvement of
statistics throughout the world.
3. The United Nations and the World Tourism OrganiLation agree to combine ,their efforts to secure the greatest pos
sible usefulness and utilization of such statistical information
and to minimize the burden placed upon national Governments and other organizations from which the information
may be collected.
Article IX
IMPLLMENTATION

OF THE AGREEMENT

The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization may
enter into such supplementary arrangements for the implementation of this Agreement as may be found desirable.
Article X
ENTRY

1.

INTO FORCE AND REV1SION

OF THE

AGREEMENT

This Agreement shall come into force upon its approval

by the General Acsembly of the United Nations and the
General Assembly of the World Tourism Organization.
2.

This Agrecment may be amended or revised by agree-

ment between the United Nations and the World Tourism

Organization, and such amendment or revision shall come
into force upon approval by the General Assembly of thc
United Nations and the General Assembly of the World
Tourism Organization.

32/157.

World Tourism Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its rcsolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 ( S-VII)
of 16 September 197 5 on development and international economic co-operation,
Reca/ling also articlc 27 of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolutions 2529 (XXIV) of 5
December 1969 and 2802 (XXVI) of 14 Decembcr
1971 concerning, ínter alia, the establishment of the

World Tourism Organization as an intergovernmcntal
organization, as wcll as the Economic and Social Council decision of 20 May 1971 on co-operation and relations betwecn the United Natio:1s and thc World
Tourism Orgimization,'1 7
Na:ing that thc statutes of the World Tourism OrJan:zation,H-" which wcrc adopted at Mexico City on
'27 Scptcmbcr 1970, cntcrcd into force on 2 January Jl)75.
Noting further article 3 of the statutes of thc World
Tourism Organization, which statcs that thc organization, in order to establish its central role in thc field of
tourism, shall cstablish and maintain effectivc collaboration with the appropriatc organs of the Unitcd Nations
and its specializcd agencies,
Rccafling its rcsolution 32/ 156 of 19 December
1977, by which it approved the Agreement on Coopcration and Relationships betwccn the United Nations
and the World Tourism Organization,
Bearing in mind article II of that Agreement, undcr
which the World Tourism Organization agrees to suhrnit as soon as possible to its General Assembly or its
Exccutivc CounciL as appropriate, ali formal rccommendations that the United Nations may makc to it
and, in due course, to report to the United Nations on
the action takcn by it in order to give effect to such
rccommendations,
Recalling further article IX of the Agreement, which
states that the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Secretary-Gcneral of the World Tourism Organization may enter into supplementary arrangements
for the implementation of the Agreement,
Recogni::.ing the contribution of tourism to economic and social development and to the promotion of
international understanding, peace and prospcrity,
C anscious of the need to pay particular attention to
t he intcrests of developing countrics in the field of
tourism,
A ware of the actions undertaken by developing countries individually and collectively to promote tourism,
1. Requests the World Tourism Organization to
intcnsify its cfforts to promote tourism, particularly in
dcveloping countries, through international co-operation, bcaring in mind articlc 3 of its statutes, and to
report to thc General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through thc Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fifth session, on the action taken by it with rcspect
to this recommcndation;
2. Invites those Statcs Membcrs of the Unitcd
Nations which are not yet members of the World
Tourism Organization to consider becoming members
of that organization;

3. Requests the Secrctary-Gencral to follow up this
invitation with the Member States concerncd and rcport
on this matter to the General Assembly at its thirtythird scssion, through the Economic and Social Council
at its sixty-fifth scs;ion.
107th plenary meeting
19 Decemher 1977
u7 See O/jiciu/ Recurds of the Economic and Social Counci/,
Fi/tieth S,ssion, Supplcment No. I (E/5044), p. 25, ítem

12 (h).
68 E/4955,

annex.
