United Nations

A/RES/66/139

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 March 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 65 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2011
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/66/458)]

66/139. Strengthening collaboration on child protection within the
United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the Convention on the Rights of the Child 1 and its Optional
Protocols, 2 and reaffirming all its previous resolutions on the rights of the child,
Recognizing the primary role and responsibility of the State in the promotion and
protection of the rights of the child, including child protection, bearing in mind the
importance of relevant actors of the United Nations supporting the State in this regard,
Reaffirming that the best interest of the child, non-discrimination, participation
and survival and development provide the framework for all actions concerning
children, including those of a State and all relevant actors of the United Nations
dealing with the promotion and protection of the rights of the child, including child
protection,
Recognizing the important role and the continuing work of the United Nations
system and all its relevant actors in the promotion and protection of the rights of the
child, including child protection, and recognizing also the role and contribution of
civil society in this regard,
Stressing that further strengthening collaboration within the United Nations
system on the promotion and protection of the rights of the child, including child
protection, is important for continuing to support efforts of Member States in the
realization of the rights of the child, and in this regard reaffirms the important role
that the General Assembly continues to play in strengthening collaboration and
coherence within the United Nations system,
Welcomes the existing collaboration among relevant actors of the United
1.
Nations working on the promotion and protection of the rights of the child,
including child protection, and encourages them, within existing resources and
mandates, to highlight information on such collaboration in their existing reports to
_______________
1
2

11-46716

*1146716*

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531.

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/139

the General Assembly and to also address this issue within the framework of the
existing Third Committee interactive dialogue under the item entitled “Promotion
and protection of the rights of children”, and invites these United Nations actors to
further enhance their collaboration;
Reiterates the importance of all relevant actors of the United Nations on
2.
child protection to continue to exercise their functions in a fully independent
manner and to act in full observance of their respective mandates;
Underlines the importance of sustained, adequate resources and support
3.
for the work of the United Nations system on the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child, including child protection, and in this regard strongly encourages
enhanced voluntary contributions to support the work of all relevant actors of the
United Nations, so as to support technical assistance and capacity-building in the
area of child protection;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
4.
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session on the current collaboration within the United
Nations system on child protection, taking into account information provided by
Member States and relevant actors of the United Nations.
89th plenary meeting
19 December 2011

2
