S/PV.7905

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7905th meeting

Thursday, 23 March 2017, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Johnson/Mr. Rycroft. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Zemene
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Amendola
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ali
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Baba Cissé
Ms. Wallström
Mr. Prystaiko
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-07641 (E)
*1707641*

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President: I want to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other representatives to the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, President
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, who is joining
today’s meeting via video-teleconference from Nairobi.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; and Mr. Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Madeira,
who is joining the meeting via video-teleconference
from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/226, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
2/24

23/03/2017

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2346 (2017).
I now give the floor to Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating: As the Secretary-General said on
his first field visit since he took office, Somalia is
experiencing a moment of both tragedy and hope.
Tragedy, because a drought-induced humanitarian crisis
is now engulfing the country, with the imminent risk of
famine. Hope, because the recent electoral process has
created the momentum for fresh political engagement
among Somalis. The announcement 48 hours ago of
the establishment of the Cabinet, which includes six
women, is another important step forward.
More than 6 million Somalis — half the total
population — are now in need of assistance. Nearly
3 million, mainly women and children, require
immediate lifesaving support, and they include growing
numbers of displaced people living in miserable
conditions. Somalis, including politicians, business
people, civil society and members of the diaspora,
are taking responsibility for drought response. That
distinguishes Somalia from other countries facing
humanitarian catastrophe. President Farmajo declared
a national disaster within days of taking office. He is
using all available platforms to mobilize national and
international support. Access remains a challenge,
including in areas controlled by Al-Shabaab. But
compared to 2011, when 260,000 people died, the
scope for responding to the crisis is greater. Cell-phone
coverage and money-transfer options have expanded;
data on needs and assessment has improved; controls
on resources and partner-vetting are stronger; and
operational capacities have grown.
Humanitarian partners are scaling up the response
in various ways, including through the private sector
and with cash programming in affected areas. More
people are now being reached with food aid, nutritional
support, health-care services and access to safe water.
But much more is needed. The most urgent challenges
include funding for immediate lifesaving action, in
particular for the cholera response, which has now
affected 11 of Somalia’s 18 regions. Treatment centres
and units are being opened throughout the country, but
the disease continues to spread. A rapid expansion of
treatment and preventive measures is urgently needed
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

before the rains, which will only exacerbate the
problem further.
The famine-prevention operational plan is seeking
$825 million in order to reach 5.5 million people by June.
The plan is currently 32 per cent funded. Funding and
cash-flow constraints prevented a significant increase
in response activities at the beginning of the year, and
more resources will be needed by the end of March if
we are to enable the partners to reach those affected
before it is too late. I welcome the recent generous
contributions made by many countries in response to
the calls from the Somali Government and the United
Nations for assistance, including a very generous one
from your Government, Mr. President.
Had the electoral process not delivered a result
accepted as legitimate, drought-response efforts would
be much more difficult. Instead, the electoral process
has created a sense of hope. The new Parliament is more
diverse, and its membership is younger and includes
more women than any before it. The elections were
largely peaceful and were not derailed by Al-Shabaab.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
Somali security and intelligence forces did a great job
of protecting electoral sites. The presidential election
was conducted transparently. The former President,
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, deserves credit for a
smooth and peaceful handover.
The elation that greeted President Farmajo on
8 February transcended clan and regional lines. The
outcome of the process has generated widespread
goodwill. As Prime Minister Dessalegn of Ethiopia
said,
Somalis have made history and set a great example
to countries ... emerging from conflict”.
The complexity and imperfections of the electoral
process have not diminished the expectation that
there must be one-person, one-vote elections in 2020.
Preparations must now begin to establish the necessary
legal and administrative framework, lay the groundwork
for inclusive elections and enable women to compete on
equal terms with men. To that end, the United Nations
will field a needs-assessment mission this week.
The new Government and Parliament now have
an opportunity to use the goodwill to reboot efforts to
build a functional and inclusive Federal State and to
tackle the socioeconomic, structural and political issues
that make millions of Somali women, men and children

S/PV.7905

so vulnerable. For a functional and truly sovereign
Federal Somalia must find ways to rely less on foreign
funds and more on its own resources. Unless Somalia
can start attracting serious investment and generate
domestic revenues, State-building will remain only
an aspiration, and the country will remain perilously
dependent and vulnerable to weather-related shocks.
That will require not only greater institutional capacity
but also a settlement between the Government and the
private sector. Taxes should be collected by the State, in
return for assurances that funds will be accounted for
and used to provide basic services, including security
and the rule of law.
The President and Prime Minister have committed to
making improvements in public financial management,
transparency and accountability, including vigorous
steps to fight corruption, which they see as drivers of
insecurity. Those tasks will not be easy. They deserve
our support, including incentives for the private sector.
Support is needed to clear Somalia’s arrears and allow
it to move along a path towards debt relief.
A more immediate challenge is to eliminate the
scourge of terrorism. The cost is just too high, both in
terms of human life and lost opportunities for Somalia,
but also for its neighbours and the international
community, including countries that are serving on
the Council. Success in degrading and dismantling
Al-Shabaab requires a multi-pronged approach,
embedded in a political strategy led by the Somali
Government. That approach will need to embrace support
for AMISOM’s operations, Somalian security-sector
reform, a resolution of local conflicts, the stabilization
and expansion of State authority in liberated areas, and
it should address the deficits in governance and the rule
of law that give Al-Shabaab oxygen.
Somalis want to assume greater responsibility
for their own security. There is some way to go. The
Somali security forces are underresourced, irregularly
paid, fragmented, often privatized and largely
unaccountable. But building trusted security forces that
are acceptable to all Somalis is essential. It represents a
major opportunity to build and consolidate the federal
State and should be approached as such, not just as
a military undertaking. The essential first step is a
political agreement between the Federal Government
and Federal member states, supported by Parliament
and civil society, on a shared security architecture that
embraces both army and police.

17-076413/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

23/03/2017

Such an agreement can become a basis for more
coherent international support and a cornerstone
for joint planning with the African Union (AU) on
AMISOM’s future and eventual drawdown. AMISOM
is a model for a comprehensive approach to security,
but it has reached its tenth anniversary and will not
stay forever. The troop-contributing countries have
their own parameters, and donors face many competing
global demands. However, as was evident during
the electoral process, for now AMISOM remains
the backbone of security in Somalia. Its presence is
essential to building the Somali security forces, and its
precipitate drawdown could be disastrous.

In conclusion, Somalia faces many daunting
difficulties after decades of violent conflict, but it
has now been presented with a political opportunity.
The Security Council enjoys a remarkable degree of
consensus on Somalia. I hope that it can be used not
only to address the immediate crisis facing millions of
people but also to support Somalia’s new leadership,
President and Prime Minister in addressing the
underlying issues so that we can prevent such a tragedy
from ever happening again.

For that reason, I urge the Council to focus on
finding the funds to maintain AMISOM’s presence and
enable a conditions-based withdrawal. The objective
must be a sufficient level of security in the coming
years, including in the run-up to the elections in 2020.
Over the next month, the AU and the United Nations
will jointly review AMISOM’s future. Along with the
results of the strategic assessment mission, the review
should help the Council decide on the way forward for
AMISOM, including the use of assessed contributions.
However, the results of the review are unlikely to be
ready by 15 April, owing to delays in the establishment
of the new Government.

Mr. Madeira: I am honoured to have this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia.

The President: I thank Mr. Keating for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.

Security is not the only priority. Advancing the
constitutional process remains urgent. Constitutional
development will require consensus-building, dialogue
and consultations at various levels in order to address
all issues related to federalism. Strengthening conflictresolution capacities is another. It is vital to include
all sectors of society, including women, young people,
minorities and businesses, in the peaceful resolution
of internal conflicts. The United Nations will work on
that in coordination with key international partners
such as the African Union, the European Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

It has been 10 years this month since the first
soldiers of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) landed in Mogadishu on 6 March 2007,
under fire from Al-Shabaab’s Kalashnikov guns and
mortars. In order to mark that important event, show
solidarity and congratulate the people of Somalia and
President Farmajo on his outstanding election, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission — who
has asked me to greet those in this Chamber on his behalf
and present his excuses for being unable to join the
Council today — felt it was important and appropriate
that he begin his activities outside the African Union
headquarters with a visit to Somalia, his very first to a
member State of the African Union and only four days
after he took office, on Tuesday 14 March. He wanted to
be close to AMISOM’s men and women in the field and
the people of the great country of Somalia, to honour
our heroes and celebrate 10 years of the sustained effort
by AMISOM and the Somali National Army to restore
peace and stability in Somalia and in the East African
region as a whole.

Significant work is needed to improve the dismal
human rights situation in Somalia. I am particularly
concerned about attacks on journalists and the increase
in sexual violence against internally displaced women
and members of minority clans. Military operations
and a worsening humanitarian situation will expose
Somalis to violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Improving the capacity to provide
protection must be a priority. Full implementation of
the human rights due diligence policy, including the
implementation of mitigating measures, is essential.

The Chairperson also felt that it was important
to go to Somalia in order to highlight the alarming
humanitarian situation that has befallen the country,
where 6.2 million people are on the brink of famine,
and a catastrophe similar to that of 2011 is looming on
the horizon. As in 2011, the African Union, through
AMISOM, will once again continue to work hand in
hand and in coordination with the Somali authorities
and other partners to support our Somali sisters and
brothers who are the victims of drought, and to do our
best to save them from an impending calamity.

4/24

17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

As we look back at where we were in 2007, we
realize that we have come a long way. Overall, the
situation in Somalia has greatly improved, thanks to the
enormous efforts of AMISOM in its joint operations
with the Somali national security forces and other
partners. In terms of performance, Somalia has defied
the odds. The past four years have witnessed intense
political activity and reforms, facilitated by a security
environment conducive to such action. The Federal
Government has remained in place in Mogadishu,
functioning
and
actively
formulating
policy
frameworks, strengthening its institutions, improving
its performance and enhancing its efficiency. Regional
Governments have been established and are doing the
best to perform and respond adequately to the enormous
challenges faced by the people under their authority.
Economic life is coming alive in many regions of the
country, particularly Mogadishu. Political dialogue,
reconciliation and State formation, a constitutional
review and elections have all been taking place. With
the support of AMISOM and the Somali National
Army, in September 2012 and February 2017, Somalia
succeeded in effecting exemplary peaceful transfers of
power. Eighty per cent of the country’s territory has
now been recovered from Al-Shabaab.
However, a lot more must be done to bring Somalia
to the point where it needs to be. The country’s capacity
to hold on sustainably to its liberated territories, restore
its authority, ensure the safety and security of its
communities and enable the Administration to perform
its governing functions must be further strengthened.
AMISOM is playing its part in the concerted effort
to build the country’s capacity and enhance the
effectiveness of Somalia’s security forces, especially
the National Army, the police force, the intelligence
service and other public institutions that are central
to the provision of basic services to the people and to
keeping them happy and confident.
Somalia is now turning a new page under a new
leadership, committed to putting the people of Somalia
first. That means better governance, including the
delivery of services, accountability, fighting corruption
and enhancing the capacity of Somalis themselves to take
on, deter, degrade and contain Al-Shabaab terrorists. A
firm foundation enabling the country’s institutions to
take over their constitutional responsibilities is being
laid. We are happy that the views of the African Union
and those of President Farmajo on how to do that are
very similar.

S/PV.7905

We are satisfied with the current ongoing
momentum in the build-up to the London conference
on a comprehensive approach to security in Somalia
and on streamlining, empowering and consolidating
Somalia’s governance institutions. However, it is
important that we do not lose sight of the fact that the
effective achievement of our common objectives with
regard to Somalia implies establishing short-, mediumand long-term benchmarks that must be pursued and
implemented in a coordinated, complementary and
mutually reinforcing manner. Concentrating on the
medium- to long-term objectives — without a joint,
coordinated and complementary commitment to a
concrete, mutually reinforcing and objectively feasible
plan to address the immediate challenges to our
common effort in the short term — has the potential
to undermine and render the implementation of our
medium- to long-term plans very difficult.
As the Government strives to contain Al-Shabaab and
improve security in a coordinated and complementary
manner, we must provide it with the means and requisite
support enabling it to concomitantly establish its
presence in and effectively govern the territories that
it has liberated with our support, and that must happen
while we pursue our medium- to long-term goals of
building permanent and more reliable and effective
State institutions. The fight against Al-Shabaab and
the efforts to degrade it must continue, and providing
adequate means and conditions for AMISOM and
the Somali national security forces to do so more
effectively and in acceptable conditions must be one of
our common and immediate short-term objectives.
Containing Al-Shabaab today requires, inter alia,
that we build barracks to house the Somali National
Army soldiers who have already been certified and have
been made aware of the United Nations human rights
due diligence policy. It requires that they be screened,
equipped, rehearsed and motivated, paid salaries and
given command so that they can face the enemy more
effectively. It requires that both AMISOM and the
Somali National Army be given the support that they
have requested to dislodge the enemy from its remaining
strongholds in the Juba Valley and Somalia’s northeastern coastline. It equally requires that AMISOM be
provided with a more predictable, less erratic and more
dependable source of funding to perform its duties and
achieve its mandate on time. That should include the
assessed contribution.

17-076415/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

We have a very clear timeline. We have to start
drawing down in 2018. We do not have much time left.
We need the means to make a significant difference by
then. The Secretary-General has been on the ground
in Somalia and has seen for himself what needs to
be done. The African Union remains committed to
fulfilling its part in our common struggle against
violent extremism and terrorism and for the restoration
of peace and security, which are essential ingredients
for economic development and the improvement of the
living conditions of the people of Africa and of the
world at large.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, President of the Federal
Republic of Somalia.
President Farmajo: Before I start my statement,
I would like to express my deepest sympathy and
condolences to the British people and the British
Government following the barbaric terrorist attack in
London. We in Somalia are at the forefront of that war.
We fully condemn terrorism and will continue to fight
it in all its forms.
It is a great honour to address the Security Council
on the important matter of Somali’s progress and the
remaining challenges we face. The Security Council,
along with many partner nations of the United
Nations, has played and will continue to play a vital
role in our national progress alongside our people and
Government, both bilaterally and multilaterally. At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General and his delegation, including
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for visiting Somalia to witness and assess
the current acute humanitarian challenges we face. I
heartily welcome the statement by Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, and agree that while there are immediate and
long-term challenges to overcome, there is also much to
be hopeful about as we make tangible and sustainable
political progress.
Despite the progress Somalia is making, it is difficult
to meet the challenges of drought and the humanitarian
crises both in our country and in the region, but we must
not simply give way to doom and gloom. We in Somalia
strongly believe that socioeconomic and political gain
6/24

23/03/2017

must go hand in hand with good governance to achieve
sustainable development for all our people.
As the Council knows, despite the enormous
challenges and scepticism, the long and protracted
elections have just been concluded peacefully and
democratically. On 22 February, I appointed Hassan
Ali Khayre as my Prime Minister, and the Federal
Parliament endorsed him unanimously. Just two days
ago, he in turn formed a competent Cabinet. I am
optimistic that Parliament will once again support the
new Cabinet so that we can get to work, starting with
tackling the drought currently wreaking havoc in our
nation. Somalia was one the first democratic countries
in Africa, and on 8 March we completed our first
successful national election in decades. That election
saw the preceding President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud,
graciously accept the electoral outcome that led to my
becoming President, and his speech to all delegates
strongly encouraged all Somalis and other stakeholders
to work with and support the new Administration under
the new President.
For the first time in history, we have an almost
30 per cent representation of women in our Parliament,
a substantial improvement from 14 per cent in 2012.
Furthermore, the number of young lawmakers has
increased, and there is a healthy number of diaspora
parliamentarians, which is an excellent indicator that
our people living all over the world will have an even
greater impact than they have already had through
remittances in shaping the direction that Somalia takes
going forward. The new Cabinet also reflects a greater
proportion of women and youth, who are the bedrock
of our society.
Among the many pressing priorities for my
Administration, responding effectively to the current
humanitarian crisis tops the agenda. Almost half of
my people are facing acute food shortages, and about
15 per cent are facing famine. I am truly saddened by
that situation, as the Somali people are proud, generous,
hard-working and truly resilient. They would be the last
people to ask for assistance if they could somehow find
a way to survive and transcend their reality. Instead,
however, men, women and children walk for miles
and hours in search of food and water, and many have
fled to urban centres looking for the support that our
Government is desperately trying to provide with
the assistance of the international community. Many
people’s livelihoods, especially those in the area of
animal husbandry, have perished. We are therefore
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

left collectively to plan a better future together in the
aftermath of this humanitarian crisis.
The Somali Government has already sounded the
alarm internationally and nationally and is leading a
drive to generate funds from the Somali diaspora, the
business community and others sources that might
provide the urgent lifesaving assistance that the
millions of our people affected by drought need. A few
weeks ago, I declared the current drought a national
disaster, so as to unleash our institutions and enable
them to act urgently. The Prime Minister chairs the
national drought committee, which has successfully
mobilized and organized Somalis in the country and in
the diaspora to collect funds in support of their brothers
and sisters affected by the devastating drought.
The response from the Somali people and the
international community has been tremendous, and
we are working with the humanitarian community and
valuable partners to address the issue. We kindly ask
all those who can to give further support to this effort.
Their support and generosity will be noted not just by
the Somali people but by history.
Given the regional nature of the drought, it is
important that sustainable, region-wide and resilient
early-warning and intervention strategies be created
and, where they already exist, enhanced. We must
ensure that we increase the resilience of communities
and make a priority of developing sustainable solutions
for environmentally induced disasters such as this
drought. In that regard, we have now created a new
Government Ministry that focuses exclusively on
humanitarian response and disaster management.
In our national development plan, we have an entire
chapter dedicated to resilience and a long-term strategy
to mitigate cyclical droughts. In the desperate fight
to avert this and other droughts, it is crucial that
neighbours share ideas and experience bilaterally and
multilaterally through the United Nations and regional
institutions such as the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. This is the only way that can we hope to
mitigate the devastating damage caused by droughts in
East Africa.
The humanitarian response to the drought is
somewhat challenging in certain places because of the
insecurity caused by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab.
However, we are determined to defeat it. I can
confidently say that Al-Shabaab, thanks to the courage
and sacrifice of the troops of the Somali National

S/PV.7905

Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), has been substantially weakened. In the
fight against Al-Shabaab and international terrorism,
we are grateful for the continuous support of AMISOM
troop-contributing countries, our valued international
partners, including many members of the Security
Council, and the Somali Security Service, which is
growing in strengthen and ability every day.
While we are grateful for all the support from
and sacrifices by AMISOM, we understand that the
only way to protect our democracy and development
against evil spoilers is to rebuild our national army,
police and other security services. I can assure the
Security Council today that that is our goal, and we will
achieve it with the Council’s continued support. We are
working with our partners to develop a clear road map
for the reduction of AMISOM forces, while we are also
expanding both the quality and quantity of our security
services. In that regard, I would like to ask the Security
Council to work with us on a road map towards the
full lifting of the arms embargo. The road map will be
presented at the upcoming London conference in May.
Achieving sustainable peace requires more than
physical security. We must invest in education, jobs and
skills in order to overcome the many challenges Somalia
faces. That critical component of development must
accompany the physical security we seek, or it will be
difficult to overcome the challenges of radicalization,
illegal migration and other tragedies that waste talents
and lives. Furthermore, we need to train and educate
the future water, engineering, livestock, agriculture
and technological champions who will design, produce
and maintain the drought-resilience systems that are
necessary for ensuring that today’s misery is never
again repeated. I am sure that all Council members will
agree that that is a better investment of our money than
repeatedly responding to cyclical humanitarian crises.
Our strategy for a sustainable economic recovery
is detailed in the national development plan. We will
present our top priorities at the London conference,
but I can point to a few key ones today. First, we need
to invest seriously in our vital infrastructure, starting
with energy, water and major roads. Secondly, we
need to revive key economic engines such agriculture,
livestock and fisheries. Thirdly, we need to invest in
new sectors, such as telecommunications and finance.
Finally, none of the foregoing will be possible if we do
not first undo our errors and normalize our relations
with international financial institutions. Tangible

17-076417/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

progress has already been made in that regard, but
we hope for an accelerated process of debt relief and,
subsequently, access to capital loans. A detailed plan
covering those issues will be presented in London.
On the political front, we have major work ahead
of us. A primary objective for us will be to deepen
the federal architecture by strengthening the federal
member states and finalizing the status of the capital,
Mogadishu. Furthermore, we will finalize the review
of our Constitution, which is the document that will
bind the Somali people together. We have a large
number of negotiations ahead, in such key areas as
resource-sharing, the relationship between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, security
architecture and policy, and many other issues. We will
approach them with an eye to reconciliation and social
healing. Most importantly, we will work towards the
implementation of a one-person, one-vote arrangement
in 2020, anchored in a political party system. That is the
only way to make our political system more transparent
and truly democratic.
Despite the many challenges, none is insurmountable.
The Somalis are resilient, patient and ready to do the
heavy lifting for their own progress. However, we have
a saying in Somalia that one finger cannot be the boss
of your whole face. We therefore want to reiterate to the
Security Council how much we value the effort of all
our partners, and to emphasize that in this time of both
our greatest need and greatest opportunity, we must
cooperate in order to achieve our common goals and
ensure that Somalia, the region and the rest of the world
are safe, progressive and prosperous.
The President: I thank President Farmajo for
his statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom.
I am grateful to President Farmajo for his first
address to the Security Council, and to Mr. Keating and
Mr. Madeira for their briefings.
Last week I was fortunate enough to visit Somalia
at a time that the Secretary-General has described as
both tragic and hopeful. Today President Farmajo had
an opportunity to describe how the Federal Government
plans to bring peace and stability to his country. I
hope the President will take the clear message from
8/24

23/03/2017

this meeting that as long as he works for the benefit of
Somalia, the Security Council will stand with him.
We meet at a moment when Somalia faces the
daunting prospect of its third famine in 25 years.
We cannot forget that the last time that Somalia was
blighted by starvation in 2011, no fewer than 260,000
people died. Today more than 6 million Somalis need
help. The crisis also risks undermining the hard-won
political and security progress that has been made.
The good news is that if we learn the lessons of 2011
and act promptly and decisively, the famine can still
be prevented. Britain has contributed more than
$135 million in emergency aid to Somalia this year. That
United Kingdom aid will provide more than 1 million
people with food, water and emergency health care. I
urge all our partners to support the relief effort that is
now under way. And I urge the Somali Government
to deliver on the commitments it has made to improve
access and remove logistical blockages, as part of its
welcome focus on the issue.
In Mogadishu last week, I witnessed a military
training session for the Somali National Army and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) troops.
A heavy responsibility rests on these brave soldiers to
guarantee the security on which every other form of
progress depends. This is a critical time for security
in Somalia. We must work together to agree on a
clear, long-term plan for international security support
in Somalia. We hope to make progress on a security
pact during the forthcoming London conference on
Somalia. The most urgent requirement is for a political
agreement between the Federal Government and its
federal member states on the security architecture of
the Somali security forces. Once that has been agreed
on, the international community should outline its
comprehensive and coordinated support to Somalia
on security-sector reform. We also need to agree on
the shape of a conditions-based transition away from
AMISOM to the Somali security forces. I cannot
commend highly enough the prowess and bravery of
AMISOM soldiers and their Somali counterparts in the
struggle against Al-Shabaab. They have made a real
difference to Somalia and to the security of East Africa
as a whole, and we are all conscious of their sacrifice. It
is precisely because we must not allow their sacrifice to
be in vain that we must ensure a successful transition.
The African Union is a central partner, and the
forthcoming joint United Nations-African Union
review will be crucial to setting the future direction of
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

that partnership. I hope that all members of the Council
will be open-minded, particularly with regard to
funding, so that Somalia’s progress is not jeopardized
by a hasty transition.
Security is one urgent aspect of the broader
constitutional settlement that a stable, federal Somalia
needs. The Federal Government and member states
will also have to agree on how to share power and
resources. Resolving those questions will be crucial to
the country’s long-term stability. I look forward to a
one-person, one-vote election in four years’ time. I also
welcome the focus of President Farmajo on promoting
economic recovery and creating jobs for a new
generation of young and ambitious Somalis. For that to
succeed, the Government will need to continue to make
progress on important economic reforms, comply with
the current International Monetary Fund programme
and improve the business environment. Those steps
will also be essential for Somalia to be able to make
progress towards its aims of accessing multilateral
finance and debt relief.
At this crucial time, Britain will join the United
Nations and the Federal Government to host a
conference on Somalia in London in May. The
conference will assess the response to the humanitarian
emergency, accelerate progress on security and adopt
a new partnership agreement that sets the terms of the
relationship between Somalia and the international
community for the coming years. A peaceful and
prosperous Somalia is the aim we all share, and let me
say to President Farmajo that the Security Council will
stand beside him as he strives to achieve that goal.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): First of all, my thoughts
are with the British people, and especially with the
victims of the horrific attack at Westminster, the heart
of British democracy. We are angered by this callous
and cowardly attack. However, we are also confident
that the legendary resilience and spirit of Londoners
will shine through. There can be no surrender to fear.
We stand united against the threat of terrorism in all its
forms, wherever and by whomever it is committed.
Let me thank you, Mr. President, and the United
Kingdom presidency for convening today’s meeting,

S/PV.7905

as we embark upon the next step towards a peaceful
and prosperous Somalia. I want to congratulate the
people of Somalia on their successful completion
of parliamentary and presidential elections. I am
encouraged by the positive results, especially the
increased representation of young people and the fact
that the number of women in Parliament has almost
doubled. I am equally encouraged by the fact that
women make up 23 per cent of the newly appointed
Cabinet. That is important for the future.
There is now an opportunity to put renewed energy
into the continued peace- and State-building process
in Somalia. I would like to briefly highlight three
aspects that I believe should be addressed in order to
maintain a positive path, with continued support from
the international community and the Council.
First, with the process of creating federal
member states concluded, the focus should now shift
towards clarifying the arrangements between them
and the central Government. For that to be fruitful,
the constructive relations already established must
be further strengthened. The establishment of local
governance and the delivery of basic social services
to all Somalis must be given priority. Furthermore,
the constitutional review should be resumed as soon
as possible, as part of resolving outstanding political
issues, with a view to being concluded before 2020.
Secondly, preparations for the 2020 elections need to
start at the earliest possible moment, and a clear road
map towards one person, one vote must be developed,
incorporating lessons learned from the newly concluded
electoral process, as we have already heard.
One priority is making sure that ordinary Somalis
benefit from our collective peacebuilding and
development efforts. In order for those efforts to be
successful, an improvement of the security situation in
Somalia is still crucial. I welcome the efforts already
made by the Somali Government and its partners in
that regard. We should especially commend the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for its vital work.
It is critical that we ensure that it has the necessary
support, including more predictable and sustainable
funding. On that note, I welcome the African Union’s
plans to strengthen self-financing, not least in the area
of peace and security. At the same time, continuing
the discussion on access to assessed United Nations
contributions is important.

17-076419/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

We must also make sure that AMISOM’s drawdown
is consistent with a corresponding build-up and
takeover by Somalia’s own security forces. Strong
United Nations leadership in Somalia, well-coordinated
support and a comprehensive approach to security, as
adopted by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, will be necessary. The high-level conference
in London in May will hopefully allow us to identify a
clear path to sustainable security-sector reform.
Lastly, I want to express my deep concern with
regard to the severe situation caused by the drought in
Somalia and the region. It is devastating that in 2017
people all over the world are still dying of starvation.
The international community, including Sweden, is
responding, and there seems to be a strong and united
determination to prevent a repeat of the catastrophic
famine that took place only six years ago. However, the
worst of the drought has likely not yet been reached,
and it is crucial that we continue to scale up both
funding and delivery. The strong leadership taken by
the new Government in addressing the issue will help
our joint effort. The regional challenges of the drought,
which are exacerbated by refugee flows and ongoing
conflict, must also be addressed. I encourage Somalia’s
neighbours and other countries in the region to further
strengthen cross-border and regional cooperation
in order to address those complex and interlinked
challenges comprehensively.
In conclusion, maintaining a positive trajectory
will require hard work by the Somali Government, and
we wish the President of Somalia all the best. It will
also require dedicated and long-term support from the
international community. Sweden remains committed
to continuing its strong partnership with Somalia, with
the goal of ensuring sustainable peace and development
for all Somalis.
Ms. Zemene (Ethiopia): We were indeed shocked
by the Westminster terrorist attack in London
yesterday, and we would like to offer our condolences
to the families of the victims. We also join others in
condemning that heinous attack in the strongest terms
and expressing our solidarity with the people and the
Government of the United Kingdom.
Turning to the business of the Council today, we
would like to thank the United Kingdom presidency
for organizing this meeting on Somalia. We are very
pleased to see you, Mr. President, presiding over this
meeting only a few days after your important visit
10/24

23/03/2017

to our region, including Somalia. We were also very
happy to hear from His Excellency President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo. We would all like to
thank him for his important remarks outlining his
Government’s vision for a peaceful and stable Somalia.
And we are grateful to Mr. Keating and Ambassador
Madeira for their respective briefings.
It was two weeks ago that Secretary-General
António Guterres undertook his first field visit to show
solidarity with the Somali people, who are facing a dire
humanitarian situation. His appeal to the international
community to scale up assistance to Somalia was
quite crucial and very much appreciated. It is in that
same spirit that the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki, visited Mogadishu over
the past weekend, thereby making Somalia the first
country to be visited by the new leader of the African
Union Commission. The symbolism is remarkable.
We do indeed need to act swiftly if we are to avert
a humanitarian catastrophe in Somalia. We commend
President Farmajo, who demonstrated his political
leadership immediately after taking office by convening
a high-level conference in Mogadishu to mobilize
assistance for the humanitarian response. The severe
drought is threatening the lives of millions of people in
Somalia and the wider region. It is in that context that
we would like to reiterate the call made by the Council
of Ministers of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which met last week in Addis
Ababa, for enhanced support from the international
community to complement efforts at the national and
regional levels. For our part, we are supporting the
United Nations response to the drought situation by
allowing UNICEF to purchase supplies from our local
markets and by facilitating easy-access corridors for
the humanitarian supplies to reach Somalia.
Somalia is facing this humanitarian challenge
at a time when it has made significant gains on the
political and security fronts. That is why we should do
everything possible not to allow the drought situation
to undermine those gains. That is also why we should
act fast and act now. There is no better indication of the
progress in Somalia than the recent election, which, by
all measures, and considering the security challenges
the country is facing, was the most competitive
and participatory that the country has had in a very
long time. It is indeed a significant achievement for
Somalia and its nascent institutions. The international
community, which has invested so much in supporting
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

peace and stability in Somalia, should also draw a
measure of satisfaction from that achievement.
It should be stressed that the country has also come
a long way in restoring peace and stability in much of
its territory. Somalia unquestionably continues to face
formidable challenges in the security area, but that
should in no way cloud the tangible progress that has
been made. Yes, A1-Shabaab cannot yet be dismissed
as a mere nuisance, and the series of attacks carried out
by that terrorist group recently in Mogadishu and other
parts of Somalia are clear indications that it is still
capable of causing great damage in terms of the loss
of human life and the destruction of property. But one
thing is for sure — Al-Shabaab has been significantly
weakened, and it no longer controls large swathes of
Somali territory.
We welcome the strong commitment made
by President Farmajo to defeat Al-Shabaab by
working closely with the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). Provided that there is adequate
international support, the total elimination of
Al-Shabaab is in fact no longer a remote possibility.
AMISOM is marking its tenth anniversary in Somalia
this year, and its contribution to laying a foundation for
enhanced peace and security in the country has been
remarkable. However, AMISOM was never intended
to be more than a stopgap measure. Its mission is to
provide security support to Somalia in the short term
until the security forces of the country are fully ready
to take over full responsibility. That cannot be too far
away now, and the effort to achieve that goal should be
taken up more seriously than ever.
In the meantime and in tandem, ways and means
have to be found on the part of the United Nations
and the international community to make sure that
the support provided to AMISOM is predictable and
dependable, so that it can finish the job and pave the
way for its gradual drawdown and exit. We very much
hope that the Secretary-General will come up with
concrete proposals in that regard. Of course, as has
already been indicated, the long-term and sustainable
solution to the issue is to build the capacity of the
Somali National Army, and much remains to be done
in that area, including the coordination of international
efforts within the context of full country ownership.
Despite its recent positive trajectory, there is
no doubt that Somalia continues to faces enormous
challenges and difficulties. The country is building its

S/PV.7905

institutions, as well as regional and local administrative
structures, more or less from scratch. The recent
election has shown us that what we are seeing in Somalia
today is more than just a light at the end of the tunnel.
There is hope for the country’s future. Now is the time,
therefore, for scaling up support for Somalia’s postconflict reconstruction and development endeavours.
For that reason, the pledges that were made at the
Brussels and Istanbul conferences on Somalia should
be honoured.
Finally, we welcome the announcement that you
made, Sir, together with President Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo in Somalia, about the holding of
the London conference on Somalia in May. We look
forward to participating and hope it will contribute to
supporting the long-term stability and reconstruction
of Somalia. We in the region will continue to support
our sisterly country in overcoming its many challenges.
In that context, a special summit of IGAD will be held
in Nairobi on Saturday to find a sustainable and durable
solution to the plight of Somali refugees. I would like
to conclude by expressing the hope that this regional
effort will be complemented by support from the
international community, including the United Nations.
Mr. Prystaiko (Ukraine): Let me begin by
expressing Ukraine’s deep and sincere condolences to
the families of the victims of yesterday’s act of terror.
Our prayers go to all Londoners, and we believe that
we all have to remain united and dig deep to get to the
bottom of the attack and those responsible for it.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for presiding over
today’s important meeting personally. We appreciate
the United Kingdom’s leadership in the Council on the
issue of Somalia, including by steering the Council’s
field mission to Mogadishu in May 2016. I am also
grateful to the briefers for their insightful updates. And
I would like to express our full support for the President
of Somalia and his commitment to bringing sustainable
peace and prosperity to his country.
Like others, we are heartened to see the significant
progress that has been made since 2012 on the political
and security fronts in Somalia. The most substantial
strides have been in the electoral area. It was a longdistance election marathon with many hurdles along the
way. Yet at the finish line we witnessed the most peaceful
and inclusive electoral process that Somalia has had in
the past several decades. That indicates a clear success.
It is truly remarkable that the representation of women

17-0764111/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

in political life has increased by 70 per cent since the
previous elections. I am confident that that will have
a positive impact not only on the further political
empowerment of women, but also on the overall success
of peacebuilding endeavours in Somalia.
We understand that elections alone cannot end the
instability in the country. Yet they represent a historic
milestone on the road to peace and reconciliation for
the nation, achieved against a backdrop of continued
security challenges, especially terrorist threats.
That positive electoral experience should facilitate
preparations for the next step — ensuring universal
suffrage in Somalia. Further international assistance,
in particular through the commendable efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the European Union, the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
remains instrumental.
As the famous eighteenth-century English writer
Samuel Johnson once quipped, “the future is purchased
by the present”. With that in mind, I would like to
single out three specific challenges that Somalia is
facing today.
First, the dire humanitarian situation unfortunately
continues to deteriorate with every passing day.
According to recent data from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
UNICEF, malnutrition and drought-related diseases are
on the rise, and cholera has spread to 11 of the country’s
18 regions. Drought- and conflict-related displacement
also continues to increase. Half of the population
is in need of food and humanitarian assistance.
Approximately 1.4 million children are at risk of dying
imminently from severe malnutrition as famine looms
in Somalia and neighbouring countries. Those numbers
are more than abstract statistics. They represent the
lives of people who must be saved, including women
and children. The Council should act decisively and in
a unified manner. We should realize that under such
circumstances time is not on our side. In that light, we
commend the efforts of the Secretary-General and fully
support his personal involvement aimed at preventing
the repetition of the situation we saw in Somalia in
2011, when hundreds of thousands of people perished.
12/24

23/03/2017

Now is the time for joint action and for our unified
support and assistance to the Government and the
people of Somalia. It would be totally unacceptable for
the United Nations, or the international community in
general, to allow famine to devastate the country once
again. We welcome all international efforts aimed
at preventing such a scenario. In that context, we
commend the United Kingdom’s role in those efforts
and its readiness to seek new platforms and ways to
help Somalia, including the London conference on
Somalia to be held in May.
Secondly, with regard to security and counterterrorism, although the security situation continues to
improve, we realize that the threat posed by A1-Shabaab
persists. We strongly condemn its terrorist activities,
particularly attacks and violence against civilians, the
recruitment and use of children, and abductions of and
attacks on humanitarian workers. We pay tribute to
AMISOM and Somalia’s security forces for their efforts
to combat that threat. In the context of AMISOM’s
eventual exit, we encourage the Government of
Somalia to accelerate its security-sector reform, in
close cooperation with the United Nations presence and
international partners. The readiness of local forces
for a gradual takeover of security responsibilities from
AMISOM, including in the area of the protection of
civilians, should remain our top priority. We know very
well from our own experience back home that only
well-trained and well-equipped national forces can
effectively ensure lasting peace and stability in the face
of the threat posed by terrorism.
Thirdly, on the political front, besides the importance
of ensuring universal suffrage, which I have already
mentioned, there can be no doubt that conducting the
constitutional review and achieving further agreement
on the country’s federal administrative system are
key tasks for the new Government. Transparency and
inclusiveness will play a decisive role in determining
its success in that regard and how it will be judged by
the international community and, most important, by
the Somali people.
Finally, I would like to touch briefly on another
factor that must not be overlooked if we are to
support Somalia on the path to sustainable peace in a
comprehensive and holistic manner. Last week we had
reports of the first hijacking of a commercial vessel
by pirates since 2012. We hope that incident does not
portend a return to the levels of piracy threats that we
saw in the Gulf of Aden several years ago. Preventing
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

and countering piracy and armed robbery at sea should
continue to be a priority for the Government of Somalia
and the international community. Ukraine will stand
in solidarity with Somalia as it counters that and other
challenges and embraces new, historic opportunities.
Mr. Baba Cissé (Senegal) (spoke in French): First,
on behalf of Senegal, I would like to firmly condemn the
attack that occurred in London yesterday and express
the sincere condolences of the Government of Senegal
to you, Mr. President, and to the Government of the
United Kingdom and to the families of the victims.
I would also like to thank President Farmajo for his
important statement, as well as Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia and
Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia for
their briefings.
The delegation of Senegal also wishes to thank
the United Kingdom presidency for having taken the
initiative of convening this debate on Somalia, where
successful presidential elections in February resulted
in the election of Mr. Farmajo as new President of
the Republic.
That election, combined with the adoption of a new
constitution and a transparent, democratic and inclusive
electoral code, is undoubtedly a great step forward.
On behalf of the Government of Senegal, I once
again convey our warm congratulations to the Federal
Government of Somalia for the successful political
elections, and I encourage regional and international
actors to maintain their coordinated and cohesive
support so as to consolidate the country’s progress.
Our debate is certainly timely, given the current
state of affairs, which reflects the seriousness of
the other challenges facing Somalia — the most
recent being the severe drought, which, according to
humanitarian agencies, puts some 3 million people at
risk of starvation. That risk is all the more worrying,
as the country is still quite exposed to terrorists.
Al-Shabaab continues to be a threat as it still occupies
parts of the country and engages in harmful actions,
such as carrying out asymmetrical attacks, thus greatly
undermining the country’s security.

S/PV.7905

I also pay tribute to the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali defence and
security forces for their ongoing and outstanding work
alongside the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia in difficult and often dangerous conditions
in their efforts to support this brotherly country in
establishing the rule of law.
However, despite the significant progress that the
successful holding of presidential elections represents
and the progress made in the fight against terrorism,
the security and humanitarian challenges remain a
source of concern in Somalia, owing to the residual
capacities of the Al-Shabaab group, but also to the
growing foothold of the Islamic State in the region.
The increase in violence against civilians attributed
to Al-Shabaab is compounded by the use of children
in clashes, the attacks on humanitarian workers, the
embezzlement of aid and hindrances to its delivery, all
of which are reprehensible practices that we all strongly
condemn, whoever the perpetrators.
In order to better address those challenges, my
delegation believes that substantial reform of the
security sector is necessary and even urgent. In addition,
we encourage Member States to support AMISOM
by providing the necessary assistance to the African
Union and troop-contributing countries by paying for
troops, training, technical assistance and ammunition,
consistent with the exemption to the arms embargo
imposed on Somalia, as well as by making financial
contributions outside of the United Nations trust fund
in support of AMISOM.
Confident of the efficiency of regional processes,
we also remain convinced that the full cooperation
of regional States, particularly Intergovernmental
Authority on Development member States, through the
regional frameworks and mechanisms established for
that purpose, can promote a coordinated, and therefore
sustainable, response to the problem of Al-Shabaab and
other terrorist groups that threaten the region.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, according
to statistics cited here by many speakers, including
even the President of Somalia, some 6.2 million people
in Somalia need humanitarian aid and protection, of
which 2.9 million are directly at risk of starvation. We
make an impassioned plea for international solidarity
to help Somalia cope with that alarming situation. The
newly elected Somali authorities must continue to focus
on the fight against corruption in many sectors and the

17-0764113/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

improvement of human rights in Somalia, particularly
those of women and children. Senegal condemns
all violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, irrespective of the perpetrators.
In conclusion, my country calls on the international
community to continue to support the Somali Federal
Government in all of its efforts to advance the political
process, eradicate the Al-Shabaab threat, improve the
humanitarian situation and promote peacebuilding and
sustainable development.
Mr. Amendola (Italy): First of all, as Prime
Minister Gentiloni expressed to British Prime Minister
May, I would like to reiterate our deep condolences to
the British people and its Government over yesterday’s
terrorist attacks. We reaffirm our commitment to
remaining united in our fight against terrorism.
At the outset, allow me to greet President Farmajo
and express Italy’s congratulations on his election and
on the early appointment of the Prime Minister and the
new Government, as well as on the strong representation
of women within the new Government. We assure him
of our strong commitment to supporting the Somali
leadership in its efforts to stabilize the country. We
are convinced that Somali ownership is the key to
that process.
We have always believed in that principle; we
reaffirmed that position during the recent election,
and we will continue to do so as we further strengthen
our bilateral relations and shore up our contribution
for building the stable and prosperous Somalia that its
President invoked during his statement.
Somali ownership brings me to the first point:
institutional framework and security architecture. We
are actively involved — along with Somalia, the United
Nations, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the European Union
and other relevant partners — in supporting the
empowerment of Somali institutions. To that end,
it is instrumental that Somali national and regional
authorities work together to consolidate a united
Federal Somalia.
As far as security is concerned, the exit strategy for
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) must
be gradual in order to enable the entry of the Somali
security forces. Besides supporting Somali ownership
in the security field through bilateral training for
the Somali police and leading the European Union
14/24

23/03/2017

training mission in Somalia with a command of more
than half of its soldiers, we continue to encourage the
efforts of the United Nations and the African Union, as
expressed before, aimed at laying the groundwork for
the AMISOM transition.
I turn now to the stabilization of the country. The
presence today of President Farmajo and Minister
Omer is the best evidence of what has been achieved
over the past year. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General used the words “tragedy” and
“hope”, but Somalia could be and is a success story.
After instability and unrest, it is finally heading towards
peace. But we should not lose sight of the multifaceted
challenges posed by terrorists. Security is not the only
concern. The residual capability of Al-Shabaab and the
appearance of Da’esh still constitute threats that affect
the daily lives of the Somali people. The United Nations
and all partners of Somalia can do more to tackle the
root causes of radicalization, namely, poverty, the lack
of education and the lack of job opportunities.
We hope that the ongoing review of the United
Nations presence in the country will carefully assess
that issue. We call on international financial institutions
to do their part and, jointly with the donor community,
to support the Somali Government in improving the
business climate.
Finally, with regard to the humanitarian crisis, we
are extremely concerned, like other speakers before us,
about the severe impact of the drought and the risk of
famine. It is a situation that requires immediate action,
as the Secretary-General pointed out following his
recent visit. We are encouraged by the outcome of the
high-level round table convened by President Farmajo in
Mogadishu on 28 February and by the prompt measures
he has taken to facilitate the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian aid. We look forward to further results
during the forthcoming Intergovernmental Authority
on Development conference on Somali refugees to be
held on 25 March.
I am pleased to be able to share with the Council
that in answer to its appeal ahead of the London
conference, our Foreign Minister, Mr. Alfano,
personally informed Secretary-General Guterres a few
days ago of an additional humanitarian-aid contribution
by Italy, which will provide direct support to the Somali
people and the Government as they face this critical
humanitarian situation.
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

I would like to conclude by expressing our solidarity
with the people and the Government of Somalia
following the death of 40 Somali refugees on a boat
off the Yemeni coast. Our thoughts and condolences
go to the families of the victims. We follow the plight
of Somali refugees with great concern. As that most
recent tragic event has sadly reminded us, insecurity
and humanitarian challenges are interlinked. It is
imperative that we find a common solution to tackling
the root causes that have led to the problem of migration
in Somalia and elsewhere.
Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan would like
to welcome you, Mr. President, and to join the other
members of the Council in condemning the recent
terrorist attack outside the Houses of Parliament in
London. We express our condolences to the families of
the victims and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
We congratulate President Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo on his election as Head of State
and hope that under his wise stewardship the people
of Somalia can achieve tangible results in restoring
their country. We express our deep appreciation to the
leadership of the Federal Republic of Somalia, Special
Representative Keating and the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, Mr. Madeira, for their comprehensive
and thought-provoking updates. We also commend
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) for their commitment to bringing peace
and security to the country.
Kazakhstan welcomes the significant political and
electoral progress that has been made in Somalia, as
well as the improvements in the security situation. The
formation of a new Cabinet is an important practical
step in tackling the challenges that the country faces.
Preliminary measures aimed at building stable State
institutions and interministerial coordination should be
taken as soon as possible in order to enact legislation
and develop national strategies. That will provide a
foundation for the rule of law, good governance and
security-sector reform. It is essential that the resources
be found to pay the salaries of the army regularly with
the assistance of the United Nations system, together
with that of regional and international organizations
and financial institutions. We are looking forward to
the upcoming London conference on Somalia, which
will prepare a road map for a future federal security
structure designed to consolidate the current efforts.

S/PV.7905

The international community should support
Somalia in its efforts to reach the political goal of
achieving one-person, one-vote universal elections in
2020. To that end, technical guidance from the United
Nations Department of Political Affairs, UNSOM and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union will be required in order
to establish regional and local electoral structures.
The historic momentum towards inclusive democracy,
as seen in the increased representation of women
in the upper and lower houses of Parliament, must
continue. The electoral achievement across the country
would not have occurred without the heroic efforts of
UNSOM, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and especially the bravery
of AMISOM in combating the destructive acts of
Al-Shabaab. The training and financial and technical
support that AMISOM needs to enable it to succeed
in the current asymmetrical conflicts it is facing must
therefore be intensified. Kazakhstan is very concerned
about the recent Al-Shabaab attacks and calls for closer
collaboration between the Government, AMISOM,
UNSOM, the United Nations system and other
international partners.
As Chair of the Security Council’s Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009), concerning Somalia and Eritrea, Kazakhstan
is striving to promote peace and security in the Horn
of Africa. We underline the importance of ensuring
sufficient financial resources for implementing
Somalia’s first national development plan. It is
evident that the United Nations, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and regional financial
institutions should reinforce the Government’s
commitment to pursuing the path of sustainable
development. Such goals can be achieved, inter alia,
by introducing macroeconomic measures, including
creating jobs for young people and building the
capacity needed to establish and maintain the new and
stable public institutions that the country is striving
for. Only such national approaches, combined with
a comprehensive and holistic regional strategy that
addresses the issues of security and development, can
ensure lasting peace and stability for the country and
the wider subregion.
Like others, we are concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Somalia caused by the ongoing drought.
Our inability to provide assistance will undermine
the pursuit of key State-building and peacebuilding
initiatives. While we appreciate the efforts of several

17-0764115/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

countries to host Somali refugees, only a major
concerted effort by the international community can
mitigate the massive problem of refugees that we are
witnessing today. The prevailing tensions and armed
conflicts have resulted in death, violence and human
rights abuses, especially among children, women and
other vulnerable groups. Such acts of violence call for
intensifying the mobilization of protection services
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
measures by well-trained experts assigned to UNSOM.
Counter-terrorism efforts in Somalia must take into
account the rights, special needs and protection of the
sectors of the civilian population that are affected by
the armed conflict.
Despite the situation, Kazakhstan has hope and
optimism for Somalia with respect to its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence, and
we would like to express our full support to the newly
elected President and his new Government in their
vision for Somalia.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
strongly condemns the terrorist attack that took
place in London yesterday and would like to offer its
condolences to the bereaved families of the innocent
victims and our sympathy to the injured. Terrorism is
the common enemy of the international community.
China is resolutely opposed to all forms of terrorism and
is ready to step up its cooperation with the international
community in our joint response to terrorist threats and
challenges, with the goal of maintaining world peace
and security.
China was pleased to welcome Mr. Boris
Johnson, Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom,
as he presided over today’s meeting. We also welcome
President Farmajo of Somalia, who joined us by video
link, and to acknowledge the presence of Foreign
Minister Omar of Somalia at today’s meeting. China
listened attentively to the statements made by President
Farmajo; Mr. Keating, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia; an Mr. Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia.
Somalia is entering a crucial stage of national
reconstruction. China congratulates President Farmajo
on his election and welcomes his appointment of
Mr. Hassan Ali Khayre as Prime Minister. We also
commend his commitment to advancing the political
process of stabilizing the country and pressing ahead
16/24

23/03/2017

with economic reconstruction. We are confident
that the Government and the people of Somalia will
contininue to make new progress in the reconstruction
of their country.
The security and humanitarian situation in Somalia
remains precarious, given rampant terrorist activities
and the recent grip of a crippling famine. Somalia still
has a long way to go in its quest for peace and stability.
That is why there is a need for unwavering support and
assistance from the international community. China
welcomes the Security Council’s unanimous adoption
this morning of resolution 2346 (2017), on the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, which will enable it to carry out
the assessment of the post-election situation in Somalia
and provide targeted support, based on the Government
of Somalia’s needs, to enable it to advance its peace
process and national reconstruction. Secretary-General
Guterres and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Faki, both visited Somalia this month
in a testament to the solidarity of the African Union and
the United Nations with Somalia as it works to rebuild
itself in the new context. China highly commends
those efforts.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
deployment of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). Over the past decade, AMISOM and
countries in the region have assisted the Government
of Somalia in actively combating terrorism. The
United Nations has provided robust logistics support
to AMISOM and has diligently coordinated the
international assistance directed to Somalia. Thanks to
those efforts, the situation in Somalia has gradually made
a turn for the better. That is also an illustration of the
positive momentum towards stability and development
across the African continent driven by a commitment to
unity, self-reliance, peace and development.
Today some parts of Africa are still facing
daunting challenges characterized by continued
local conflicts, a lack of development capacity and a
precarious humanitarian situation. The United Nations
has cooperated well with the African Union and other
countries of the region on Somalia, providing useful
reference points for the Security Council in tackling
other hot-spot issues in Africa. China supports Africa in
in efforts to address African issues in African ways and
is supportive of the leading role played by the AU and
other regional and subregional organizations in seeking
political solutions to African hotspot issues, enhancing
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

coordination among various parties and building
synergies. All the parties should decide on priorities,
press the conflicting parties to settle their differences
through dialogue and consultation, identify the nature
and root causes of given problems, build mutual trust,
facilitate reconciliation and pursue lasting solutions.
The international community should nurture a
vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security, support capacity-building in
the African Standby Force and the African Union
Rapid Reaction Force, and generally improve Africa’s
collective security capabilities. It is important to take a
holistic approach to peace and development, emphasize
conflict prevention, draw up clear-cut peacekeeping and
peacebuilding targets, and boost Africa’s development
capabilities so as to promote stability and development
in Africa.
The Chinese Government attaches great importance
to its cooperation with Africa. During the Johannesburg
summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation,
held in December 2015, China’s President Xi Jinping
and African leaders agreed to upgrade China-Africa
relations to a comprehensive, strategic and cooperative
partnership. Ten cooperation initiatives for the next
three years were launched at the summit, focusing
on industrialization, agricultural modernization,
infrastructure, finance, green development, trade
and investment facilitation, poverty reduction, public
health, people-to-people exchanges and peace and
security. These outcomes are being implemented in a
swift and comprehensive manner.
So far, almost 50 per cent of China’s pledged
$60 billion has materialized or is in the pipeline. China
will continue to act on the principles put forward by
President Xi — those of sincerity, practical results,
affinity and good faith — and uphold the value of
friendship, justice and shared interests. We will ensure
good progress in delivering on those initiatives and
assist African countries in expediting industrialization
and agricultural modernization. We will remain
actively engaged in promoting the cause of peace and
security in Africa and will further contribute to peace,
stability and development in Africa.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay welcomed the presence of the United Kingdom
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs, His Excellency Mr. Boris Johnson, in presiding
over our work, and we are grateful to him for organizing

S/PV.7905

today’s briefing on the situation in Somalia. As I
said yesterday, my Government once again wishes to
express its solidarity in connection with the shocking
attack that occurred yesterday in the city of London.
I welcome the presence through videoteleconferencing of His Excellency President Farmajo
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, and would also like
to thank Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), and the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Caetano José
Madeira, for their briefings.
Uruguay welcomed the establishment of the
new Federal Government of Somalia on 8 February
following the election of its new President. At the start
of this new phase, it is important to decide how the
Security Council and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia can best support Somalia on issues
relating to State-building, including the revision of the
Constitution and the completion of the establishment
of the Federal State. That is why Uruguay supported
the extension of the UNSOM mandate this morning, in
order to give the Council sufficient time to develop an
effective mandate that benefits the people of Somalia.
This is a decisive and historic moment on the path
towards the consolidation of a democratic, inclusive,
stable State with full powers. Somalia has embarked
upon preparations for general elections in 2020 based
on the principle of one person, one vote. Uruguay
acknowledges the efforts made to achieve the 30 per
cent threshold of parliamentary seats set aside for
women, even though that goal was not reached in
this particular instance. However, the result of the
elections did show the transformation in the political
representation and participation of women in Somalia
and, given that important precedent, efforts should be
stepped up to achieve that goal in 2020.
Uruguay strongly condemns the continuing threat
posed by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, which is the
main threat to peace and security in Somalia. Securitysector reform, and in particular the rapid and effective
development of the Somali National Army, is vital if
the Government security forces, including police, are
to be able to assume a greater responsibility for the

17-0764117/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

maintenance of peace and security and the protection
of Somali citizens.
For Uruguay, it is urgent that the international
community respond to the worsening humanitarian
crisis and famine in Somalia. Unless those problems
are addressed, there may be grave consequences that
could undermine the recent political achievements.
Uruguay would especially like to underscore the need
to protect civilian populations, particularly children,
women and the elderly, and we encourage the Federal
Government of Somalia to broker agreements and
achieve stability, especially in areas where access to
supplies and humanitarian assistance is essential.
Uruguay reiterates that UNSOM and the international
community should work in an increasingly close and
coordinated manner with regional administrations and
the Federal Government to prioritize capacity-building
and institution-building at the regional level, strengthen
regional administrations and gradually create the basic
conditions needed for governance, security and the
provision of basic services for local populations.
Uruguay is very concerned about the recorded
increase in human rights violations. Without prejudice to
the important commitments that the Somali authorities
have made in recent years regarding the protection of
children, the detention of children for alleged links
to Al-Shabaab remains a matter of concern. Uruguay
therefore urges the Government of Somalia to treat
children as victims first and foremost, and to ensure
that the Government’s guiding principles should be the
best interests of the child and international standards
of protection.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to strongly condemn the terrorist attack in the
city of London yesterday. I would also like to express
our sincere condolences to the Government of the
United Kingdom and the families of the victims.
We are grateful to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for holding today’s important meeting
enabling us to examine the recent developments in the
brotherly country of Somalia. We thank Mr. Keating
and Mr. Madeira for their valuable briefings. I would
also like to congratulate President Farmajo of Somalia
on his election last month and to commend Somalia
for respecting the choice of the people and effecting a
peaceful and democratic transition of power.
18/24

23/03/2017

It goes without saying that the election of
Mr. Farmajo, who had broad popular support and has
appointed a new Government, is a positive development
that will, we hope, help to continue the development
of the political process in Somalia and respond to the
aspirations of the Somali people with regard to State
institution-building, the elimination of terrorism and
the promotion of socioeconomic development. In that
regard, we look forward to the report being drafted
by the Secretariat in accordance with resolution 2275
(2016) concerning the future presence of the United
Nations in Somalia.
My delegation would like to reiterate how
important it is for the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to fully
reflect developments on the ground so that it can
provide the Somali Government with the appropriate
support in confronting the challenges that the country
is facing. In doing so, it should focus on the concept
of establishing lasting peace, especially in the areas of
national reconciliation, the constitutional review, the
development of Somali armed forces that are strong and
united, and the establishment of effective institutions
that can provide basic services and ensure public order
and security in liberated areas.
Terrorism still represents a serious threat to the
progress achieved in Somalia in the recent past. That
threat is not limited to Somalia; it has spread to other
States in the region and beyond. We must promote
regional and international efforts to defeat Al-Shabaab
and other terrorist organizations. In that context, I would
like to commend the sacrifices made by the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
armed forces. It is a priority for the Somali stakeholders
to agree on a plan so as to achieve the goal of building
a united Somali army, given the progressive drawdown
of AMISOM planned for 2018 before it withdraws fully
and its protection and security functions are completely
transferred to the Somali State.
We express our solidarity with the Government
and the people of Somalia with regard to the effects
of the humanitarian crisis caused by the drought and
the scarcity of rain. My delegation calls for increased
regional and international efforts to provide assistance
to those who need it. The consequences of the crisis
are numerous and extremely dangerous, particularly
for the humanitarian, political and security fronts,
and can include problems such as increased migration,
pressure on natural resources and ensuing conflict.
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

In addition, it is important to strengthen efforts to
build capacity in Somalia in the area of early warning
and prevention mechanisms to manage this type of
crisis — which Somalia has suffered from repeatedly
in the past — in order to prevent their recurrence and
reduce their severity in future.
Lastly, I would like to renew our congratulations
to the President, the Government and the people of
Somalia on their successful elections, and to reiterate
the full support of Egypt for that brotherly country in
its efforts to build a stable, strong and prosperous State.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): As others
have done before me, I want to express our heartfelt
condolences to our close friends in the United Kingdom
in connection with the terrorist attack yesterday in
London. We pledge our full cooperation and support
in responding to the attack and in bringing those
responsible to justice.
I thank the President of the Council for the
United Kingdom’s leadership on Somalia. I am also
grateful to Special Representative Keating and Special
Representative Madeira for their briefings. We were
honoured by President Farmajo’s participation today,
and look forward to working closely with him and
his Cabinet.
There is a difficult job ahead, with formidable
humanitarian and security challenges complicating the
already daunting tasks of building State institutions and
extending services to communities throughout Somalia.
Let me assure President Farmajo and the people of
Somalia of continued support from the United States.
An immediate challenge facing the people of
Somalia is the worsening hunger crisis, of course. More
than half of Somalia’s population needs food, water and
health services now and, as we have just heard today,
only 32 per cent of the needed $825 million has been
received. We must aggressively pursue all funding
streams to meet these urgent needs if we hope to
mitigate the possibility of another famine.
We urge the Somali federal and State authorities
to do everything possible to remove bureaucratic
impediments to the movement of humanitarian
assistance and, with the support of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to establish conditions
conducive to the unhindered delivery of critical
humanitarian supplies.

S/PV.7905

We are especially troubled by Al-Shabaab’s
increasing depravity as it intensifies its asymmetric
attacks on civilians, security services and Government
officials. We condemn Tuesday’s car-bomb attack
in Mogadishu’s Hamar Weyne district, and we offer
our condolences to the families of the victims. We
urge AMISOM and the Somali security forces to be
proactive in efforts to disrupt Al-Shabaab and to deter
other terrorist organizations from gaining a foothold
in Somalia.
The United States continues to engage with
partners in working towards a suitable solution to the
issue of AMISOM troop stipends. The United States
provides substantial assistance, including equipment,
to the militaries of many AMISOM troop-contributing
countries. We encourage donors to contribute to the
trust fund for AMISOM and the Somali National Army.
We recognize that AMISOM cannot stay in Somalia
forever and, in that regard, joint planning between
the United Nations and the African Union to identify
AMISOM’s immediate needs has become increasingly
important.
The upcoming joint United Nations-African Union
review of AMISOM will be an opportunity to assess
Somalia’s comprehensive security needs and identify
a way forward for AMISOM. Given the severity of
the remaining security challenges in Somalia, we
do not believe that it is appropriate at this time to
transition to a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
AMISOM should continue its principal mission — to
reduce the threat of Al-Shabaab — while setting the
conditions for a successful security transition. To that
end, we encourage President Farmajo to work with the
Somali regional presidents to reach agreement on a
national architecture for the Somali National Army and
security forces.
Somalia’s international partners must carefully
consider how best to provide coordinated support to
Somalia’s security sector. If we are frank, we must
recognize that at times our efforts to train and equip
the Somalia National Army have not translated directly
into sustainable gains. Security assistance works well
when donors coordinate closely behind a Somaliled process, and we have welcomed intensified donor
coordination in recent months under the auspices of the
“S6” mechanism.
Strong Somali leadership from Villa Somalia and
Parliament is needed to begin the constitutional review

17-0764119/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

23/03/2017

process that will formalize State formation and provide
a legal foundation for Somali institutions. A spirit of
reconciliation must undergird those efforts to ensure
inclusiveness. It is crucial that the Somali Government
also protect its citizenry and prevent the unlawful use
and recruitment of child soldiers, sexual and genderbased violence, and the harassment of journalists by
security forces.

the risk of famine helps address the root causes of
terrorism. Recognizing the very serious famine
situation, Japan decided last week to extend an additional
$26 million in emergency humanitarian assistance in
response to the call by the Secretary-General, with
$8.5 million directed to Somalia. This is in addition to
Japan’s assistance to Somalia in the amount of more
than $22 million, decided in January 2017.

We look forward to the London conference on
Somalia as an opportunity for the Federal Government
of Somalia and its international partners to reach
agreement on the key issues that we have discussed
here today. We hope that we will emerge from the
conference with a shared path for the next phase of
supporting Somalia’s development, while addressing
urgent humanitarian needs and building on the recent
political and security successes that give us hope that a
brighter future is possible for the Somali people.

Improvement of the security situation in all corners
of Somalia is the top priority. The role of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is key in
combating extremism, including Al-Shabaab. In order
to avoid security gaps as AMISOM draws down next
year, reinforcement of the capabilities of the Somali
National Army must be conducted in an urgent and
coordinated manner. While international donors have
mobilized abundant resources over the years, there has
been insufficient progress in building a representative
and effective Somali National Army. Among the
reasons are minimal integration of clan-based militias
and a lack of coordination among donor communities.

Mr. Bessho (Japan): Before I speak on the issue of
Somalia, I wish to express Japan’s strong condemnation
of the heinous terrorist attack that took place in London
yesterday. On behalf of the Japanese Government, I
express my sincere condolences to the families of the
victims and our solidarity with the people of the United
Kingdom. I wish a swift and full recovery to those who
were injured.
I thank you, Mr. President, and the United
Kingdom, for convening this timely briefing. I thank the
briefers for their informative updates on the situation in
Somalia. I also extend my deep appreciation to President
Farmajo for his robust commitment to achieving peace
and stability in the country.
Progress towards peace and stability in Somalia
has been unfortunately fragile so far. Many challenges
lie ahead, such as formulating a national security
framework, building capacity for a representative
Somali National Army, combating Al-Shabaab, agreeing
on Federal-State resource- and revenue-sharing
mechanisms and facilitating universal suffrage in 2020.
Robust and sustained international assistance is critical,
and Somali ownership is indispensable. Japan praises
President Farmajo’s active leadership in tackling these
problems, and we promise to extend our full support for
his endeavours.
The ongoing famine has threatened progress
in State-building since the establishment of the
Government in 2012. As Secretary-General António
Guterres remarked during his visit to Somalia, tackling
20/24

We welcome the initiative by the United Kingdom
to host the London conference on Somalia in May
and commend President Farmajo and the SecretaryGeneral for co-hosting the conference. That will be a
perfect opportunity to address these problems and use
limited international resources in a more coordinated
manner. In particular, we hope the meeting will provide
momentum for agreement among political leaders from
each State on a national security framework, with a
clear demarcation of the responsibilities between the
Federal Government and states.
Improvements in the country’s long-term security
also depend on strengthening the capacity of the
Somali police forces, including via salary support,
institution-building and the provision of basic social
services. Japan has contributed more than $400 million
since 2007 in these areas and will continue to support
Government efforts.
Macroeconomic improvements are critically important
for achieving sustained peace and prosperity. Japan
has long given priority to this area and welcomes the
successful conclusion of the regular consultations by
the International Monetary Fund last month. Sustained
efforts in implementing measures to improve the fiscal
framework, raise tax revenues and conduct structural
reforms are key. Japan hopes that the political leaders
demonstrate strong leadership and cooperation on
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

resource- and revenue-sharing mechanisms that will
serve as a backbone of the Somali economy.
Finally, the first reported hijacking of a large
commercial vessel off the coast of Somalia in five years
has reminded us of the need for continued international
counter-piracy efforts in the region. Japan will continue
its warning and surveillance activities and escort
operations while also supporting social services and
economic development in the coastal regions, in close
cooperation, naturally, with the Somali Government
and the international community.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Before beginning our statement, we would like to add our
own words to those of all our colleagues in condemning
the heinous attack that took place yesterday in London
and also repeat what President Evo Morales Ayma said
in conveying our condolences to the Government and
the people of the United Kingdom and to the families of
those who lost their lives. We wish a speedy recovery
to those who were injured. A few minutes ago, I found
out that citizens of 11 countries were among the victims
of yesterday’s attack. That is a terrible reminder of the
fact that terrorism is a global threat and that it is crucial
for the international community to come together to put
an end to it.
I would now like to begin by thanking President
Farmajo of Somalia for participating in this meeting
of the Security Council. I would also like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Boris Johnson, Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom, as well as Mr. Michael Keating and
Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira, whom I thank for
their respective briefings.
Bolivia would like to emphasize the importance
of the conclusion of the Somali electoral process and
the election of President Farmajo on 8 February. We
were pleased to see that the elections were much more
peaceful and inclusive than has been the case in the past
and that they have inspired a sense of hope in Somalia.
We believe that they were the most representative and
legitimate elections in the country’s history and that
they have made it possible, for the first time, for 26 per
cent of parliamentary seats to be held by women.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s position
with respect to the importance of international
cooperation in consolidating the recent political
and security achievements. Moreover, we must also
continue to ensure ongoing and long-term support for

S/PV.7905

Somalia in order to promote the process of institutionand capacity-building based on initiatives aimed at
good governance and efforts to improve the living
conditions of its people. We underscore the importance
of adhering to the political road map so that elections
based on the principle of one-person-one-vote can be
held no later than 2020.
Another issue of concern for us is the deterioration
in the humanitarian situation, exacerbated by the
drought that has extended beyond Puntland and
Somaliland to areas in the south, such as Gedo and Juba
Hoose. According to United Nations statistics, 5 million
Somalis are facing acute food shortages, of whom more
than 1.1 million are in emergency and crisis situations.
According to the report (S/2017/21) of the SecretaryGeneral, the continued lack of social safety nets and
basic services increases the country’s vulnerability and
the potential for a broader crisis.
We call on the international community to respond
without delay so as to prevent the situation from
developing into a general famine in the country and the
Horn of Africa, such as we saw in 2011 when, according
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, 250,000 people died, of whom more than
half were children under the age of five.
I would like to underscore what the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden said earlier, namely, that it
seems unthinkable that in 2017 we are confronting the
worst humanitarian crisis since the Second World War.
But we also believe that it is crucial to recall that in
2017 we are encountering the greatest concentration of
wealth among a few in the history of humankind. Eight
individuals possess more than half of the world’s wealth,
and we naturally believe that that is closely linked not
only to the planet’s profound humanitarian crisis, but
also to climate change, which is one of the causes — not
the only one — of the tragic drought situation.
During the Secretary-General’s visit to Somalia
in March, he stressed to donors the need to provide an
additional $825 million so as to be able to deliver critical
humanitarian assistance over the next six months, and
that, without that aid, the Somali people would face a
tragedy that neither they nor any other people deserve.
We therefore call on institutions like the World Bank,
as part of their international responsibility, to remove
all obstacles that might prevent such assistance from
reaching Somalia.

17-0764121/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

Moreover, we commend the President of Djibouti,
the Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, the President of the Republic of Kenya and
the President of Somalia for their joint declaration,
entitled the Mogadishu Declaration on regional
cooperation on the current drought, which commits
those States to combining efforts to establish security
and stability in Somalia and neighbouring countries,
thereby ensuring an effective response to the drought
and enabling further progress in peacebuilding and
State-building in Somalia.
Furthermore, Bolivia joins in the strong
condemnation of the coordinated suicide attacks that
killed dozens of Somali civilians and soldiers over the
last several days, for which responsibility lies with the
terrorist group Al-Shabaab. Similarly, we call attention
to the plight of the Somali refugees who are returning
to their country and facing situations of insecurity.
Finally, we acknowledge the important work of
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the
African Union Mission in Somalia. We believe that
their contribution is fundamental within a framework
of respect for human rights and for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Somalia.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to express our
condolences and sympathy to our United Kingdom
colleagues, all the victims and the families of those
who were killed in yesterday’s terrorist attack in
London. We strongly condemn that murderous attack,
which once again confirms the need for coordinated
action to effectively counter the global terrorist threat.
We believe that that tragic event clearly demonstrates
the timeliness and necessity of our initiatives to
unify the efforts of the international community to
combat terrorism.
The successful completion of the electoral process
in Somalia and the election of the new President,
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, has been
an important milestone in moving the country forward
on the path of national reconciliation, re-establishing
State authority and consolidating democratic
institutions. A Prime Minister has been appointed, a
new Government has been formed and the process of
establishing a system of territorial administration has
practically been completed.
22/24

23/03/2017

However, we must note that a clan-based approach
continues to prevail, unfortunately, in the domestic
political life of the country. We need to gradually move
away from that tendency and eliminate the fragmented
nature of the Somali State at every level. We expect that
the new Government will address the issues associated
with internal political reforms, socioeconomic
revitalization and development. We look forward to
the positive outcome of the serious work currently
under way on preparing a new version of the country’s
Constitution and on adopting a law on political
parties. At the same time, the most important tasks
for the Government continue to be the strengthening
of the security sector, solidifying the foundations
of federalism and promoting a lasting national and
interethnic reconciliation in Somalia.
In our estimation, the security situation remains
far from stable. We note the importance of continuing
coordinated efforts by the international community to
provide multidimensional assistance to Mogadishu so as
to enhance the combat readiness of the Somali National
Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia, which
bear the primary burden for combating Al-Shabaab.
We are concerned about the increase in destabilizing
activity by that terrorist group beyond Somalia and the
coordination of its actions with other terrorist groups in
Africa. However, to date, achieving a decisive turning
point in the fight against extremists has been impossible.
In that regard, we call for a resolution of the issue of the
delays in paying salaries to African peacekeepers and
Somali soldiers and officers, who shed their blood to
ensure Somalia’s safety and security.
The arms and coal embargoes against Somalia are
an important and effective instrument in preventing
extremist and terrorist forces from resupplying
and re-arming. It is those forces that prevent the
normalization of the region. The policy of partially
lifting the embargo on arms to benefit the security
forces of Somalia has proven its effectiveness.
The seriously deteriorating humanitarian situation
in several parts of Somalia demands close attention
and an appropriate international response. It was
caused primarily by a combination of the catastrophic
consequences of the drought and the persistent internal
instability. Hundreds of thousands of people in the
country are on the verge of starvation, and forecasts
for the near future are far from encouraging. The
international community must provide humanitarian
assistance to ensure that the population is provided
17-07641

23/03/2017

The situation in Somalia

with drinking water, food and medicine. Russia is
actively taking part in developing coordinated steps
aimed at resolving the crisis, as well as in providing
multidimensional assistance to the authorities in
Mogadishu. We will continue training Somali civilian
experts in Russia, the funding for which will be
provided by the Russian federal budget.
Our country has regularly provided humanitarian
assistance to the Federal Government of Somalia and
Somali refugees in neighbouring countries through
targeted contributions to the relevant funds of the
United Nations system. Since 2011, our overall share
in providing assistance has exceeded $16 million,
including $2 million for Kenya, which has hosted
approximately 1 million Somali refugees. We intend
to continue to provide similar humanitarian assistance
to Somalia.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
various briefers for their presentations and would like
to pay special tribute to the British Foreign Minister,
who took the initiative to convene today’s important
meeting and travelled to New York to preside over it.
I would also particularly like to thank the President of
the Federal Republic of Somalia for his statement via
video link.
Once again, on behalf of the Government of France,
I would like to express our strongest condemnation
of yesterday’s terrorist attack in London and convey
our deepest sympathy to and full solidarity with the
United Kingdom.
I should like to make three points. First, with regard
to the political and humanitarian situation in Somalia,
the electoral process has been satisfactorily concluded.
France welcomes the uncontested election of President
Farmajo, which sparked a genuine wave of enthusiasm
among the people. We are well aware that the holding
of elections called for considerable logistical and
security support from the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), respectively. And that is indeed
an achievement. I warmly congratulate Mr. Keating
and the representative of the African Union, as well as
my Ethiopian colleague, and, through him, all troopand police-contributing countries.
The new Somali Administration is already under
immense strain. The Secretary-General has just returned
from a visit to Somalia and was able to see for himself
the seriousness of the humanitarian situation, which, as

S/PV.7905

we know, is being exacerbated by famine affecting the
region. The newly formed Government must respond to
that situation with the full support of the international
community. Above and beyond that emergency
situation, it is important for the Somali Government
to be resolutely committed to institution-building and
the establishment of the genuine rule of law in order to
promote improved respect for human rights and lasting
stability in the country.
My second point relates to AMISOM and prioritizing
the work of the United Nations. Now that elections have
been held this year, security will be our primary concern
in the years to come. AMISOM has been deployed in
Somalia since 2007. Its work, which receives logistical
support from the United Nations and financial support
from the European Union, is particularly challenging.
I would like to pay special tribute to all those who lost
their lives in the fight against Al-Shabaab. That fight is
a collective endeavour that cannot be won by AMISOM
alone. Moreover, it was never intended for AMISOM
to be perpetually deployed in Somalia. In that regard, I
believe that two points should be underscored.
With regard to the financing of AMISOM, which
is not sufficiently predictable or sustainable, France
had hoped that other donors would agree to join the
European Union in providing considerable financial
support. The European Union has already provided
some $1.7 billion, in addition to contributions that its
member States have made to the budget of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia and the bilateral
contributions of some member States. Regrettably,
AMISOM funding is still not geographically diverse.
The European Union continues to finance 80 per cent
of the total required and hopes that other donors will
join in that effort.
With regard to the withdrawal of AMISOM, we
understand that some troop-contributing countries are
ready and willing to withdraw, and, once again, we
pay tribute to them. Nonetheless, it is important that
the withdrawal not be dictated only by the schedule
of requirements, but that it be linked to developing a
security solution for Somalia.
That leads me to my third point, which relates to
the ability of the Somalis to be responsible for their
own security. That appears to be the key issue on the
table for the next reporting period. There are 10,900
soldiers in the Somali army who are eligible for the
logistical support provided by the Support Office for

17-0764123/24

S/PV.7905

The situation in Somalia

joint operations with AMISOM. At the same time, there
are local militias, referred to as the Dervish, that also
provide security functions.
That raises several questions that could be useful in
guiding our discussions. Are the soldiers of the Somali
National Army well identified? How might the training
and operationalization of the Somali National Army
be conducted? Could UNSOM step up its efforts to
coordinate training and furnish equipment, with a view
to providing a more coherent response to the needs of

24/24

23/03/2017

the Somali National Army? How can existing Somali
security forces be more involved in security operations
in the country and in Somali National Army offensives?
We welcome the holding in May of the London
conference, which we hope will provide some answers
to those questions, and we look forward to future
reports on AMISOM and the presence of the United
Nations in Somalia in the new post-election period.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

17-07641
