S/2021/935

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 December 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 17 November 2021 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8900th meeting of the Security Council,
convened on 9 November 2021 under the item “Maintenance of international
peace and security”. The interventions of the briefers and Council members, as
well as Albania, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Chile, Cuba, Denmark, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Japan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco, the Netherlands, Peru,
Portugal, Qatar, Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland, the United Arab Emirates and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, will be published as an official record of the
Security Council (S/PV.8900).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
the 8900th meeting, the following delegations submitted written statements, copies
of which are enclosed: Brazil, Georgia, Jordan and Ukraine. These statements will
be issued as a document of the Security Council in accordance with the procedure
set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of members of the Security Council
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, and reference to the document will be
made in S/PV.8900.
(signed) Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
President of the Security Council

21-17714 (E) 250322 290322

*2217714*

S/2022/935

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil thanks the Mexican presidency for convening this meeting and providing
us with an opportunity to advance our understanding of the nexus between security
and development, a topic Brazil brought to the attention of the Security Council
during its most recent term as an elected member, as mentioned in the concept note
contained in document S/2021/883.
There is no denying that the causes of armed conflict lie in deep-seated
political, social and economic factors, which are complex and case-specific. In some
cases, economic issues such as socioeconomic inequality, chronic poverty and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources aggravate armed conflicts as well.
The Security Council has already recognized the need to consider developmentrelated issues in the exercise of its responsibilities with regard to the maintenance
of international peace and security. In presidential statement S/PRST/2011/4, the
Council reiterated the need for a comprehensive and integrated approach to conflict
that must take into account the economic, political and social dimensions of each
conflict. Nevertheless, the challenge remains as to how to incorporate development
aspects in the Council`s activities and streamline coordination among the different
United Nations agencies that have a prominent role in promoting development and
sustainability.
Supporting conflict-affected countries needs to be a system-wide commitment
by the United Nations. In most cases, the Security Council will not address
development issues directly; but in order to consider their impacts both in the field
and on the Council’s actions, it needs to be fully cognizant of such issues. The Council
should be aware of the effectiveness of development actors on the ground and look
to coordinating them with Security Council-mandated missions, where they exist.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities often intersect with development
challenges. In the fulfilment of their main roles, peacekeeping operations and special
political missions have an unequivocal responsibility to help host countries tackle
the root causes of conflicts with a view to building the foundations of peace and
reducing the likelihood of a new cycle of violence.
Furthermore, peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not mutually exclusive
activities per se, most notably in the context of the former. For that reason, Brazil has
argued for mandates that incorporate reconstruction and peacebuilding activities in
parallel to peacekeeping actions. Peacekeeping and special political missions can
play a role in performing humanitarian activities, working in favour of strengthening
institutions — including the judiciary and public security forces — and assisting
national authorities in the implementation of development strategies.
Peacekeepers should play the role of early peacebuilders. To that end, Member
States must remain committed to initiating, funding and constantly improving
peacebuilding activities within peacekeeping mandates, particularly through
programmatic activities and quick-impact projects. When appropriate, the Council
should also encourage further coordination between peacekeeping missions and
relevant development actors on the ground.
Conversely, peacebuilding efforts fill a critical gap during the transition from
peacekeeping, addressing the root causes and dynamics that can make a country
relapse into conflict. Programmes aimed at improving living conditions and
strengthening institutions, which are core elements of peacebuilding objectives, can
also contribute to tackling social exclusion and inequality in a virtuous cycle that
supports the prevention of new conflicts.
2/9

21-17714

S/2022/935

For countries in critical transition phases where United Nations peacekeeping
missions are scaling down, it is important to seek greater coordination within the
whole United Nations system to ensure continued aid flow and the alignment of
security and development objectives, which will lay the foundation for successful
peacebuilding activities. We are convinced that purely military or security strategies
will not be able to adequately deal with the overwhelming majority of today’s
situations of conflict.
As the Council starts considering a broader set of issues in order to better
fulfil its mandate in relation to peace and security, such as poverty and inequality,
it becomes imperative that the cooperation between the Council and other United
Nations bodies primarily responsible for those issues become more regular and
effective, with more and clearer guidelines and follow-up opportunities. With those
considerations in mind, the Security Council’s increased cooperation with the
Economic and Social Council is clearly needed, as is greater interaction between the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
The Peacebuilding Commission fills an institutional gap in the United Nations.
Its mission is to act as a catalyst or coordinator, within the United Nations system and
beyond, to support efforts aimed at consolidating peace and promoting development
in countries emerging from conflict. While the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission to the Security Council has experienced steady improvements in the
past few years, even closer collaboration between those two bodies appears to be
essential for the operationalization of a new approach to peace efforts — one that
privileges prevention and the peaceful resolution of disputes. Such collaboration also
has the merit of mitigating the representation gap in the United Nations collective
security mechanism, in the light of the fact that a greater number and variety of
countries have access to Peacebuilding Commission membership.
In order to ensure that the PBC plays an increasingly useful advisory role
throughout the whole cycle of peace operations, it is important that conversations
between the Commission and the Council on any specific issue start early on and
be held on a regular basis. Sustainable peace implies applying a comprehensive
approach to the peace-development continuum. In many instances, addressing and
preventing the underlying causes of conflict can be more efficient and cost-effective
in countering security threats than military interventions.

21-177143/9

S/2022/935

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the
United Nations, Kaha Imnadze
We thank the presidency of Mexico for convening today’s high-level open
debate and for bringing this important subject to the Security Council’s agenda.
We see that conflicts worldwide are not decreasing; rather, their number is on
the rise, and they are becoming increasingly intense and protracted. Although the
number of deaths resulting from conflicts has been declining over time, we see that
more countries are affected by violence and conflicts today than ever before, with
the increased involvement of non-State actors, which could be a sign of the presence
of new driving factors of conflicts.
This situation is prompting the international community to take action
and find ways to address conflicts more effectively. In that regard, effective and
sustainable conflict resolution and peacebuilding requires that root causes such
as marginalization and inequality, human rights violations, poverty and economic
disadvantages, among many others — which are the main drivers of conflicts — be
addressed, as well as that peacebuilding processes be made more inclusive. Moreover,
it has become clear that factors such as climate change and the coronavirus disease
pandemic further exacerbate the overall situation.
Georgia welcomes the efforts of the international community to build new
political consensus in favour of maintaining peace and security by preventing
conflicts before they occur, in line with the concept of sustaining peace, which
underlines the imperative of addressing all stages of the conflict cycle.
My country has long been committed to peaceful conflict resolution with
regard to the protracted Russia-Georgia conflict, which relies upon the de-occupation
of Georgia’s territories and reconciliation and confidence-building between the
war-torn communities. Despite Russia’s unconstructive behaviour in the overall
process, Georgia spares no effort to promote confidence-building measures and its
engagement policy, which is aimed at reconciliation and peaceful conflict resolution.
The Government of Georgia has undertaken bold steps, such as the
introduction of a peace initiative entitled “A Step to a Better Future” in 2018, which
is supplemented by another initiative entitled “Produce for a Better Future”. Those
initiatives cover various areas that include, but are not limited to, trade, education
and business, with the ultimate goal of facilitating contacts between the divided
communities, ease the exchange of goods, provide access to quality education and
share the progress that Georgia has achieved with the people living on the other side
of the occupation line.
In addition, the Government of Georgia recently launched an inclusive
whole-of-nation development process with its State strategy for de-occupation and
peaceful conflict resolution, which will engage civil society, grass-roots level nongovernmental organizations, internally displaced persons and conflict-affected
women, as well as international partners. The strategy will include two pillars
of our peace policy, namely, the de-occupation of Georgia’s territories by Russia
and reconciliation and engagement between the divided communities across the
occupation line.
Regrettably, we see quite the opposite from the actions of the Russian
Federation — the occupying Power — including the installation of physical barriers
along the occupation line, restriction of the freedom of movement, kidnappings,
arbitrary detentions, deprivation of life, torture and ill-treatment, ethnic
discrimination and a ban on education in the native language, among other things.
4/9

21-17714

S/2022/935

Moreover, Russia does not allow any international presence in the Russian-occupied
territories of Georgia to monitor and prevent those severe human rights violations in
the regions and territories adjacent to the occupation line, which clearly runs counter
to Georgia’s reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts.
We strongly believe that only by upholding the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and through respect for international law, as well as a firm and
principled stance by the international community, can we deliver on our pledge to
maintain peace and security and pave the way for the protection of human rights
and sustainable development. Georgia therefore once again reaffirms its strong
commitment to multilateralism and the rules-based order.

21-177145/9

S/2022/935

Annex III
Statement by the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are confident that your wise stewardship of the Council
will enable it to fulfil its function of maintaining international peace and security.
Exclusion affects the lives of millions of people around the world who struggle to
stay alive in extremely harsh social and economic conditions, which have been
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We are grateful to
you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting and raising this issue on
the agenda of the Council.
Many of today’s violent conflicts have to do with grievances caused by
inequality, exclusion and marginalization, all of which create fertile ground for
conflict, fuel it, exacerbate it, undermine prospects for peaceful solutions and make it
difficult to strengthen social bonds. When individuals feel that they are marginalized
and ignored by the people, groups or institutions around them, there are often negative
consequences. Those consequences can be felt beyond the individual level; they can
affect the society as a whole, or even spread to other societies. Marginalization,
exclusion and disempowerment can create a deep frustration that manifests as enmity
towards the perceived culprit. Sadly, there are many ideologies and organizations that
can exploit such frustration to undermine social stability and cohesion.
The exclusion of young people and their disengagement from all areas of life
create threats that place them among the most dangerous obstacles to the human
development of society. They weaken young people’s allegiance to the values of the
nation, society and the world. As a result, youth are more easily recruited to extremist
movements and can adopt ideologies that are inconsistent with, and antithetical to,
their culture. Convinced that young people have a role to play in preventing conflict,
Jordan submitted resolution 2250 (2015) — on youth, peace and security — during
its term on the Council. That historic resolution marks an unprecedented recognition
of the urgent need to involve youth in strengthening peace and combating violent
extremism. It underscores the important role that youth can play in preventing and
resolving conflicts. That is critical to sustaining peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts and ensuring that they are inclusive and successful.
The resolution reaffirms the role of youth in conflict prevention and urges
Member States to facilitate an enabling environment for youth and to create policies
and mechanisms that would allow them to play an effective part in peacebuilding
and strengthening a culture of peace, tolerance and respect for religions. For that
purpose, young persons need to be integrated into their societies effectively and in
institutional terms. Education and work should be improved to meet their needs,
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and enable youth to play a constructive
role in their societies, rather than a destructive one.
Jordan aims to build a generation of young people who can play a positive
role in public life, help build a country based on justice, the rule of law and
equal opportunities and make headway towards sustainable development. This
year, the royal committee on modernizing the political system put forward a set
of recommendations aimed at creating a safe space for young people to engage in
positive, organized political activity; generating an economic and development
environment conducive to tackling the challenges raised by unemployment, which is
a significant obstacle to political participation; and offering incentives for creativity
and innovation in all public, private, academic and civil institutions.
6/9

21-17714

S/2022/935

In order to strengthen the political role of women, youth and persons with
disabilities in political party and public life, the committee recommends that at least
20 per cent of the founding members of any political party should be young persons
aged between 18 and 35, at least 20 per cent should be women and at least one
should have a disability. The committee recommended lowering the minimum age
for candidacy to 25 in order to encourage youth engagement in politics.
The COVID-19 pandemic has set global development progress back by
several years, pushed 120 million more people into extreme poverty and exposed
profound inequality and exclusion. Efforts to recover from the devastating effects
of the pandemic give us an opportunity to move towards more inclusive societies.
That means finding political solutions and taking systematic measures to tackle
inequality and exclusion and to show that change is possible. Our common Agenda
(A/75/982) provides a road map to strengthen multilateral cooperation and enable us
to build our world back better. By connecting individuals with their societies and
societies with the world, in accordance with our shared values, we can avert conflict
and prevent violence, extremism and wars.

21-177147/9

S/2022/935

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the United Nations
Ukraine highly appreciates the initiative of the Mexican Security Council
presidency to hold this important debate and expresses its gratitude to the briefers
for their presentations.
We fully agree with the idea that much more needs to be done by the Council
if we are to effectively address the root causes of conflict. It is extremely important
to find appropriate tailor-made solutions as well as to determine and effectively
counter fake narratives on the nature of a particular conflict or crisis situation. As
we observe now, such narratives are often disseminated by instigators in order to
avoid responsibility and impede conflict resolution.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has explicitly shown how dramatically
humanitarian challenges can complicate our efforts to address long-standing
threats. Health emergencies, food insecurity, poverty and inequality are among the
challenges that can become conflict triggers.
We concur on an assumption made in the debate’s concept note (S/2021/883,
annex) that the Council has not succeeded in addressing the structural causes of
various types of violence that can become threats to international peace and security.
One of the explanations is that we are still compelled to confront the attempts
by perpetrators of conflict to distort, including here in the Security Council,
the essence of conflict situations resulting from armed aggression against, and
occupation and attempted annexation of, sovereign States, as well as other violations
of international law.
While we share the view that social, political and economic exclusion can
exacerbate conflicts, the Council requires shrewd expertise in each conflict or crisis
situation, as there are cases when exclusion-related allegations are used as a pretext
by a conflict instigator.
For instance, in the case of the armed aggression against Ukraine, Russia
has persistently attempted to camouflage and justify its hostile actions with fake
narratives about the violation of language rights of certain groups of people, the
exclusion of certain regions from decision-making processes and the central
Government’s disregard of the legitimate interests of certain regions of Ukraine.
Poverty and inequality, lawlessness and flagrant human rights violations,
exclusion and marginalization of the civilian population in the occupied territories,
infrastructure degradation and poor access to basic services are now the outcomes
of the conflict in Donbas, not its triggers.
It is important therefore to ensure that information on exclusion and
marginalization in conflict situations be verified by intergovernmental monitoring
mechanisms, including those of the United Nations. In that regard, we regret that
the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine continues to be
denied access to Crimea and that the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine faces impediments in the occupied
part of Donbas.
A wide range of instruments have been used by the aggressor to instigate and
further fuel the conflict in Donbas. The devastating impact of inciting hatred and
hate speech, including by disseminating fakes and disinformation, and violations
of human rights and fundamental freedoms have been widely recognized by the
international community. Those should be further addressed until a solution based
on respect for international law is found.
8/9

21-17714

S/2022/935

Violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the occupied
territories should also be considered as a deliberate action by the occupying Power
to undermine the prospects for a peaceful resolution. Respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine is further
deteriorating in view of the persisting repressive policies against Ukrainian citizens,
in particular Crimean Tatars.
It must be clear, in that regard, that a human-rights violator and abuser of
fundamental norms of international law can hardly be a reliable partner in addressing
other threats and challenges throughout the global security agenda.
As the concept note rightly points out,
“[a]n international order based on the rule of law is indispensable for a
peaceful, more prosperous and just world.” (S/2021/883, annex, para. 10)
That is why we are convinced that we need strong institutions — in particular
the Security Council — protecting international law, in which all members are
responsible and reliable contributors to safeguarding the rules- and values-based
international order.

21-177149/9
