Reaolntiona adopted on the reporte of the Third C..ommittee

the occasion of the World Refugee Year, special attention to the problems of refugees coming within the
competence of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, and in particular to consider the possibility of :
(a) Improving the legal status of refugees living
on, or to be admitted to, their territory by, inter alia,
acceding to the Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees;a
( b) Increasing the facilities for permanent refugee

solutions through voluntary repatriation and assimilation
within new national communities, and, for resettlement
of refugees, providing further opportunities through the
liberalization of immigration laws and regulations and
through the inclusion of refugees in resettlement schemes ;
(c) Enabling the High Commissioner, through additional voluntary financial contributions, to implement
the programmes of international assistance to refugees
approved by the Executive Committee of the High
Commissioner's Programme for 1959 and 1960;
2. Authorizes the High Commissioner, in respect of
refugees who do not come within the competence of the
United Nations, to use his good offices in the transmission of contributions designed to provide assistance
to these refugees.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1389 (XIV). Refugees from Algeria in Morocco
and Tunisia
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,2
Considering the efforts made by the High Commissioner and the results achieved during the World
Refugee Year,
Noting with appreciation the action of the High Commissioner on behalf of refugees from Algeria in Morocco
and Tunisia,
Recognizing however that the situation of these refugees, and especially of the young children who constitute
the majority of them, remains precarious,
Recommends that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees should continue his efforts on
behalf of these refugees pending their return to their
homes.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1390 (XIV). World Refugee Year
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1285 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 on the World Refugee Year,
Noting with appreciation the support that has already
been given to the World Refugee Year by Governments,
non-governmental organizations and the general public,
as well as the efforts of the Secretary-General in this
endeavour,
B elieuing that the success of the World Refugee Year
will be largely dependent on concrete responses yet to
be made in many countries,
8 United Nations Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Status of Refugees and Stateless Persons, Final Act an.d Cowven,'!On .relating to the Status of Refugees (United Nations pubhcation, Sales No.: 1951.IV.4), p. 11.

21

1. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies, in accordance with
the national wishes and needs of each country and in
the humanitarian spirit of the World Refugee Year:
(a) To continue to focus interest on the refugee
problem;
( b) To endeavour to make additional financial contributions for international assistance to refugees and
to encourage in their territory increasing contributions
from non-governmental organizations and the general
public;
( c) To encourage additional opportunities for permanent refugee solutions through voluntary repatriation,
resettlement or integration, on a purely humanitarian
basis and in accordance with the freely expressed wishes
of the refugees themselves ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to assist in the promotion of the World Refugee
Year.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1391 (XIV). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter VI, section III, of the
report of the Economic and Social Council,'
Recognizing the value of the United Nations Children's Fund in focusing international and national
attention on the needs of children,
Noting the growing significance of aid given through
the Fund in helping countries to initiate permanent
health, nutrition and welfare services for their children,
and in improving the quality and effectiveness of these
services,
Considering that the aid provided through the Fund
constitutes a practical way of international co-operation
to help countries to carry out the aims proclaimed in
the Declaration of the Rights of the Child,1
Aware of the importance of the Fund as an essential
element in international efforts to help countries, and in
particular under-developed ones, raise their standards
of living and strengthen their capacity for economic
and social progress,
Impressed however with the magnitude of the many
needs as yet unfulfilled, and the opportunities which
exist for the effective use of additional assistance from
the Fund,
Concerned that, despite continued and, in some cases,
increased support from many Governments, the Fund's
income for 1959 will be lower than that of 1958, thus
reversing the trend of recent years,
1. Expresses the hope that all Governments of States
Members of the United Nations and members Gf the
specialized agencies will contribute to the United
Nations Children's Fund as generously as possible;
2. Congratulates the Fund on its outstanding
achievements.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.
• Official Records of tht General Assembly, Fourtetnth
Session, Supplemtnt No. 3 (A/4143).
