Resoludona adopted on the reporta of the Seeond ec.müttee

3407 (XXX). Target for World Food Programme
pledgea forthe period 1977-1978
·
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of its resolution 2095 (XX)
of 20 December 1965, under which the World. Food
Programme is to be reviewed befare each pledging
conference,
Recalling the provisions of paragraph 4 of its resolution 3121 (XXVIII) of 13 December 1973 whereby,
subject to the review mentioned above, the mext pledging conference should be convened, at the latest, early
in 1976, at which time Governments should be invited
to pledge contributions for 1977 and 1978, with a view
to reaching such a target as may then be recommended
by the General Assembly and by the Conference of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations,
Noting that the review of the Programme was undertaken by the United Nations/FAO Intergovernmental
Committee of the World Food Programme at its twentyseventh session and by the Economic and Social Council at its fifty-ninth session,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 (LIX) of 10 November 1975, as well
as the recommendations contained in the report of the
Intergovemmental Committee, 15
Recognizing the value of multilateral food aid as
implemented by the World Food Programme since its
inception and the necessity of continuing its action
both as a form of capital investment and for meeting
emergency food needs,
l. Establishes for the two years 1977 and 1978 a
target for voluntary contributions to the World Food
Programme of $750 million, of which not less than
one third should be in cash and/ or services in the aggregate, and expresses the hope that such resources
will be augmented by substantial additional contributions from other sources in recognition of the prospective volume of sound project requests and the capacity of the Programme to operate ata higher level;

2. Urges States Mernbers of the United Nations or
mernbers or associate rnembers of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United N ations to make
every effort to ensure the full attainment of the target;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, to convene a pledging conference for this purpose at United Nations Headquarters early in 1976;
4. Decides that, subject to the review provided for
in General Assembly resolution 2095 (XX), the pledging conference at which Govemments should be invited
to pledge contributions for 1979 and 1980, with a view
to reaching such a target as may then be recommended
by the General Assembly and by the Conference of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, should be convened, at the latest, early in 1978.
2420th plenary meeting
28 November 1975
Ili See E/5694.

51

3408 (XXX). Activities of the United ~ations
Children's Fund to expand basic services for
children in developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1880 (LVII) of 31 July 1974 and General Assembly
resolution 3250 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974 endorsing the decision of the Executive Board of the U nited
Nations Children's Fund entitled "Declaration of an
emergency for children in developing countries as a
result of the current economic crisis", 16 a situation
further aggravated by numerous natural and man-made
disasters,
Recalling further resolution 1964 (LIX) of 30 July
1975, in which the Economic and Social Council took
note of the appeal1 7 of the Executive Board of the
United Nations Children's Fund to the General Assembly at its seventh special session to give consideration
to the situation of children and to the necessary measures for meeting their needs,
Recognizing that the provision of basic services for
children in developing countries, as proposed by the
United Nations Children's Fund in the annex 18 to the
appeal of its Executive Board to the General Assembly
at its seventh special session, constitutes an important
link in the development process,
Convinced of the consequent need for action at the
national and intemational levels to assist in the expansion of these basic services for children as a meaos
of promoting development,
Affirming that the enlargement of these basic services
is a feasible, practica) and effective means of responding to Economic and Social Council resolutions I 880
(LVII) and 1964 (LIX) and General Assembly resolution 3250 (XXIX),
Believing that the external assistance required to
support these services is within the capacity of the
intemational community,
I. Endorses the approaches to the expansion of basic
services for children set forth in the annex to the appeal
of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund, entitled "Basic services for children in
developing countries", 18 which embodies proposals for
expanding children's services in the fields of maternal
~nd child health, nutrition, water supply, basic educat1on and supporting services for women, utilizmg the
materi~l and human resources available in developing
countnes, at costs which developing countries can ultimately afford;
2. Urges the developed countries and others in a
position to do so to provide, through bilateral and multilateral channels and particularly through the United
Nations Children's Fund, external assistance, at a Ievel
more commensurate with the needs of developing countries, in support of the efforts of developing countries
to expand their basic services for children;
l6 O/ficial Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fiftyseventh Session, Supp/ement No. 9 (E/5528), para. 6.
17 /bid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5698),
para. 17.
18 lbid., annex l.

52

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

3. Invites the Executive Board of the United Nations
Children's Fund to consider this matter in depth at its
next session and to submit a report, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at
its thirty-first session.
2420th plenary meeting
28 November 1975
3409 (XXX). Unified approach to development
analysis and planning

The General Assembly,
T aking into account the importance of the aims and
policies recommended in its resolutions 2626 (XXV)
of 24 October 1970, containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December
1969, containing the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational
Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and intemational economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1747 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, which contains
recommendations concerning the unified approach to
development analysis and planning by the Govemments
of various countries,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations Research lnstitute for Social Development, 19 containing a
definition of a unified approach to development analysis
and planning, and of the report by the Joint Inspection
Unit 2º on the feasibility of applying a unified approach
in the work of the regional commissions,
Believing that unified planning at the national leve!
is one of the most effective tools to promote economic,
social and human development and to provide increasing opportunities to all people for a better life,
Reatfinning that each State has the sovereign and
inalienable right to choose its economic and social system in accordance with the will of its people without
outside interference,
l. Considers it appropriate to regard a unified a¡r
proach to development analysis and planning at the
national level covering all sectors of the national economy, public and prívate, as a means for the attainment
of balanced social, economic and human development;
2. Relieves that the application of a unified approach is connected with carrying out basic social and
economic structural changes;
3. Recognizes that, among other measures, stn:ngthening of the public sector will contribute to effective
national planning;
4. Invites Governments to take account of the provisions of Economic and Social Council resolution 17 4 7
(LIV) in the application of a unified approach to development analysis and planning;
5. Endorses the application of a unified approach
to development analysis and planning in the regional
commissions and other United Nations bodies concerned;
19 See E/CN.5/519.
20 See E/5430.

6. Commends the Secretary-General for bis efforts
to integrate the activities related to the social and economic aspects of development within the Secretariat;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to study the question of a unified
approach to development analysis and planning with
a view to preparing proposals for action-oriented guidelines thereon;
(b) To prepare a report on the application by Governments of a unified approach to development analysis
and planning in conjunction with the preparation of a
report by the Secretary-General for the next biennial
review and appraisal of progress in the implementation
of the Intemational Development Strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade as provided in General Assembly resolution 2626 (XXV),
taking into account the contributions made in this regard by recent major United Nations conferences;
(e) To submit that report to the Commission for
Social Development at its twenty-fifth session and to
the Committee for Development Planning at its thirteenth session for their analysis and appropriate recommendations;
8. Requests that the report mentioned in paragraph 7 ( b) and (e) above be fully taken into account
in carrying out the biennial review and appraisal of the
International Development Strategy;
9. Invites the Secretary-General to prepare, in consultation with the Director of the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, suggestions
for pilot projects on the practica! application of a
unified approach to development, taking into account
the reports mentioned in the third preambular paragraph above, and to submit these suggestions to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-first session;
10. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
analyse and appraise the progress made in this field in
conjunction with its review and appraisal of the International Development Strategy at its sixty-third session;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-second session the item entitled "Unified
approach to development analysis and planning", with
a view to considering the economic as well as the
social aspects of that question.
2420th plenary meetinR
28 November 1975
3434 (XXX). Dissemination of information and
mohilization of puhlic opinion regarding the
United Nations Hahitat and Human Settlements Foundation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3327 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 establishing the United Nations Habitat and
Human Settlements Foundation as from 1 January 1975,
Convinced that the dissemination of information and
the mobilization of public opinion among Meniber
States would be an important factor in creating greater
awareness of the problems of human settlements and
would thus promote the increased efforts required in
the sphere of intemational co-operation,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the
Foundation,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to stimulate and
intensify efforts to mobilize public opinion in all coun-
