A/74/897–S/2020/549

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
17 June 2020
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 36
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-fifth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2489 (2019), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report dated 17 March 2020 ( A/74/753S/2020/210).

II. Relevant developments
3.
The President, Ashraf Ghani, and the former Chief Executive and presidential
candidate, Abdullah, concluded an agreement on 17 May, overcoming nearly three
months of political impasse and paving the way for gov ernment formation.
Preparations for a peace process continued, with the establishment of a negotiating
team representing the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and with confidence -building
through prisoner releases, but attacks persisted as the Taliban reject ed calls for a
ceasefire. The number of reported armed clashes returned to established trends
following the one-week nationwide reduction in violence in February. Based on the
Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United States of America
and the Taliban and the Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and the United States of America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan, both
signed on 29 February, the United States announced steps to start reducing the number
of United States forces from 13,000 to 8,600 by 13 July. The spread of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) added to serious concerns for the humanitarian situation in view
of continued conflict-related displacement, population returns, poverty and food

20-07347 (E)

190620

*2007347*

A/74/897
S/2020/549

insecurity. Planning continued for the 2020 ministerial pledging conference on
Afghanistan.

A.

Political developments
4.
On 9 March, Mr. Ghani was sworn in as President for a second term. In his
inauguration speech, he reiterated his commitment to national cohesion, the formation
of an inclusive government, and fostering peace and economic growth. Calling the
election results fraudulent and illegal, Mr. Abdullah held his own inauguration
ceremony on the same day. On 11 March, Mr. Ghani dissolved the Office of the Chief
Executive by decree. Negotiations between Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah on the
formation of a government continued for over two months, with disagreements on
power-sharing arrangements.
5.
Afghan political leaders sought to mediate a resolution to the political impasse,
as civil society activists, elders and community leaders urged both sides to uphold
national rather than personal interests in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic and
intra-Afghan negotiations. The Secretary of State of the United States, Mike Pompeo,
visited Kabul on 23 March to encourage the leaders to resolve the political crisis and
move forward with peace efforts. Upon his departure, the United States issued a
statement expressing regret at the failure of the two leaders to agree on an inclusive
government and announcing a $1 billion funding cut in 2020, with a possible further
$1 billion reduction in 2021 should the political impasse remain unresolved. In
response, Mr. Ghani reassured the Afghan people that the reduction of assistance
would not affect key sectors or people’s lives and suggested that the United States
might revisit its decision. The prolonged impasse generated national and international
reactions. On 1 May, the European Union and Norway reiterated the need to end
political divisions, emphasizing that a lack of progress might affect the availability
of future funding for security and development.
6.
Following his inauguration, Mr. Ghani announced a number of key appointments,
including Haneef Atmar as acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Abdul Hadi Arghandiwal
as acting Minister of Finance, Ahmad Zia Saraj as acting Director General o f the
National Directorate for Security, Shakir Kargar as Chief of Staff in the Office of the
President, Fazl Fazli as Head of the Administrative Affairs Office of the President, and
Mohammad Yousuf Ghazanfar as the President’s Special Representative on Economic
Development, Trade and Poverty Reduction Affairs. He also appointed five provincial
governors. On 4 April, the former President, Hamid Karzai, Abdul Rab Rasool Sayaaf,
and the former First Vice-Presidents, Yonus Qanooni and Karim Khalili, publicly urged
Mr. Ghani to suspend appointments until a political settlement was reached with
Mr. Abdullah. On 13 May, Mr. Ghani appointed two State ministers, namely, Zia ul Haq
Amarkhel as State Minister for Parliamentary Affairs and Ghulam Bahauddin Jailani as
State Minister for Natural Disaster Management.
7.
On 26 March, the State Ministry of Peace announced the formation of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan negotiating team. Led by the former Director General of the
National Directorate for Security, Masoom Stanekzai, the 21-member team comprises
representatives from various political and social constituencies and includes four
women. The formation of the team was welcomed by many Afghan political leaders,
including Mr. Abdullah, as well as by international and regional stakeholders, although
the Taliban has questioned whether the team is truly representative.
8.
The State Ministry of Peace and the negotiating team began preparations for
negotiations. In mid-April, the team formed four committees on thematic issues and
began meeting with constituencies and interest groups. On 13 April, representatives
of the two bodies met with 11 women members of parliament to discuss the

2/15

20-07347

A/74/897
S/2020/549

preservation of rights and values and the effective participation of women in the peace
process. On 20 and 21 April, the State Minister of Peace, Abdul Salam Rahimi, met
with the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, members of the
negotiating team and a group representing war victims, whom he pledged to involve
in the peace process. On 26 April, Mr. Rahimi held the second meeting of the Senior
Coordination Committee for Peace Affairs to coordinate a whole-of-government
approach to the peace process.
9.
Further to the appeal of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire in support
of the battle against COVID-19, numerous Afghan actors and international
stakeholders called for a ceasefire in Afghanistan to enable a humanitarian response
to the pandemic. On 23 April, on the eve of Ramadan, Mr. Ghani appealed to the
Taliban to agree to a humanitarian ceasefire. On 24 April, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) issued a statement emphasizing that the level of violence by
the Taliban was not acceptable and calling on the Taliban to enter into negotiations
with the Government without delay and for both sides to accelerate the release of
prisoners and detainees and declare a humanitarian ceasefire. Also on 24 April, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation renewed its appeal for all parties to work
together for an urgent and lasting ceasefire during the month of Ramadan. Many
women activists and grass-roots organizations, along with Afghan religious scholars,
called for Afghan political leaders and the parties to the conflict to set aside their
differences and work together to address the pandemic and anticipated food shortages.
On 26 April, the Taliban issued a statement rejecting calls for a ceasefire or
humanitarian pause, claiming that the United States and the Government of
Afghanistan were not committed to their obligations under the Agreement for
Bringing Peace to Afghanistan of 29 February, in particular the release of 5,000
prisoners, and reiterating that no discussion of a ceasefire would be considered until
the start of intra-Afghan negotiations.
10. On 17 May, Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah signed an agreement ending the political
impasse. The agreement specifies a 50 per cent share in the Government for
Mr. Abdullah, including appointments to ministries and provincial governors; the
creation of a High Council of Government and a High Council for Peace and National
Reconciliation; intended electoral reforms; and the promotion of the former Vice President, General Abdul Rashid Dostum, to the position of Marshal, with the associated
authorities as Deputy Commander-in-Chief. The High Council of Government is to
consist of political leaders and national figures and will focus on creating political
consensus and providing advice to the President on national issues. The High Council
for Peace and National Reconciliation, which will be under the leadership of
Mr. Abdullah, establishes the architecture for the management of the peace process. A
delegation consisting of six political elders is to be established for the monitoring of the
agreement and the mediation of disputes. On 18 and 19 May, the President made two
further appointments, namely, Hasina Safi as acting Minister of Women’s Affairs and
Noorulhaq Ulumi as Special Representative for Good Governance Affairs.
11. The agreement of 17 May was welcomed by many national and international
partners, including the European Union, NATO and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Others pointed to shortcomings. The former
Minister for Foreign Affairs and leader of Jamiat-I Islami, Salahuddin Rabbani, and
the leader of Hizb-i Islami, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, maintained their position that the
presidential election results should be annulled. The Taliban rejected the agreement
as a repetition of past failed experiences.
12. In accordance with the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan and the
Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United States
of America, on 9 March the United States announced the start of its conditions -based
reduction of forces to 8,600 over 135 days. Also based on the Agreement and the Joint
20-07347

3/15

A/74/897
S/2020/549

Declaration, efforts began to implement the confidence -building measure of prisoner
releases. On 11 March, Mr. Ghani signed a decree for the release of 5,000 Taliban
prisoners in two phases. The first 1,500 prisoners would be release d based on age,
health and remaining sentence. The remaining 3,500 Taliban prisoners would be
released on the condition that progress was made in intra-Afghan negotiations and
that there were further reductions in Taliban violence. All releases required gu arantees
that the prisoners would not return to combat. The Taliban spokesperson described
the decree as “not satisfactory” and repeated the demand that 5,000 prisoners be
released before the beginning of negotiations.
13. On 15 and 16 March, the United States Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, and the Commander of NATO and United States
forces in Afghanistan, General Austin Miller, met with Taliban representatives in Doha
to pave the way for virtual technical talks on prisoner releases among representatives
of the Taliban and the Government, which were subsequently held on 22, 25 and
29 March. On 23 March, the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Pompeo, met
the Head of the Taliban Political Commission, Mullah Baradar, in Qatar and discussed
plans to accelerate the release of detainees and reduce the levels of violence.
14. With the support of the International Committee of the Red Cross, a three member Taliban technical team arrived in Kabul on 31 March to dis cuss prisoner
releases and verification, the first publicly acknowledged face-to-face meeting
between the Government and the Taliban. Despite disagreements related to eligibility
criteria, which resulted in the Taliban recalling its technical team on 7 Apr il, the
Government released 100 prisoners on 8 April and the Taliban released 20 detainees
on 12 April. On 13 April, General Miller and Mr. Khalilzad held talks with the Taliban
in Doha to encourage a reduction in violence and further releases of detainees .
Mr. Khalilzad met with the Taliban in Doha again on 6 and 7 May to encourage a
reduction in violence and a humanitarian pause to address the COVID -19 pandemic.
As at 7 May, the Government had reported the release of a total of 1,000 Taliban
prisoners, while the Taliban had reported the release of a total of 276 detainees.
15. On 11 May, the Government announced the suspension of prisoner releases,
citing concerns that detainees released by the Taliban to date included civilians who
had been abducted after the Agreement of 29 February, and pending the release by the
Taliban of a total of 200 detainees from the Afghan security forces. Mr. Khalilzad met
again with the Taliban in Doha on 18 and 19 May. On 20 May, he met with Mr. Ghani,
the Chairman of the High Council for Peace and National Reconciliation,
Mr. Abdullah, the head of the negotiating team, Mr. Stanekzai, and the State Minister
of Peace, Mr. Rahimi, in Kabul to discuss the steps to reach intra-Afghan negotiations.
16. UNAMA continued to engage with national, regional and international
stakeholders in support of a reduction in violence, a ceasefire and intra -Afghan
negotiations. On 9 April, special envoys and representatives on Afghanistan and
UNAMA held a virtual meeting to take stock of the peace process and encourage
confidence-building measures. Local peace initiatives by UNAMA continued.
UNAMA worked with subnational authorities and communities in over 25 provinces,
where calls for a humanitarian pause, peace and COVID-19 prevention were
broadcast on local radio. A women’s shura council in Sarobi district, Kabul,
established and supported through a local peace initiative by UNAMA, redirected its
work to support COVID-19 prevention efforts. Similarly, women and youth groups in
Kabul used social media channels to broadcast COVID-19 prevention messages
alongside peace messaging and engaged with local authorities and members of the
United Nations country team to support the distribution of aid to vulnerable families.
17. Coordination discussions by UNAMA with donors and partner organizations
mobilized support and technical assistance for the peace process and negotiating
4/15

20-07347

A/74/897
S/2020/549

teams, as well as the State Ministry of Peace. In April and May, UNAMA continued
advising the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission on options for
engagement on issues related to peace, human rights and transitional justice,
including how to bring victims’ perspectives into the peace process and public
discourse. Donors and peace practitioners also coordinated support for wom en’s
participation in the peace process. On 10 March, the Permanent Missions of
Afghanistan and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, as co-chairs of the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan,
co-hosted, together with the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security, a
discussion at Headquarters entitled “A critical moment for Afghan women: the
intra-Afghan peace process”.

B.

Security
18. The security situation remained volatile and unpredictable. With the nationwide
reduction in violence during the last week of February, reports of direct armed
engagements dropped to the lowest level of any seven-day period over the past 10 years,
with a total of 41 armed attacks. Taliban attacks resumed the day after the signing of the
Agreement of 29 February. In view of the Taliban attacks, the acting Minister of Defence
announced an “active defence posture” on 19 March. The day after high-profile attacks
on 12 May targeting a hospital in Kabul and a funeral in Nangarhar, Mr. Ghani
announced that the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces would return to an
“offensive posture”, with a resumption of operations against the Taliban.
19. Between 7 February and 14 May, UNAMA recorded 5,543 security-related
incidents, a 2 per cent decrease compared with the same period in 2019. The highest
number of incidents occurred in the southern region, followed by the northern and
eastern regions, with those three regions accounting for 59 per cent of all incidents.
20. Established trends remained unchanged, with 3,422 armed clashes accounting
for the majority of all incidents (62 per cent) during the reporting period, representing
a similar number of armed clashes compared with the same period in 2019.
Anti-government elements initiated 95 per cent of direct armed engagements
following the violence reduction period. The use of improvised explosive devices
remained the second most common type of incident, with a 22 per cent increase
compared with the same period in 2019. The 180 air strikes by Afghan and
international military air forces during the reporting period represented a 47 per cent
decrease compared with the same period in 2019, reflecting reduced international
military air operations. The number of air strikes conducted by the Afghan Air Force
showed an overall increase.
21. Neither pro-government forces nor anti-government elements achieved any
significant territorial gains during the reporting period. On 2 March, the Taliban
announced that it was resuming its military operations; however, the group has not
yet declared its annual spring offensive. The highest amount of conflict activity
occurred in Kandahar, Helmand, Wardak and Balkh provinces. On 28 March, the
Taliban retook control of Yamgan district in Badakhshan Province (north-eastern
region), which had been recaptured by the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces on 9 September 2019. On 10 April, the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces recaptured Khamyab district in Jowzjan Province (northern region), which had
been under Taliban control for approximately two years.
22. High-profile attacks by anti-government elements continued, with 10 suicide
attacks recorded during the reporting period, compared with 8 in the previous period.
Six of the attacks targeted Afghan National Defence and Security Forces installations, a
hospital, a funeral and a place of worship. There was no claim of responsibility for the

20-07347

5/15

A/74/897
S/2020/549

attack of 12 May on the hospital in Kabul, in which at least 24 people were killed,
including 19 women and 3 children, and many more were wounded, including a newborn
baby. A health-care worker was among those killed. The Taliban denied involvement.
23. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K) remained under
sustained pressure from the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and the
Taliban, particularly in eastern Afghanistan. During the reporting period, 18 incidents
were attributed to ISIL-K, compared with 122 over the same time period in 2019. After
a six-month period of no attacks in Kabul attributed to ISIL-K, the group claimed an
attack by indirect fire targeting the inauguration of Mr. Ghani on 9 March. The group
claimed two other indirect fire attacks on Bagram airfield on 21 March and 9 April,
and an armed attack during a commemoration of the life of Afghan leader, Abdul Ali
Mazari, on 6 March in Kabul, in which 32 civilians were killed. High -profile suicide
attacks targeting a Sikh temple in Kabul on 25 March and a funeral in Nangarhar
Province on 12 May were also claimed by ISIL-K. The first attack reportedly resulted
in at least 25 civilians being killed and many more wounded, while the second resulted
in 19 people being killed and at least 60 more wounded. On 6 May, the National
Directorate for Security reported the arrest of eight individuals in raids on two
locations. The individuals were described as belonging to a joint ISIL-KP and Haqqani
Network cell and are accused of carrying out several of the attacks. An additional five
militants were killed in the raids. On 11 May, the Government reported that raids by
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces in Kabul had led to the capture of
three leaders of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant for South Asia and the Far East.
24. There were 17 incidents involving United Nations personnel during the
reporting period, including 12 incidents of intimidation, 4 criminal -related incidents
and 1 abduction.

C.

Regional cooperation
25. Regional engagement by Afghanistan was constrained owing to travel
restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and focused on assistance and
cooperation among regional countries to respond to the pandemic. The restrictions
also limited planned multilateral engagements, including within the framework of the
Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process and the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan. The Afghan authorities made efforts to keep the borders open for the
continued delivery of food, medicine and other essential items. Many regional
partners, including China, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, provided humanitarian assistance to the Government
of Afghanistan in support of its COVID-19 response. After closing their borders
because of the pandemic, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan agreed to open
them periodically at the request of the Government of Afghanistan to facilitate the
repatriation of Afghan nationals from their territories. Neighbouring countries have
maintained the flow of commercial cargo throughout the rep orting report.
26. Between April and early May, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Mohammad Javad Zarif, held a series of telephone conversations
with Mr. Ghani, the acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Atmar, the Nation al
Security Adviser, Hamdullah Mohib, and Mr. Abdullah to discuss the political
impasse, intra-Afghan negotiations and bilateral cooperation on the response to
COVID-19. Mr. Zarif also held consultations with senior officials of regional
countries to discuss issues pertaining to the situation in Afghanistan. On 19 and
20 April, the Special Envoy of the Islamic Republic of Iran to Afghanistan, Ebrahim
Taherian, met Afghan officials in Kabul to discuss the importance of protecting the
political structures and institutions set out in the Constitution of Afghanistan, as well
as talks with the Taliban and national reconciliation.

6/15

20-07347

A/74/897
S/2020/549

27. On 16 April, the United Nations convened a meeting of the permanent
representatives of Afghanistan, China, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan, the
Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, the United States and Uzbekistan to the
United Nations to discuss regional efforts to support peace in Afghanistan. The
participants expressed solidarity with Afghanistan in its quest for p eace, security and
prosperity, and echoed the call of the Secretary-General for a comprehensive ceasefire,
particularly in the light of the urgent need to combat the spread of COVID -19.
28. On 20 April, Mr. Atmar held a telephone conversation with the Mini ster for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, Shah Mahmood Qureshi, to discuss the prospects of
strengthening bilateral cooperation with regard to the Afghan peace process, the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity and the fight against
COVID-19. They agreed to revitalize the Action Plan, as their bilateral engagement
framework, and to strengthen economic cooperation.
29. On 27 April, Mr. Atmar spoke with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of China,
Wang Yi, and thanked him for the provision of medical support in the fight against
COVID-19. They also discussed economic cooperation and the Belt and Road
Initiative, joint counter-terrorism efforts, the peace process and the role that China
could play at the regional level.
30. On 28 April, the national railway company of Uzbekistan launched a regular
freight train service from Tashkent to Hairatan, Afghanistan. Operating three times a
week, the train service allows for reduced delivery times and connectivity with the
wider region.
31. On 4 May, Mr. Ghani participated in a virtual summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement Contact Group on COVID-19, hosted by Azerbaijan. In his statement,
Mr. Ghani outlined his Government’s vision to reallocate resources to focus on public
awareness, relief, recovery, regional connectivity and global partnerships. He urged
the States members of the Non-Aligned Movement to call on the Taliban to cease
violence and engage in the political process.
32. On 13 May, the ministers for foreign affairs of the States members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization held a meeting via videoconference during which
they emphasized the importance of promoting international cooperation in response to
COVID-19 and reaffirmed their readiness to further promote the efforts of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization to help reach a political settlement in Afghanistan.
33. On 15 May, Mr. Atmar held a telephone conversation with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, Mukhtar Tileuberdi. Mr. Atmar expressed his
Government’s interest in strengthening cooperation in the transit, transport and
energy sectors, as well as continuing the educational programme hosted by
Kazakhstan for Afghan citizens. Mr. Tileuberdi informed Mr. Atmar of his
Government’s decision to provide humanitarian assistance to A fghanistan.
34. On 18 May, the special representatives for Afghanistan of China, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Pakistan and the Russian Federation held a virtual meeting on the
current situation in Afghanistan and the peace and reconciliation process. In a
statement, they welcomed the agreement between the political leaders of Afghanistan
and expressed hope that it would expedite the start of intra-Afghan negotiations.
Voicing support for an “Afghan-led, Afghan-owned” peace and reconciliation process,
they underlined that inclusive intra-Afghan negotiations were the only way to realize
Afghan national reconciliation, and called on all Afghan groups and parties to launch
the negotiations as soon as possible. The four special representatives cited the need
for the withdrawal of foreign troops “in an orderly and responsible way”, voiced
support for the release of prisoners and detainees, and expressed hope for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2513 (2020). They also voiced support
20-07347

7/15

A/74/897
S/2020/549

for the Secretary-General’s initiative for a ceasefire and called for the simultaneous
declaration of a comprehensive ceasefire throughout Afghanistan. They called for
action against terrorism, reaffirmed their support to Afghanistan in overcoming the
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, and underscored that the reintegration and
repatriation of Afghan refugees should be part of any peace and reconciliation process.

III. Human rights
35. The conflict in Afghanistan continues to be one of the deadliest in the world for
civilians. On 27 April, UNAMA released its first quarterly report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. From 1 January to 31 March 2020, the Mission
documented 1,293 civilian casualties (533 killed and 760 injured), representing a
decrease of 29 per cent in comparison with the same period in 2019. Ground
engagements were the leading cause of civilian casualties during the quarter (30 per
cent), followed by targeted killings (26 per cent) and non-suicide improvised
explosive devices (18 per cent). In March, after the agreed week -long period of
reduction in violence between pro-government forces and the Taliban, UNAMA
documented an acceleration in violence and a subsequent increase i n civilian
casualties and harm caused.
36. Anti-government elements were responsible for 55 per cent of documented
civilian casualties, of which 39 per cent were attributed to the Taliban, 13 per cent to
ISIL-K and 3 per cent to undetermined anti-government elements. During the first
quarter of 2020, the number of civilian deaths attributed to anti-government elements,
in particular the Taliban, increased by 22 per cent in comparison with the first quarter
of 2019, mainly owing to an increase in targeted killings and summary executions.
Pro-government forces caused 32 per cent of civilian casualties, of which 21 per cent
were attributed to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, 8 per cent to
international military forces and 3 per cent to pro -government armed groups and
multiple or undetermined pro-government forces.
37. The armed conflict in Afghanistan remains the deadliest conflict in the world
for children. The country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations
against children in armed conflict verified 417 child casualties (152 killed and 265
maimed) during the first quarter of 2020. Pro-government forces were responsible for
more child casualties than anti-government elements and over twice as many child
deaths. During the quarter, the task force verified the recruitment and use of four boys
for combat roles by the Taliban, and UNAMA continued to receive credible
allegations of sexual violence against children, including by the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces. The task force recorded 18 conflict-related incidents
affecting health-care facilities and workers, 17 of which were attributed to the Taliban
and 1 to the Afghan National Army. The task force verified eight incidents of attacks
against schools and protected personnel, of which four were attributed to the Taliban,
two to the Afghan National Army, one to ISIL-K and one to an undetermined armed
opposition group. Those incidents included two attacks deliberately targeting schools
and teachers, five attacks causing incidental harm to schools and education personnel,
and a threat against an educational facility. The task force also verified three incidents
of denial of humanitarian access, two of which were attributed to the Taliban and one
to the Afghan National Police.
38. On 26 March, the President issued a special decree on pardons, the suspension
of investigations into those in detention and a delay in the enforcement of sentences,
to prevent the spread of COVID-19. On 27 April, on the occasion of Mujahideen
Victory Day, the President issued another decree ordering all remaining prisoners to
be released, except those convicted of crimes disqualified for pardon under the

8/15

20-07347

A/74/897
S/2020/549

Criminal Procedure Code, who would nevertheless be given a significant reduction
in sentence. Crimes covered by the law on the elimination of violence against women
were exempt from pardon. As at 14 May, approximately 9,700 detainees and prisoners
had been released under the two presidential decrees. Given that the estimated number
of prisoners and detainees as at 26 March, when the first decree was issued, was
41,000, the impact of the releases to ease overcrowding in prisons and contribute to
preventing the spread of COVID-19 remains limited. The number of female prisoners
released appears to be low. In addition, the lack of support for female prisoners after
release, including for those who may not be able to return to their families, presents
another challenge. Between 19 and 24 April, the United Nations provided technical
advice and support to the Ministry of Women’s Affairs to enable it to provide
humanitarian assistance to women released from prison throughout Afghanistan. The
United Nations, along with other humanitarian partners and civil society
organizations, is working to locate safe houses and provide transitional safety nets for
women upon their release from correctional services.
39. On 23 March, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission released
its annual report on violence against women and girls. In 2019, the Commission
registered 4,693 cases of violence against women and girls, an increase of 8.4 per cent
compared with 2018. Over 97 per cent of incidents occurred at home. The justice system
has slowed proceedings throughout the country owing to the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, investigations and prosecutions of crimes under the law on the elimination
of violence against women are continuing. Since the outbreak of COVID -19, reports to
the justice sector and other actors of violence against women and girls have reportedly
decreased in many parts of the country, suggesting increased challenges in accessing
formal justice and places of safety due to movement restrictions. However, there are
indications that violence against women has in fact increased.
40. Over the past months, UNAMA has reinforced its cooperation with the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission in several areas, including the
provision of technical assistance on peace, human rights and transitional justice, as
well as coordination and advice on the protection of human rights in the COVID-19
response. Thematic coordination between UNAMA and the Commission has been
reinforced through regular meetings at both leadership and working levels.
41. Media workers and human rights defenders continued to fac e intimidation and
violence. During the reporting period, five human rights defenders were killed in
Kabul and three other provinces, allegedly by anti-government elements, although
there was no claim of responsibility. Three other human rights defenders w ere
kidnapped and subjected to ill treatment by the Taliban in Paktika. In Zabul, the
Taliban kidnapped a journalist, who was released after two days following the
intervention of community elders. On 9 May, security forces reportedly killed five
people who were participating in a protest over the distribution of humanitarian aid
by the Government in the capital of Ghor Province. A journalist who had raised
concerns about the mismanagement of funds allocated to the COVID -19 response was
arrested (and later released) by security forces in Kunar, and another journalist was
reportedly threatened by local authorities in another province for raising concerns
about the same issue.
42. On 5 March, the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
authorized the ICC Prosecutor to commence an investigation in relation to alleged
crimes committed on the territory of Afghanistan (since May 2003), as well as other
alleged crimes linked to the armed conflict in Afghanistan but committed on the
territory of other ICC States parties (since July 2002). That judgment amended the
decision of Pre-Trial Chamber II of 12 April 2019. On 15 April, the Prosecutor
informed the judges of Pre-Trial Chamber II that the Government of Afghanistan had,
on 26 March, requested the Prosecutor to defer to the domestic investigations of
20-07347

9/15

A/74/897
S/2020/549

Afghanistan pursuant to article 18(2) of the Rome Statute. The Government provided
the Prosecutor with a non-exhaustive summary outline of national investigations and
proceedings being undertaken and asked for the possibility to provide further
information and materials supporting the deferral request by 12 June 2020.

IV. Coordination of development assistance
43. High-level meetings with the Government of Afghanistan and Member States
continued in preparation for the 2020 ministerial pledging conference on Afghanistan,
co-organized by the Governments of Afghanistan and Finland, with facilitation by
UNAMA. Mindful of the implications of COVID-19, donors reached an agreement to
continue the technical preparations. Donors also agreed to accelerate the identification
of key development priorities to support the Government’s revised Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework, expected to be presented by the end of
July. After consultations with the Ministry of Finance, UNAMA prepared a concept
note for the future Mutual Accountability Framework in order to facilitate discussions
with development partners. Finland appointed a special envoy, Janne Taalas, to engage
the donor community and Governments in planning for the conference.
44. Following the presidential decree of 26 March, which mandated that the
Attorney General suspend investigations and prosecutions for all but the most serious
criminal cases as part of the COVID-19 response, the Supreme Court formed a
working group on 9 May, with the support of UNAMA, to develop contingencies for
the hearings that would continue, using videoconference technology. The United
Nations continued to provide technical advisory support to the State Cases
Department and the legal aid units under the Ministry of Justice for continued
operations. Attacks against justice sector officials increased in April and May. In
targeted attacks on 25 March and 2 May, the Supreme Court’s administrative chief
was killed and a senior prosecutor was injured.
45. On 22 March, the Supreme Court upheld the decision of 15 January 2020 of the
appeal court of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre, which convicted and sentenced nine
former electoral commissioners. The six former commissioners from the Independent
Election Commission and three former commissioners from the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission were sentenced to two and a half years in prison for the offence
of altering vote counts in the 2018 parliamentary elections in Kunar Province. On
15 April, the Supreme Court released all nine former commissioners on bail, as part of
the measures to decongest prisons during the COVID-19 pandemic. On 26 March, a new
head of the Major Crimes Task Force was appointed within the Ministry of the Interior
and started to reform the component. In May, he presented a new consolidated list of
255 arrest warrants and summonses related to serious corruption cases (including the
127 identified prior to the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afgh anistan of 2018), of
which 169 had been executed as at 14 May.
46. On 4 March, the Cabinet adopted the regulation on the recovery of illicit assets
and proceeds of corruption, which was issued pursuant to the anti-corruption law and
is aimed at regulating the duties and authorities of justice and judicial institutions and
other relevant organizations in the recovery of illicitly acquired assets, as well as in
their effective and transparent management. On 5 March, a revised Supreme Audit
Office law was adopted through a presidential legislative decree, which incorporates
international standards and norms and is aimed at increasing the effectiveness of
audits of the State budget.
47. Of the 63 deliverables contained in the 2019 Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, 15 have been achieved, 30 are on track to being achieved and 18 are
incomplete or off-track. The Independent Electoral Complaints Commission
10/15

20-07347

A/74/897
S/2020/549

addressed 95 per cent of the complaints registered, and a total of 1,127 cases of
corruption registered by the Attorney General were referred for investigation, while
437 cases were referred to trial. Six reviews of the Extended Credit Facility were
completed, and special drawing rights of $44.4 million were disbursed to the
Government. To improve the standard of living, a total of 3,657 communities
completed at least one project related to energy, roads, irrigation, schools or drinking
water. Some 60 per cent of the core reforms under the Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund partnership programme and financing programme were implemented.
48. Afghanistan is among the 25 countries to benefit from the debt service relief
approved on 13 April by the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) under the Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust, which aims to help
beneficiaries to cover their IMF debt obligations and hence redirect resources towards
vital COVID-19 emergency medical and other relief efforts. On 29 April, the
Executive Board approved the Government’s request for emergency assistance of
approximately $220 million under the Rapid Credit Facility.
49. On 7 May, the Board of Executive Directors of the World Bank approved a
$400 million grant to help Afghanistan to sustain the pace of key economic and public
finance reforms, and to support the country’s management of risks and uncertainties
compounded by the COVID-19 crisis.

V. Humanitarian assistance
50. Sustained conflict, natural disasters, chronic poverty, food insecurity and the
added burden of the COVID-19 pandemic caused increasing suffering for people
across Afghanistan.
51. As at 21 May, 8,676 Afghans had tested positive for COVID -19 and 193 had
died. Since mid-March, the price for staple food commodities has surged by up to
20 per cent, raising concerns for socioeconomic effects. According to the World Bank,
gross domestic product in Afghanistan is projected to decrease by 17 per cent in 2020.
52. On 27 March, the Government announced a lockdown, initially for Kabul and
selected provinces. On 21 April, Mr. Ghani approved an emergency budget of
$88.5 million and provincial governors were allocated funds ranging from $263,000
to $5.26 million. On 23 April, Mr. Ghani presented the Government’s plan to address
the economic consequences of COVID-19, centred on health care, food security,
public works and economic regional cooperation. Donors were asked to
“re-programme existing commitments into relief, recovery and stimulus
programmes” and engage regional partners “to shape regional response strategies”.
On 2 May, the nationwide lockdown was extended until 24 May.
53. In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, the United Nations country team and the
humanitarian country team developed collaborative programmes, aligned with the
Government’s plan “Responding to the coronavirus: an invitation for discussion”, as
well as the United Nations framework for the immediate socioeconomic response to
COVID-19. The United Nations and the World Bank continued their close collaboration
focused on technical support for socioeconomic recovery and procurement services to
the Government for essential materials and supplies to fight the pandemic.
54. Health partners supported the Government in establishing isolation centres with
a total capacity of 22,000 beds and, to date, 9 out of 15 planned testing l aboratories
countrywide. As at 20 May, more than 983,000 vulnerable people had received
guidance in coronavirus-specific hygiene practices, as well as hygiene supplies. At
the request of the Ministry of Public Health, the United Nations procured and
delivered on 18 April a six-month supply of personal protective equipment and
20-07347

11/15

A/74/897
S/2020/549

infection prevention and control supplies to two hospitals in Kabul that provide
services to more than 10,000 women every month.
55. The spread of COVID-19 is having a devastating impact on women and girls.
Lockdown measures to stem the pandemic are very likely to have increased levels of
domestic violence. The United Nations and its partners have mainstreamed activities
to address gender-based violence and the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on
women and girls throughout all programmes. The joint European Union -United
Nations Spotlight Initiative is being adapted to provide a quick impact intervention
highlighting the risks of increased domestic violence as a result of COVID -19 and to
share key messaging and information tools with front-line responders to raise
awareness of sexual and gender-based violence. On 16 April, the United Nations
provided an online platform for women’s civil society organizations to discuss
appropriate messaging, and for women in provinces, districts and rural communities
to discuss local efforts to change behaviours to curb the spread of COVID -19 and to
strengthen the role of women and girls in the fight against COVID -19.
56. To address the impact of the pandemic on livelihoods, the United Nations is
engaged in a campaign to reach over 300,000 people with livelihood support between
April and June, with a focus on vulnerable populations, including landless and
women-headed households and persons with disabilities. Around 24,500 nomadic
herders are expected to receive animal feed, with additional outreach to 194,250
landless labourers, vulnerable herders and farming households.
57. Food insecurity remained at alarmingly high levels. In April and May, some
13.4 million people were either in crisis or at emergency levels of food insecurity
(level 3 or 4 of the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification), with the number of
people at emergency levels increasing to 4.3 million. Over 3 million women and
children are projected to be acutely malnourished in 2020, with an additional 160,000
people projected to be affected owing to COVID-19. From 15 February to 20 May, the
United Nations and its partners provided 37,355 metric tons of food and $2.16 million
in cash to food-insecure people affected by conflict and natural disasters, treated over
72,000 children with severe acute malnutrition, and pre-positioned therapeutic
treatment in priority provinces, adapting protocols to the COVID -19 situation. In the
provinces, almost 100,000 children were reached monthly with community nutrition
preventive services. Food security partners also collaborated with local authorities to
enable farmers to harvest crops while minimizing the risk of exposure to COVID -19,
thereby mitigating increasing food insecurity and nutritional deficiencies.
58. The number of undocumented returnees arriving in Afghanistan has surged.
Between 15 February and 20 May, there were 241,499 undocumented returnees and
318 refugee returnees, bringing the total to 287,979 Afghan migrants and refugees
since the start of the year. In March, there was a five-fold increase in the number of
returnees compared with the same period in 2019. Most of those returnees came from
the Islamic Republic of Iran, often from cities severely affected by COVID-19. The
voluntary repatriation of refugees from Turkey has been on hold since 4 March owing
to concerns about COVID-19 transmission.
59. Conflict and disasters continued to create humanitarian needs. Since the end of
February, more than 12,000 people have been newly displaced. Between late 2019
and April 2020, the Government and humanitarian partners mobilized more than
$20 million and provided shelter, heating materials and clothing for 76,589 vulnerable
households affected by winter conditions. Between 1 January and 28 April, the United
Nations and its partners provided emergency shelter, household items and cash
support to more than 20,000 people affected by floods.
60. A total of 11 confirmed cases of polio have been reported sin ce the start of the
year, mostly in areas controlled by non-State armed groups and where house-to-house
12/15

20-07347

A/74/897
S/2020/549

vaccination campaigns have been banned since May 2018. Due to physical distancing,
health partners had to suspend two polio vaccination programmes that would have
reached 9.9 million children.
61. Insecurity and mine contamination continued to challenge the humanitarian
response. Since the start of the year, aid workers have reported 332 access-related
incidents. Between 15 February and 20 May, 8 aid workers were killed, 8 were injured
and 19 others were abducted. That is a decrease compared with the same period last
year, when 9 aid workers were killed, 27 injured and 20 abducted.
62. More than double the number of civilian casualties from explosive remn ants of
war were documented during the week-long reduction in violence in February
compared with the average seven-day period in the first quarter of 2020, as people
were able to travel to newly accessible areas. From February to March, the United
Nations and its partners cleared 5.5 square kilometres of land contaminated by high impact explosives, benefiting 28 communities. Approximately 156,356 people, most
of them returnees, received risk education. Medical personnel, ambulances and
vehicles have been offered for COVID-19 response in areas where humanitarian mine
action is operational.
63. With international commercial flights suspended and some domestic flights
disrupted, in April the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service established an
international airbridge to Doha three times a week to facilitate the rotation of
humanitarian personnel. To ensure that critical humanitarian operations are not
disrupted, the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service has continued providing
domestic flights, including special helicopter services.
64. The humanitarian community supported the Government’s COVID -19 response
by conducting a rapid needs analysis and revising the 2020 Humanitarian Response
Plan. The estimated number of people in need of humanitarian assistance has
increased from 9.4 million at the start of the year to 14 million. Humanitarian partners
now seek $1.1 billion to provide life-saving assistance to 11.1 million people.

VI. Counter-narcotics
65. From 15 March to 29 April, law enforcement authorities conducted a total of
217 counter-narcotics operations, leading to seizures of 294 kg of heroin, 470 kg of
opium, 24,704 kg of hashish and cannabis, 111 kg of methamphetamine, 7 kg of
morphine, 78 litres of acetic anhydride and 200 grams of methadone. These seizures
led to the arrest of 251 suspects, including three members of the Afghan National
Police and four Afghan National Army personnel, and the confiscation of 66 vehicles
and 30 weapons. In line with the National Drug Action Plan, 355 hectares of opium
poppy were eradicated in coordinated operations led by the Ministry of the Interior.

VII. Mission support
66. As at 31 March, vacancy rates at UNAMA were 9 per cent for international staff,
6 per cent for National Professional Officers and 2 per cent for national staff,
compared with the approved rates of 8 per cent, 3 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively.
The proportion of female staff remained low, at 37 per cent for international staff,
46 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 13 per cent for National Professional
Officers and 9 per cent for national staff. Between 1 January and 31 March, UNAMA
conducted 104 road and 14 air missions, as well as 800 reverse outreach missions
during which district representatives visited UNAM A field offices.

20-07347

13/15

A/74/897
S/2020/549

67. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, UNAMA adopted a range of measures
to safeguard the safety and well-being of its staff in Afghanistan, while sustaining the
delivery of critical programmes and activities throughout the country. To that end, the
Mission implemented alternate work arrangements, resulting in significant reductions
in the presence of international staff in the country and in the number of national staff
reporting to work in UNAMA offices as at 11 May.

VIII. Observations
68. The agreement reached between Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah demonstrates
much-needed resolve to overcome the political impasse in the interest of the country.
It is my hope that the Government can build on the positive momentum born of
compromise and move united towards future intra-Afghan negotiations, recognizing
the historic opportunity for a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
69. The disturbing increase in violence since March has continued to take the lives of
civilians, among them women, children and newborns. Internal displacement,
deprivation and insecurity further endanger the population. In view of the additional
scourge of COVID-19, I reiterate my call for a ceasefire to enable an effective response.
70. The horrendous targeting of a maternity ward in a hospital and the attack on the
Dharamshala Sikh temple in Kabul have underscored the urgency of ending the
violence. Any attacks against civilians are unacceptable. Hospitals, medical facilities
and personnel have special protection under international humanitarian law. Those
who attack them must be held accountable.
71. Confidence-building efforts by the Government and the Taliban can contribute
to greater trust and to establishing the basis for direct talks. I hope that the first
publicly acknowledged face-to-face meeting between representatives of the
Government and the Taliban on the topic of prisoner releases can further contacts,
crucial for the realization of intra-Afghan negotiations. Direct talks are essential to
paving the way towards a lasting political settlement and a permanent ceasefire and
to advancing sustainable development throughout the country.
72. The best chance of a durable peace settlement rests on broad consensus, with
the political and social diversity of Afghanistan represented in the peace process, so
as to lay the groundwork for wide acceptance of an eventual settlement. That entails
giving a voice to the concerns of Afghan citizens and ensuring that human rights and
fundamental freedoms are safeguarded, including the gains made with regard to the
human rights of women.
73. I call on all parties to ensure that women in Afghanistan can raise their voices
safely and participate meaningfully in the peace process. The inclusion of four women
in the 21-member negotiating team of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
demonstrates some progress in that regard, and the growing domestic architecture for
peace, including the Ministry of Peace Affairs and the High Council for Peace and
National Reconciliation, provides further opportunities for the inclusion of women.
74. The spread of COVID-19 is having a devastating impact on women and could
reverse the gains made with regard to their rights and freedoms. Lockdown measures
to stem the pandemic are very likely to have increased levels of domestic violence,
while access to justice and protection systems has decreased. Many women have lost
their jobs as domestic labourers and handicraft workers and are at risk of losing their
hard-won economic and social independence. Women, especially outside Kabul, have
limited access to health-care services and are disproportionately affected by the
country’s weak health-care system. I call on the Government to put women and girls
at the centre of the response to COVID-19. That starts with women as leaders, with
14/15

20-07347

A/74/897
S/2020/549

equal representation and decision-making power. Urgent steps are also needed to
protect women and expand psychosocial support and services, including access to
justice. To preserve and build on the gains made, I urge all stakeholders to e nsure that
COVID-19 does not divert funds and focus away from the implementation of the
Afghanistan national action plan on women, peace and security, notably the
meaningful participation of women in decision-making, peace and political processes.
75. Civil society actors, human rights defenders, journalists and media workers are
crucial to the fabric of society and the health of the country’s institutions. Through
the public sharing of viewpoints, including peaceful protest, the fundamental rights
and freedoms under the Constitution are reinforced and given new meaning. The
checks on authority, accountability and transparency fostered by civil society and the
media sector not only strengthen the commitments of the Government to the rule of
law and countering corruption, but also serve the interests of Afghan society in future
peace negotiations. I call for their continued protection, recognizing the crucial role
of such entities as the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission and the
importance of the international treaties to which Afghanistan is party.
76. Overcrowding in places of detention undermines hygiene, health and human
dignity and constitutes a significant obstacle to preventing the spread of COVID -19.
I welcome the release by Afghanistan of large numbers of detainees and prisoners,
including the older and infirm, women and children, and those sentenced for minor,
non-violent offences. I believe that a swift and firm response aimed at ensuring
healthy and safe custody and reducing overcrowding is essential to mitigate the risk
of COVID-19 entering and spreading in places of detention.
77. The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan remains a source of deep concern, as
fundamental coping mechanisms have come under additional strain owing to th e spread
of COVID-19. Limited access to water and sanitation means that millions have limited
options to protect themselves from contracting the virus. During the season when food
stores should be at their most plentiful, they are still insufficient to mee t the needs of
some 13.4 million people who face crisis and emergency levels of food insecurity. The
number of persons who are severely food insecure in this post-harvest period of
“plenty” calls for renewed international assistance, but also national lead ership.
78. I am highly concerned about the economic prospects for Afghanistan and the
effects of deprivation and underemployment on the health and welfare of the
population. Economic inactivity, falling incomes and reduced consumption will push
many of the 35 million people who are already living on less than $2 a day to the
fringes of survival. I call for continued international support for the Humanitarian
Response Plan and robust engagement by all stakeholders in the preparations for the
2020 ministerial pledging conference on Afghanistan.
79. The constructive role of regional countries is vital to ensuring stability and
economic development in Afghanistan and the broader neighbourhood. Regional
trade, assistance and greater connectivity are in the mutual interest and remain critical
to the increased self-sufficiency of Afghanistan. I welcome the continued engagement
by the administrations in Kabul and Islamabad under the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action
Plan for Peace and Solidarity. I am further encouraged by the unanimous support of
regional stakeholders for an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process.
80. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Deborah Lyons, for their continued dedication under challenging
conditions to fulfilling our commitments in support of the Government and people of
Afghanistan.

20-07347

15/15
