S/PV.8668

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8668th meeting

Tuesday, 19 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Lord Ahmad/Mr. Allen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy/Mr. Repkin
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
The role of reconciliation in maintaining international peace and security
Letter dated 11 November 2019 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/871)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-37300 (E)
*1937300*

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/871, which contains a letter dated
11 November 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
The role of reconciliation in maintaining
international peace and security
Letter dated 11 November 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/871)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Cyprus,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Morocco,
Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Sri
Lanka, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Alpaslan
Özerdem, Dean of the School for Conflict Analysis and
Resolution, George Mason University; and Ms. Ilwad
Elman, Director of Programs and Development, Elman
Peace and Human Rights Centre.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Deputy Head of
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the representative
of the Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See
to the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/33

begin

19/11/2019

its

In that regard, I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, and give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for having convened this debate, as
reconciliation processes supported by the international
community can have a critical impact on the lives of the
people we serve.
Successful reconciliation contributes to preventing
a recurrence of conflict and to building more peaceful,
resilient and prosperous societies, particularly in
the aftermath of large-scale violence and human
rights violations.
From Cambodia to Rwanda, Northern Ireland and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, reconciliation processes have
played a crucial role in resolving ethnic, religious and
political differences and enabling people to live in
peace. Reconciliation helps to repair fractures caused
by an absence of trust between the State and the people,
when institutions and individuals acknowledge their
role in past crimes and both victims and perpetrators
muster the courage to face the truth. It is a process
through which societies can move from a divided past
to a shared future.
Promoting reconciliation and breaking cycles
of impunity are therefore integral to all our work.
Resolutions adopted by the Council have guided us by
stressing that reconciliation is part of a comprehensive
approach to sustaining peace.
We all acknowledge the vital importance of
reconciliation, but our concept of reconciliation must
evolve to keep up with the changing nature of conflict.
It can no longer be limited to those directly involved in
waging war. Today’s conflicts are complex and drawing
in neighbouring countries and great Powers. Social,
economic and political inequalities are growing and
amplified by the climate crisis and new technologies.
Democratic space is shrinking and stoking identitybased politics, discrimination, intolerance and hate
speech. Today’s reconciliation processes must respond
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to those challenges by being broader, deeper and more
inclusive than ever.
Reconciliation must have an impact at the individual,
interpersonal, institutional and sociopolitical levels, if it
is to succeed. There is growing awareness of the role of
reconciliation in addressing the root causes of conflict,
from the climate crisis to structural discrimination,
inequality, impunity and the divisive narratives
that play a part in radicalization and engendering
violent extremism.
We are currently witnessing a wave of protests
around the world. While every one is unique, they share
some common features — a deficit in trust between
people and political institutions, and the negative
impacts of globalization and technological change
that are deepening inequalities. I urge Governments
to respond to those protests with respect for freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly and to address
people’s grievances through dialogue and reconciliation
to counter deep polarization.
We need a social contract that is inclusive and
equitable; that enables everyone, including young
people, to live in dignity; that affords women and
girls the same opportunities as men and boys; and that
protects those who are sick, vulnerable or living with
a disability. Social and economic reform can play a
central role in reconciliation, demonstrating the need
to address corrupt practices and systems that serve
the interests of a small elite. Today’s reconciliation
processes must fulfil two conditions.
First, they must be based within the communities
and societies affected by conflict. Reconciliation
must come from within, with the participation of all,
not only political leaders and organizations. Women
representatives and civil society groups must be
included at every stage. Religious leaders have the
moral authority to mobilize local support and build
trust. Young people and marginalized groups are
critical players with an inherent understanding of the
grievances that lead to conflict. Peace agreements and
reconciliation processes that ignore those voices are
unlikely to succeed.
Local ownership and broad participation are also
critical to overcome attempts by powerful elites to
avoid accountability and exclude certain groups. Such
manipulation can contribute to weak agreements that
lack specific reforms and measures to bring communities
back together. Successful reconciliation restores trust

S/PV. 8668

in the State and its institutions. When people deem
their institutions legitimate, they turn to them, rather
than to violence, to address their differences.
Secondly, successful reconciliation processes
address the pain and suffering of victims, understand
the motivation of offenders, render justice, provide
remedy and ensure truth. There is no reconciliation
without justice, and there is no justice without truth.
Transitional justice mechanisms, including truth and
reconciliation commissions, can be an effective way
to achieve these goals, as we have seen in Guatemala,
Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and elsewhere. They can
help societies unite around a shared narrative that
affirms our common dignity and humanity
Reconciliation, however, cannot be a substitute for
accountability or pave the way for amnesty for serious
crimes under international law. The Council has rightly
emphasized the importance of accountability for gross
violations of human rights and humanitarian law. While
rendering justice, successful reconciliation mechanisms
must advance equality and human rights, even in cases
in which those did not exist prior to conflict.
Human rights violations impact women differently.
Transitional justice must be transformative justice that
addresses gender imbalances, is rooted in local realities
and is based on broad consultation.
(spoke in French)
The United Nations is working to integrate
reconciliation frameworks into peacemaking and
peacebuilding activities in countries throughout the
world. Our mediators and envoys are emphasizing
the importance of practical provisions that encompass
the need for dialogue, confidence-building and
reconciliation in peace agreements. We have also
worked to include provisions that address the past
in agreements mediated by regional organizations,
including in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan. In that context, I welcome the new transitional
justice policy of the African Union, a framework that
takes account of the complexities of mass violence,
while at the same time respects local traditions
involving reconciliation and justice.
We have always stressed the importance of
transitional justice — notably in Colombia, as well as
in other countries. We also provide technical support
for national processes that contribute to collective
healing, for example, in Tunisia and Yemen, where

19-373003/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

we provide our expert advice to facilitate national
dialogue. Throughout the world, the United Nations
supports nationally led and victim-centred transitional
justice processes. In the Gambia, for example, we have
provided critical support in the development of the
comprehensive national strategy for transitional justice
and the establishment of the Truth, Reconciliation and
Reparations Commission.
We will continue to encourage Governments to
make use of their national capacities, while ensuring
respect for international norms. Our support for
dialogue, consultations and political processes at
the national level, including elections and drafting
constitutions, is another crucial measure to promote
people-centred and inclusive institutions.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
our road map for countering the drivers of conflict and
promoting inclusive governance and respect for human
rights and human dignity. The entire United Nations
system is helping Governments to strengthen good
governance, the rule of law, respect for human rights,
accountable institutions, the provision of basic services,
gender equality and the inclusion of young people and
marginalized communities in political processes.
Ultimately, reconciliation must be underpinned
by key economic and political changes to the very
institutions that gave rise to conflict or repression.
Revisiting, understanding and overcoming a painful
past together is extremely challenging. In the words of
Archbishop Desmond Tutu,
“There is no shortcut or simple prescription for
healing the wounds and divisions of a society in
the aftermath of sustained violence. Creating trust
and understanding between former enemies is a
supremely difficult challenge.”
Successful reconciliation is therefore both a goal and
a process. As we near the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations and the decade of action for the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, reconciliation
based on establishing trust among peoples and nations
is imperative to ensuring peace and prosperity for all
on a healthy planet.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and insights into this issue.
I now give the floor to Mr. Özerdem.
4/33

19/11/2019

Mr. Özerdem: I am honoured to be here with
everyone today and grateful for the opportunity to
address the Security Council. Allow me to express my
sincere thanks to the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Her Excellency Ms. Karen Pierce, for
her invitation for me to speak in this open debate on the
issue of reconciliation.
Reconciliation is one of the main factors in
gaining and sustaining peace. Allow me to spend a few
moments sharing with the Council why reconciliation
is so important for achieving lasting peace.
One of the tragic ironies of wars is that is that,
when they come to an end, to achieve lasting peace,
people on all sides must learn to live together. Victims,
perpetrators and others in war-affected communities
begin the formidable task of reconciling with one
another, politically and interpersonally, reframing and
rehumanizing their opposite numbers, rebuilding trust
and accountability and coming to terms with legacies
of the past.
Therefore, reconciliation is a process of restoring
broken relationships, and has to engage deep-seated
wounds of conflict. Reconciliation is also about
learning to live non-violently with radical differences.
However, post-conflict societies consist of large and
disparate groups of actors with different experiences
of the conflict and with different cultural codes and
values. It is therefore unsurprising that the concept of
reconciliation means different things to different people.
For parents whose children were taken in a raid,
it might mean discovering what happened to them and
seeing the perpetrators brought to justice. For newly
installed national leaders, the emphasis might be on
expedience, burying the past in order to focus on the
urgent challenges of the present. For ex-combatants,
reconciliation might be their ticket to forgiveness or a
fresh start.
That is why reconciliation needs to be a tailormade process, agile enough to adapt to changing
socioeconomic and political post-conflict dynamics.
In other words, from a minimalist perspective,
reconciliation could be about achieving the objective
of coexistence, whereas a maximalist approach
emphasizes the importance of forgiveness, dealing with
the past and rebuilding trust.
We should also remember that successful
reconciliation is both an outcome and a process. As an
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

outcome, it consists of mutual trust, recognition and
acceptance, as well as sensitivity and consideration for
the other party’s needs and interests. As a process, it
would need to incorporate wide-ranging changes, both
structural and psychological.
What have we learned from our reconciliation
experiences over the years? First of all, reconciliation
should be a transformational experience — not
about learning how to forgive and forget, but how to
remember and change. The rebuilding of Stari Most, the
famous footbridge in Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
could have been a great opportunity for such a
transformational experience. Instead, the international
community built an almost identical copy of the bridge,
which was indeed a great success, but without giving
Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks an opportunity to build
bridges of trust during its reconstruction.
Secondly, reconciliation should always be based
on local approaches, local vocabulary and, most
important, local actors. Too often, however, their
efforts are dismissed by political actors. Nevertheless,
it is only through local approaches that we stand a
chance to engage the deep emotional wounds left by
conflict. Let us remember that emotions are not just
private reactions, but also the basis of sociopolitical
forces that are critical for the construction of identity
and community. Therefore, it is important to consider
reconciliation as a way of recasting the emotional
legacies of conflict.
Thirdly,
different
dimensions
of
reconciliation — interpersonal, intergroup or
inter-State — demand different types of engagement.
Accordingly, we need to consider different types of
local actors. Local authorities and municipalities, and
their potential power as insider reconcilers, are often
overlooked. For example, the city of Coventry in the
United Kingdom, which was badly bombed during
the Second World War, led an amazing mission of
reconciliation and worked with the war-torn cities of
iron curtain countries, such as Dresden, Belgrade and
Warsaw, during the Cold War years. Let us recognize
the bravery and foresight of insider reconcilers such
as Provost Howard, who, immediately following the
bombing of Coventry Cathedral, called for reconciliation
rather than revenge.
Fourthly, financial support and projects become
helpful only when they are part of a larger, locally
designed and led process. The United Nations and its

S/PV. 8668

Member States have to increase funding, but must also
make it more flexible. Effective reconciliation requires
agility to react to changing situations and longevity,
which project cycles rarely enable. That is particularly
important to ensure the full participation of women
and young people, as they tend to be excluded and
marginalized in wider peacebuilding processes.
Without women and young people, reconciliation can
never be successful.
Fifthly, it is important to remember that launching
a truth and reconciliation commission is not enough,
although it is often necessary to address past injustices
and establish what happened. Different attempts
at reconciliation — whether they focus on truth
finding, reparations, education, peace journalism,
addressing past grievances or writing a common
history — should all be interlinked and connected to
the wider socioeconomic and political realities of postconflict societies. Let us not forget that reconciliation
is a process, not just a programme.
Finally, we must not think that reconciliation
happens only after violent conflict. It needs to happen
all the time and everywhere — sometimes even as the
first option to achieve peace. In today’s world many
societies are deeply divided along religious, political,
ethnic, racial or economic fault lines. Our politics
are divisive. Therefore, we need to reduce prejudices,
challenge stereotypes and tackle dehumanization. We
need to support everyday peace and reconciliation.
Our activities as politicians, diplomats, civil society
workers, academics, the media and the private sector
should engender trust, compromise and cooperation.
Reconciliation matters because if individual
and collective traumas are not addressed, residual
grievances can provide a basis for self-perpetuating
cycles of violence among future generations. For divided
societies to heal and come together, we need strategies
in place that enable us to negotiate past grievances, and
allow us to reflect upon how memories and emotions
force the past to become the politics of the present.
Designing effective reconciliation requires the
involvement of relevant local actors, particularly women
and young people. As members of the international
community, we should faithfully support the processes
that we help to design.
Faith can be a significant inspiration for
reconciliation, but its manipulation can also lead to
further division, hatred or violence. Like all other

19-373005/33

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.8668

actors, faith actors need to be scrutinized according
to their actions, and that is what research, monitoring
impact and evaluation help to accomplish.
Reconciliation can be effective only when it is
deeply contextual. Sometimes the traditions that heal
relationships may, unfortunately, need to be revitalized.
That is where knowledge of local actors is critical, and
building networks of actors and good practices could
inspire others.
At the School for Conflict Analysis and Resolution
at George Mason University, and its newly founded Mary
Hoch Center for Reconciliation, we undertake research
on locally led reconciliation practices. With a specific
focus on insider reconcilers, we facilitate collaboration
among scholars and practitioners, examining how faith
and indigenous narratives mitigate conflicts and heal
community relationships. We remain available to assist
the United Nations in its mission to advance the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, particularly Goal
16, on peace, justice and strong institutions.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Özerdem

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Elman.
Ms. Elman: I am grateful for the invitation to brief
the Security Council this morning.
I am from Somalia, a State that collapsed
devastatingly in 1991 and remains somewhat trapped
in a spiral of prolonged violent anarchy and warfare to
this day. The first attempt at reconciliation was actually
at the height of the conflict in 1991. During the early
days of the war, a manifesto was produced and was
supported by many of the rebel leaders. However, since
not all of the rebel leaders were signatories, the process
failed. Since then, countless attempts at ending the
conflict and building peace humanitarian initiated and
continue to this very day.
Somalia, as an example of a country in a protracted
conflict, is certainly not unique. Past efforts in my
country, which proceeded from the assumption that
political and diplomatic methods could be grafted unto
existing systems and attitudes, without first developing
new social and economic foundations for change, were
part of an unfortunate norm in the crises and conflicts
the Council and member States are committed to
solving. It therefore gives me encouragement that,
under the United Kingdom’s presidency, we are now
6/33

19/11/2019

debating the toughest and, arguably, most important
part of the peacebuilding cycle — reconciliation.
I am reminded of a terrible clash between forces
loyal to Galmuldug and Puntland forces in Somalia,
in the city of Galkayo, where I was doing some work
recently on disarmament programmes. Fifty thousand
people were displaced. There were many civilian
casualties and countless militias, armed to the teeth,
were stationed at the front lines of a city whose
border was literally divided by just a single rope. The
international community stepped in immediately to
de-escalate the tensions and the leaders of the two
regions were taken out of Somalia for peace talks. The
signing of the agreement was celebrated abroad and
echoed in national media. The very day the leaders
returned, devastating fighting erupted once more,
leaving more innocent people dead.
Yet, when the women, young people and religious
leaders of that very community are asked what it would
take for the young men on the front lines to drop their
weapons, the answer is simple — just talk to them.
They are accessible. If offered a chance at peace, those
with the most to lose will participate. We know that a
reconciliation process that almost exclusively involves
political parties, with voters often left out of the talks,
will most likely not succeed. We know that to achieve
true reconciliation, the process must embrace a longterm, nationwide solution. The most urgent task is often
rebuilding public trust in institutions — formal and
informal alike. Such trust is worryingly lacking in the
conflicts we hope to solve today.
Violence will continue to ensue if people no longer
believe that they can solve their problems through
trusted channels, such as Government institutions.
Reconciliation is a process; it is not a single event and
it cannot be a process that is exported outside of the
country. I witnessed at first-hand every day what the
lack of a legal framework for reconciliation means. It
means the absence of certainty for potential defectors
from the parties to the conflict regarding the fate they
expect if they risk their lives to escape from groups
like Al-Shabaab, for example; the impact of high
corruption and the lack of adherence to international
human rights laws by Somali Government institutions;
the lack of parallel efforts to disarm and transform clan
militias; persistent clan conflicts and discrimination
and the country’s prevalent politics of exclusion and
marginalization. Such problems permeate traditional
justice mechanisms. In addition, the biased treatment
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of women and discrimination against minority
clans perpetuate grievances. Yet, efforts at trauma
healing, forgiveness and reconciliation among former
combatants, local communities and clans have been led
for years by Somali non-governmental organizations.
Successful strategies for peacebuilding and national
reconciliation must involve as many sectors of the
population as possible. Most important, such strategies
must seek to build consensus. Women-led civil society
groups all over the world that are able to speak to
the underlying drivers of violence and significantly
influence the reconciliation process are systematically
excluded. There are countless examples of women’s
peace and reconciliation efforts, in Somalia, Northern
Ireland, Liberia, the Balkans, Bosnia and more. The
evidence speaks for itself.
After 20 years of celebrating resolution 1325
(2000), I urge the Council to not just symbolically
celebrate the document but to utilize it to advance
women’s inclusion in adjusting the challenges to
reconciliation and mandate that there is inclusive
gender decision-making in the design, implementation
and monitoring of reconciliation strategies. That means
consulting women from the beginning, including
those that are displaced and with disabilities; taking
the steps necessary to increase the number of female
staff in mediation, observation and the negotiation of
peace agreements; and adjusting the protection needs
of all humanitarian workers and women human rights
defenders, who are increasingly targeted, disappeared
and abducted for getting involved in those very
processes. Although women, in particular young
women, are more likely to become victims during war,
they have created pathways to peace through advocacy
and informal networks and, with new technology, have
even created viral movements.
However, the lack of financial assistance to
complement peacemaking and the culture of human
rights is one of the biggest setbacks for peacebuilding
today. Outside of my work with the Elman Peace and
Human Rights Centre in Somalia, where I focus on the
disarmament, rehabilitation and reintegration of young
men and women who are involved with armed groups,
I also have the extreme honour of serving as an adviser
to the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund — a
testament to his commitment to including women, in
particular young women, and those from the Global
South in decision-making processes in peacebuilding.
In that process and through such work, we have

S/PV. 8668

countless times heard from the people of fragile States
and countries in conflict, directly appealing for more
support for reconciliation. That is the reason those
countries request funding.
I leave Council members with a thought and a
request that the President and the members of the
Council consider working with the mechanisms that
exist within the United Nations family today. The
Peacebuilding Fund, with the Council’s support,
can invest in reconciliation in the countries we
are discussing.
The President: I thank Ms. Elman for her very
powerful briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the United
Nations and South Asia of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
On behalf of the Government of the United
Kingdom and as current Council President, I would like
first to thank everyone for joining us today and sharing
thoughts on this important issue. In particular, I thank
Mr. Özerdem and, of course, Ms. Elman for their very
powerful, touching and poignant contributions. I also
pay tribute to the contribution of Secretary-General
António Guterres. His words resonated very strongly,
in particular when he spoke of no reconciliation without
justice and no justice without truth. That should remain
our primary aim and objective.
We all recognize that reconciliation is an important,
indeed pivotal, block for lasting peace. Why? Because it
has the power not only to resolve existing conflicts but
also to prevent future violence, by helping people and
communities overcome old grievances. That is why the
United Kingdom is and will remain a steadfast champion
of the Secretary-General’s vision for sustaining peace,
which puts conflict prevention and peacebuilding at the
very heart of the important work of the United Nations
around the world.
It is also why we, the United Kingdom, along with
other nations, have long advocated for faith leaders to
play a key role. When we look around the word today — a
world where more than three-quarters of people say
directly that their faith is important to them — there
can be very little doubt that faith leaders have the
ability to influence individuals and communities in a
way that Governments simply cannot. Faith is part of
the solution. Faith leaders can also amplify the voices of

19-373007/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

vulnerable communities and support reconciliation and
peacebuilding by mediating and encouraging dialogue
among different groups. As Mr. Özerdem said, we must
also remember the causes of the conflict and then move
forward and change.
The United Kingdom and I, personally, as the
Minister who oversees human rights, have been
focused regularly on seeking insights from faith and
belief leaders around the world, not only to seek their
support but to directly inform policy and our work
on finding practical, workable and, more important,
sustainable solutions.
I would emphasize that it is also important to get
one’s own house in order. We should reflect. Never is the
job done. We should constantly evolve as Governments
ourselves. This year, therefore, we asked the Bishop
of Truro to look at our response to the persecution of
Christians around the world as well as of members
of other religious minorities — Muslim minorities,
including Ahmadi and Shia Muslims, and members of
the Baha’i faith, to name but a few.
We are proud of both the honesty and the
transparency shown during this process, as we are
of the important priority we are giving our global
campaign in support of media freedom. It was Thomas
Jefferson who said, “The liberty of speaking and
writing guards our other liberties.” That is why the
United Kingdom, together with our partners around
the world, is also seeking to defend media freedom and
protect journalists who do an incredible job, often with
great danger to themselves. We support this campaign
because it is as important as working with religious
communities to defend their religious freedom and
protect the persecuted.
Accordingly, as a Government, we have already
accepted all of the wide-ranging recommendations
set forth in the Bishop of Truro’s review, including
establishing an early-warning system to accelerate our
response to atrocities. As I look around the Security
Council table this morning, we will be seeking a
Security Council resolution on the persecution of
Christians and of people of all faiths. We hope that
today’s debate will prepare the ground and inform later
discussions on this important priority.
With regard to justice, we have seen how transitional
justice mechanisms can support persecuted people and
lay the foundations for peace. For these mechanisms to
be successful, they must involve, as Ms. Elman said, all
8/33

19/11/2019

parts of the community, particularly women. The United
Kingdom has been and will remain a steadfast advocate
for engaging and involving women at the heart of
conflict resolution, not as an afterthought, but because
we believe they can be pivotal players in ensuring that
peace is achieved and sustained and that countries
and nations can build. It is also important to involve
women to ensure that children’s views are represented
effectively. Faith, belief and community leaders also
need to be involved. Indeed, all voices should be heard
as we look towards building justice. This inclusiveness
is vital, but our efforts must of course be tailored to the
country concerned.
Mr. Özerdem talked about local ownership. We have
seen that in certain areas of the world. The Gambia has
shown one possible model. It secured the confidence
of the public by establishing a truth, reconciliation and
reparations commission that was seen to be independent,
consultative and inclusive. Similarly, accountability is
another important element for long-term reconciliation.
Impunity must no longer be the default option. That is
why the United Kingdom has supported the established
United Nations policy to oppose amnesties for war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide or gross
violations of human rights, including in the context of
peace negotiations.
And what about the Security Council? The Council
has a pivotal and key role to play, working with the
Secretary-General and his Offices — for mediation and
support, special political missions, the Peacebuilding
Commission and others. As countries make the
transition from conflict and instability to sustainable
peace and security, all of us on the Security Council
have a particular responsibility to ensure that their
efforts succeed. That means monitoring reconciliation
processes, women mediators, deciding when to deploy
special political missions, and ensuring that women and
other excluded groups have a place at the very heart of
the table at every stage of recovery and reconciliation.
It is also important that we should consider how faith
leaders can support our efforts in this regard.
In conclusion, I thank the Secretary-General, our
briefers and all participants from whom we will hear
today for their continued commitment in support of
reconciliation that is fair, inclusive and effective. After
all, we owe it to all those who have suffered from
conflict and to those who continue to suffer to help
them overcome their differences and return to their
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8668

homes and communities. Ultimately, we all need to
play our part in building a lasting peace.

that has been done by young people in this area with the
following three points.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

First,
youth,
including
young
women,
must be involved as stakeholders in the design,
implementation and monitoring of transitional justice
processes, including truth-seeking, reparation and
reconciliation programmes.

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): Mr. President, it is a pleasure to have you
with us in the Security Council today. We would thank
you, Sir, for the presiding over this debate, and thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for orienting us
with their experiences and recommendations.
Reconciliation plays an important role in the
processes of building and sustaining peace. In order
to achieve long-term success in reconciliation efforts,
we must prioritize the rebuilding of the rule of law
and the strengthening of State institutions, as well
as the confidence of those affected by conflict with
those institutions. Otherwise, it becomes impossible to
guarantee security, with impunity remaining the rule
and economic activities being severely disrupted. We
therefore insist that ending the climate of impunity is
vital to restoring confidence, including through the
prosecution of perpetrators of violence and by providing
the due reparation to the victims of the conflict.
Brutal memories of past abuses take years to heal.
In order to sow the seeds of reconciliation, it is therefore
necessary to use the potential of educational institutions
in their role as centres of social cohesion, reconciliation
and belonging when they promote understanding and
recognition of diversity.
We must further channel reconciliation efforts into
the programmatic work of United Nations agencies,
considering that they have vast experience and such
tools as impartiality and neutrality to contribute to
reconciliation. In peacebuilding and reconciliation
processes, we often pay attention to parties to conflicts
and forget those affected by them. Women, for example,
have taken on an important role in reconciliation
processes in Colombia, Guatemala, Liberia, Northern
Ireland and the Philippines, just to mention a few. It
is clear that the inclusion of women contributes to a
holistic understanding of what reconciliation requires,
increasing the chances of success.
I would like at this point to acknowledge the work
of Ms. Ilwad Elman and underline the excellent work

Secondly, young people serve as a fabric for
integrating the commitments assumed in peace
agreements and processes, being natural transmitters of
historical memory so that future generations may learn
from conflict thereby ensuring long-term sustainability.
Thirdly, young people should be recognized for their
key role in the raising of awareness and understanding
of the dynamics of conflict within their countries and
promoting the urgency of rebuilding relationships
among marginalized communities. As an example, the
Dialogue for the Future initiative developed under the
auspices of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and implemented in conjunction with United Nations
agencies, the Republic of Serbia and Montenegro, is a
concrete example of a project that creates more spaces
for constructive dialogue among various communities
and leaders at the highest level, alongside young people.
The social capital of young people must be seriously
taken into consideration in peacebuilding processes.
We call on Governments, regional organizations,
United Nations country teams, peacekeeping and
political missions and stakeholders to involve young
people in political dialogue and formal and informal
reconciliation processes so as to ensure that their
participation be structured and systematic.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): It is a pleasure
to see you here with us again, Mr. President, and we
thank you once more for your generosity and having
hosted us last night — we really appreciate that.
I wish to begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
Mr. Özerdem and Ms. Elman for their briefings on
this very important topic on the role and value of
reconciliation in the maintenance of international
peace and security. South Africa recognizes and values
the importance of national reconciliation processes in
achieving sustainable peace, especially in countries
transitioning from conflict to post-conflict situations.
As the Security Council will be aware, South
Africa went through its own process of reconciliation
after having dismantled the oppressive system of

19-373009/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

apartheid. Our Truth and Reconciliation Commission
was established with the aims of granting amnesty
from criminal and civil liability to people who made
full disclosures of acts committed with a political
objective during the course of conflicts of the past;
affording victims an opportunity to relate the violations
they suffered; taking measures aimed at granting
reparations to victims; restoring the human and civil
dignity of the victims of human rights violations; and
making recommendations aimed at preventing the
committing of gross human rights violations. Many
South Africans had an opportunity to appear before
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in a series of
public hearings, either as victims or as perpetrators of
acts that had violated human rights. State institutions,
political parties, organizations and the business sector
were also required to elaborate on their respective roles
in the past.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission had to
deal with the question of reconciliation and the future,
on the one hand, and the necessity to establish the truth
in relation to past events and ensure reparations to the
victims of gross human rights abuses, on the other
hand. Those issues had to be carefully considered and
balanced, both during and after the historic transition
from apartheid and oppression to a constitutional
democracy. The compromises were sometimes painful,
as was confronting the truth of past oppression. However,
for us, based on our own national circumstances and
history, it was our way of reconciling the decades-long
oppression and proceed with nation-building.
Reconciliation measures during transitions from
post-conflict situations are crucial to ensuring longterm stability. However, it is equally important to
realize that one size does not fit all. Transitional justice
processes must respond to the specific context of the
country in transition. The creation of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in our country was the
manner in which we chose to deal with our own past
and future. Countries emerging from conflict must
find their own ways of bridging the past with new
possibilities for the future in the context of their own
unique circumstances.
The debate on peace and justice still continues,
and each State needs to take broad ownership of
its particular transitional processes and find its
own balance in the sequencing of peace, justice
and reconciliation. While human rights norms have
strengthened transitional justice, and although that
10/33

19/11/2019

has become an acceptable response during political
transitions, they have also shaped the transition process
into a largely legalistic field with an often-narrow
accountability and justice-based focus. It is also
necessary to consider that there is a political necessity to
promote alternative means of accountability. Focusing
on prosecutions alone can destabilize transitions.
Therefore, the whole spectrum of transitional justice
needs to be explored, including truth commissions and
reparations for victims. In addition, it is important to
recognize the value and importance of communitybased or traditional justice mechanisms, whereby local
conflict-resolution and healing practices are adapted to
address grave violations. Equally important are efforts
to ensure the representation of women and youth, not
only in transitional justice processes but also at the
negotiating table beforehand.
As Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who chaired the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, has written,
“The establishment of South Africa’s Truth
and Reconciliation Commission was a pioneering
international experiment, with a potentially farreaching effect on the way we all deal with conflict.
Normally, when countries move through the
difficult transition from oppression to democracy,
they deal with the past in one of two ways: either
the leaders of the old order are put on trial or dealt
with summarily, or previous events are swept under
the carpet and the suffering of those subjected to
violence is ignored. South Africa followed a third,
unique way when it ended apartheid. To those who
had committed grave violations of human rights, it
offered amnesty in exchange for public disclosure
of the truth about their crimes, and to the victims it
gave an unusual opportunity to be heard, as well as
hope for reparations.”
The international community, and the United
Nations in particular, has an important role to
play in creating an enabling environment in which
reconciliation can occur. Durable peace cannot
be achieved simply through the signing of peace
agreements. It also requires a comprehensive approach
that involves the active participation of the broader
multilateral system in addressing peace and security
and sustainable development needs. As in peacekeeping
operations, different situations require different
responses in dealing with post-conflict reconciliation
and development.
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

On our continent, the African Union seeks durable
peace and sustainable development through the
mechanisms and structures it has put in place for conflict
prevention, peacemaking, peace support operations
and intervention, as well as peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction. It is important to strengthen
the linkages between regional and global mechanisms
if we want to ensure that the United Nations system,
and in particular the Security Council, is able to help
establish enabling environments in countries plagued
by conflict and in order to support nationally owned
reconciliation processes and bring about sustainable
peace and security.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to welcome your presiding over
this meeting, Sir, and thank you for having organized it.
We are also grateful for the concept note (S/2019/871,
annex) provided. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing, as well as Mr. Özerdem and Ms. Elman
for their remarks.
The Security Council has held many thematic
debates over the past 10 years on the importance of
preventive diplomacy tools such as mediation in conflict
resolution. Today we are focusing on reconciliation,
which is a vital element in achieving the peaceful
coexistence of communities, especially in post-conflict
situations. There are a number of prerequisites for
reconciliaton to succeed, as detailed by the SecretaryGeneral and the two briefers in their statements. The
Security Council must pay more attention to this topic
in order to prevent relapse into conflict. That should be
done not only through holding discussions on the issue
but also by taking measures to ensure implementation
on the ground.
Reconciliation is one of the most important
elements and phases of the comprehensive approach
to peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and it is a key and
vital factor to ensure sustainable peace. The success
of reconciliation is contingent upon several other
accompanying elements, including accountability and
transitional justice, namely, to ensure that those who
are guilty do not enjoy impunity and to ensure respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law;
and rehabilitation, reintegration and disarmament.
With regard to victims, we must provide the
necessary support to ensure their full rehabilitation.
We reaffirm the importance of national ownership
of any reconciliation process. We must establish
integrated strategies of reconciliation supported by

S/PV. 8668

confidence-building measures among all relevant
parties. Dialogue requires sacrifices, compromise and
flexibility, as well as leaving the past behind, healing
wounds and making progress in a spirit of optimism
and serious political will.
The United Nations has many tools at its disposal
that enable it to play an important role in reconciliation
processes. Peacekeeping operations are among the most
important tools and have been playing such an essential
role since 1948. Peacekeeping operations have enjoyed
successes in a number of States and encountered
challenges in others. Moreover, the Special Envoys and
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General bear
the responsibility for paving the way towards launching
a dialogue that would lead to a successful reconciliation
We must also highlight the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which often plays a key and vital part
in such processes by providing advice and integrated
strategic recommendations for peacebuilding and postconflict recovery, in particular in the case of countryspecific configurations. In addition, we must help to
ensure reliable funding for early recovery activities
and sustainable financial resources in the medium
and long terms, especially through the Commission’s
close cooperation with the Peacebuilding Fund. We
should not forget that some States play an important
role in laying the foundation for reconciliation. It
is very important that the United Nations establish
partnerships with those States and cooperate with
regional and subregional organizations that sponsor
specific reconciliation process.
Reconciliation must be inclusive. In negotiations,
we must not ignore the needs and concerns of women,
young people, refugees and internally displaced
persons. We must also bear in mind the significant role
that women can play in all stages of peacebuilding and
their contributions to putting forward and implementing
reconciliation strategies. In addition, we must
acknowledge that there is not one reconciliation model.
Rather, every situation has its own characteristics
depending on the nature of the conflict in question and
the historic, cultural, social and economic dimensions
related to the outbreak of that conflict.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that reconciliation is a
complex and long-term process. However, if successful,
it can put an end to bloodshed and prevent further
destruction and loss. Such reconciliation processes
require the ongoing support of the United Nations

19-3730011/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and the international community and the participation
of civil society and the mass media. We emphasize
the importance of establishing an awareness-raising
media strategy that encourages members of society to
overcome conflict and to achieve peaceful coexistence.
That is indispensable in today’s world. As we discuss
the process of reconciliation, we look forward to the
signing of national reconciliation and peace agreements
in all hotbeds of conflict on the agenda of the Security
Council — Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan and other
conflict areas — and to putting an end to the tragic
conflict phase, offering hope for reconstruction and the
building of a better future for our peoples.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you, Mr. Minister, to New York and would like
to thank you for presiding over today’s meeting. I thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing. China has
listened carefully to the statements by Mr. Özerdem
and civil society representative Ms. Elman.
The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Thanks to the efforts of all parties and the
support of the international community, the United
Nations and the Security Council have made unstinting
efforts to maintain regional stability and promote
international peace and security. Positive results have
been achieved.
That said, there are many issues that merit further
consideration, including how to sustain and consolidate
peace. Achieving reconciliation is an important element
in ending conflicts and promoting lasting peace and
stability. If the parties concerned do not resolve their
differences and give up past grievances, peace will not
be truly sustainable and conflict may break out again.
Achieving national or intercommunal reconciliation
requires the joint efforts of all the parties as well as the
support and assistance of the international community,
in particular the United Nations. I wish to emphasize
the following points.
First, respect for national sovereignty is the
primary prerequisite for reconciliation. Countries
differ in terms of their national characteristics, judicial
systems and culture. There is no one-size-fits-all
reconciliation process. The support and assistance of
the international community must therefore be based on
respect for national sovereignty and ownership, as well
as independence, unity and territorial integrity. The
countries concerned must be supported in advancing a
12/33

19/11/2019

reconciliation process that meets its national conditions.
A bold guest overshadowing the host or imposing
external plans must be avoided in that regard. No one
should be the judge or the teacher.
Secondly. dialogue and consultations are the only
way to achieve reconciliation. With international and
regional hotspot issues appearing one after the other,
China supports peaceful means such as dialogue and
negotiation to resolve international disputes and hotspot
issues. The parties concerned must remain committed
to frank and in-depth dialogue so as to enhance mutual
trust and reduce mistrust. They must refrain from
needlessly resorting to the threat or use of force. It
is essential to embrace the vision of a shared future,
resolve disputes through dialogue, settle differences
through consultations, promote security cooperation
and respect and address each other’s legitimate concerns
so as to achieve reconciliation and peace.
Thirdly, good offices and mediation are significant
means for achieving reconciliation. Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations should be fully leveraged
regarding the good offices and mediation roles of the
Organization. The authority of the Security Council
must be safeguarded and the role of regional and
subregional organizations must be fully utilized. The
peaceful settlement of disputes through, inter alia,
dialogue, negotiation, mediation and good offices
must be supported. The international community must
remain objective and impartial, play a constructive
role in facilitating peace talks in order to find a proper
solution to regional conflicts and promote national
reconciliation with a view to de-escalating and,
ultimately, resolving hotspot issues. All United Nations
agencies must discharge their duties as mandated,
strengthen coordination and ensure synergy.
Fourthly, sustainable development is a fundamental
strategy for reconciliation. Development is the key to
all issues. Secretary-General Guterres has said on many
occasions that sustainable and inclusive development
is an effective solution to the root causes of conflict.
Most international and regional hotspot issues are the
result of poverty and underdevelopment. The way out
is therefore sustainable development. It is vital to pay
equal attention to development and peace, achieve
peace through development, facilitate development
through peace, address both the symptoms and the
root causes of conflicts and lay a solid basis for
sustainable reconciliation and peace by strengthening
development capacities.
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

President Xi Jinping has said that the world in
which we live is full of hopes and challenges. We
must not give up our dreams just because the reality is
complex or stop pursuing our goals just because they
are remote. China was the first country to sign the
Charter of the United Nations. In a world with constant
challenges and increasing risks, as a founding member
of the United Nations and a permanent member of the
Security Council, China will always support peace
and justice, actively explore and implement solutions
with Chinese characteristics to hotspot issues, play
a constructive role in striving for reconciliation and
mutual trust among parties and contribute to building a
world of lasting peace and universal security.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The theme of
reconciliation is of great relevance to Germany. That
is also because of our past. Mr. Özerdem mentioned a
small part of our past by talking about the relationship
there is today between Coventry and Dresden. But
it is not only due to our past but also because we
deeply believe that reconciliation is a very important
element in the conflict cycle. In Germany, we have just
published a strategy to support dealing with the past
and reconciliation, in particular transitional justice.
I wish to echo what the Secretary-General said at
the very beginning of his briefing with regard to the
fact that reconciliation is an important mechanism for
prevention. Reconciliation is a crucial step for countries
entering the post-conflict phase. Only successful
and inclusive reconciliation can ensure peace in the
long term.
Again, to quote the Secretary-General, but also you,
Lord Ahmad, there is no reconciliation without justice,
no justice without truth. It is absolutely crucial that we
fight impunity in our efforts towards reconciliation.
Holding those who are individually responsible for
atrocities and human rights violations accountable
under criminal law is a key prerequisite for sustaining
peace. As the Secretary-General has said, we have to
break the cycle of impunity. That is why, during the
high-level week of the General Assembly, Germany
called on partners to work together in an alliance against
impunity with a view to giving renewed impetus to the
international criminal justice system. It is also why we
support the international mechanisms to assist in the
investigation and prosecution of crimes, such as the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria, the Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar and the United Nations Investigative Team

S/PV. 8668

to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh (UNITAD).
We have had this discussion before with regard to
Syria. Germany firmly believes that the crimes and
atrocities committed on all sides during the Syrian
conflict must be investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice. That is the only way to achieve
reconciliation. For that reason, German prosecutors will
continue to investigate possible war crimes committed in
Syria and we will continue to support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. I take
advantage of this occasion to again appeal to everyone
to support the budget for the Mechanism in the Fifth
Committee. We also welcome the work of UNITAD in
Iraq and the extension of its important mandate. We
support UNITAD financially and through a secondment
and look forward to extending the productive exchange
between UNITAD and our prosecutors.
From our perspective, certain elements are
important for reconciliation to be successful. Based
on all the statements, I think we all agree that we first
need local solutions tailored to specific contexts. Such
solutions were referred to as tailor-made processes by
Mr. Özerdem and as idiosyncratic approaches by our
colleague Mr. Alotaibi. Mr. Özerdem also referred
to a concrete example that I like very much, namely,
the Mostar Bridge, which was reconstructed. It is
fantastic to see, but the local communities still have
not really reconciled. Therefore, civil society and local
organizations must be included. The local population
must be in the driver’s seat in terms of designing and
implementing reconciliation approaches. Germany
has tried to do that in concrete cases. For instance, we
support an inclusive transitional justice process in Mali.
National sovereignty is discussed over and over
in the Council. Yes, national sovereignty should be
respected but, as mentioned by our colleague from
China, within the limits imposed by the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. National ownership can be guaranteed only by
including everyone, especially marginalized groups
and civil society, and by promoting and protecting the
human rights of all.
The inclusion of women is a theme that ran through
almost all the interventions. Germany believes that
it is crucial for a gender perspective to be reflected
throughout the whole reconciliation process. Women’s
leadership and participation are necessary for the

19-3730013/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

success of transitional justice. We say that all the time,
but we have to implement it. It cannot be as in the talks
on Afghanistan, where one side is represented by men
only. We have to have women, and I think we should
all commit to not entering into any negotiations where
one side is represented by men only. We have a rule at
the German mission whereby no panel can go ahead
without a woman present. I think that should apply to
negotiations as well.
With regard to national solutions, reconciliation on
the local level must be embedded in a broader national
discourse. Policies for social reconciliation need to
include long-term nationwide solutions. Ms. Elman
gave the example of her own country and how important
it is that everyone have certainty, that there be trust
in Government institutions and that there be good
governance and no corruption.
We provide concrete support for efforts we
believe are successful. I listened carefully to what
Mr. Van Shalkwyk said about South Africa. The
Security Council travelled to Colombia, where very
good solutions were found in the form of special
courts for peace, a truth commission and units for
the search for missing persons, which we support. We
also support the Joint United Nations Development
Programme-Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs Programme on Building National Capacities for
Conflict Prevention through peace and development
advisers, who have proven very adept at supporting
reconciliation processes.
As for our support for the United Nations tool box, we
want to sharpen the Security Council’s focus on conflict
prevention. We think that we should look more often at
emerging conflicts and believe that reconciliation and
mediation capacities must be included more often in
mission mandates. We also believe that, as mentioned
by Ms. Elman, the Peacebuilding Commission plays a
crucial role in conflict situations and prevention efforts.
It also provides a platform for cooperation, exchange
and sharing lessons learned. Therefore, the Commission
should be used more frequently in the Council.
My last point is that Germany is proud to be the
largest donor to the Peacebuilding Fund and invites
others to join forces and to do even more.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I am grateful for the holding of this debate.
Allow me to thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their interventions.
14/33

As
the
Secretary-General
Desmond Tutu,

19/11/2019

said,

quoting

“There is no handy road map for reconciliation.
There is no shortcut or simple prescription for
healing the wounds and divisions of a society in the
aftermath of sustained violence.”
Creating trust and an environment that fosters mutual
respect and resilience in the face of intolerance is an
extremely difficult challenge. However, it is essential
to promoting lasting peace and restoring the social
fabric. Examining a painful past, acknowledging
and understanding it and, above all, transcending it
together is the best way to ensure that it does not happen
again. Transitional justice processes, we believe, can
contribute to that.
Reconciliation is an issue that has affected us all
at different times. My own country began a process
of reconciliation after the two World Wars that has
repercussions to this day. Reconciliation is a complex
exercise, and there is no single formula for it. However,
history shows us that reconciliation is indeed possible.
Each society must find its own way to reconciliation.
It involves a very long and painful process, which
must respond to the pain and suffering of victims,
understand the motivations of those who have violated
the rights of others, bring divided communities closer
together and seek to find the path to justice, truth and,
ultimately, peace. A series of measures can be taken
in the short, medium and long terms to achieve that,
and each country emerging from conflict must strive
to find the right combination of measures to prevent
new conflicts. For, as many have said this morning,
reconciliation is the best way to achieve prevention.
Some factors can increase the chances of success in
reconciliation processes. Let me mention three of them.
First, a victim-centred approach must be taken
to reconciliation. Victims often demand recognition
of what they have been subjected to, and even some
form of reparation; those elements can complement
the action of the criminal justice system. Such an
approach must necessarily take into account the local
and human dimensions of conflicts. For example,
as part of the peace agreement in Colombia, a large
number of local reconciliation initiatives have been
taken, such as Cinema for Reconciliation in Meta
and the Paddling for Peace project in the Caquetá
department, which brings victims and ex-combatants
together in a rafting tournament. Those initiatives
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

are helping to restore social relations where they were
previously impossible. And then there are inclusive
processes. As others who spoke before me have said,
women, young people, children, refugees, displaced
persons, minorities and other vulnerable groups may
all have dealt with particular experiences during
conflict and may therefore have specific needs within
the reconciliation process. Their experiences must be
heard and taken into account, and their participation
should be more than merely symbolic.
Thirdly, it is important to restore the trust of citizens
in their institutions. In that regard, it is important to
address the feeling of insecurity and mistrust that
some may have towards the police, the judiciary or
other public institutions. The Security Council has
been well aware of the contribution of transitional
justice to reconciliation efforts, since as long ago as
2004, in a presidential statement adopted on 6 October
(S/PRST/2004/34), it drew attention to the full range
of justice mechanisms that could be considered
during periods of transition, including international,
national and mixed criminal tribunals and truth and
reconciliation commissions. It also included the
promotion of transitional justice measures in various
forms in the mandates of several peace operations,
in support of national capacities. In that context, it
is a positive that the new integrated standards for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are now
also just as focused on transitional justice. The same
should apply to exit strategies for peace operations.
On the basis of those various experiences, we could
conduct a broader review in order to identify some key
principles for guiding the Security Council in its future
decisions in this area. Belgium believes that when
circumstances permit, transitional justice is a tool that
the Council should continue to consider as part of its
mandate to maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General and the other
briefers for their assessments of the role of reconciliation
in maintaining international peace and security.
Lasting national reconciliation is indeed a
determining factor in the successful resolution of
conflicts and the prevention of relapses into conflict.
The achievement of peace agreements and lasting postconflict reconstruction and development are possible
only when long-term, mutually acceptable solutions
are reached among the parties to a conflict. And the

S/PV. 8668

universal key to resolving domestic conflict is always,
and only, comprehensive nationwide dialogue. As
practice has shown, that is the only way to ensure a
robust, lasting and viable solution, regardless of the
State concerned. As the concept note (S/2019/871,
annex) submitted for our consideration rightly points
out, during post-conflict peacebuilding, including
with regard to national reconciliation, it is important
that both Government and society recognize their
national ownership of lasting peace. That approach is
enshrined in the 2016 twin resolutions on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture (resolution 2282 (2016)
and General Assembly resolution 70/262). And in
particular, that means that the State bears the primary
responsibility for maintaining the security of its people,
while all sectors of society have to acknowledge their
responsibility for supporting peace processes.
The actions of the international community,
including individual States, their alliances and the
United Nations itself, should be aimed at assisting the
peace efforts of actors within the States concerned. The
United Nations in particular has all the necessary tools
to help States achieve national reconciliation, through
the good offices of the Secretary-General and his special
envoys and special representatives, and the work of
peacekeeping and special political missions and country
teams. However, in our view, United Nations efforts
should focus on cooperation with official Governments.
Interaction with the various actors on the ground
should take place only with the national authorities
playing a coordinating role. Furthermore, assistance
from the international community in ensuring national
reconciliation should be depoliticized and cannot
become a way to impose ready-made solutions from
outside. Attempts to support a given party to a conflict
based on one’s own interests only deepens divides and
prevents healing and genuine reconciliation.
With regard to this topic, we would like to go
into more detail on the role of international justice
and holding perpetrators to account in the context of
reconciliation. Justice and reconciliation certainly
do not always go hand in hand. Often the operations
of international justice bodies lead to even greater
escalation of differences within societies. That is
currently a pressing issue in a number of States in
various regions around the world. We are witnessing
the settling of political scores with former opponents
with the help of the organs of international justice here
at the United Nations.

19-3730015/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

We firmly believe that in each individual case it
is essential to work to find the right balance between
the interests of restoring peace and justice, however
difficult that may be. In every case efforts should
be made to strengthen national justice institutions.
However, we believe that establishing the facts during
trials and prosecuting those responsible, as well as
acquitting the innocent, can make a real contribution
to normalizing the situation and appeasing feelings of
enmity and hostility among the parties to a conflict. But
that is possible only when those processes are impartial
and unpoliticized.
Regrettably, international judicial mechanisms
often manifest patent double standards. For example,
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals can hardly be called a success
story from the point of view of their contribution to the
reconciliation process in the Balkans. The unjustified
prevailing prosecutorial bias in the consideration of
cases involving accused persons of Serbian origin
was compounded by the lack of a real commitment to
uncovering the myriad evils perpetrated by KosovoAlbanian field commanders. It is clear that attempts to
blame one crime or another on peoples, Governments
and States generally are fomenting tension and mutual
mistrust in the lands of the former Yugoslavia, reviving
long-standing problems and inter-ethnic strife in the
region. Promoting reconciliation is therefore out of
the question.
We feel compelled to point out that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has followed a similar path. The
cases referred to it by the Security Council are being
considered in a way that is at variance with the goal of
reconciliation, which worsens disagreements between
the warring parties, something that is particularly
evident in the ICC’s Libyan dossier.
If we look at the activities of the international
tribunals generally, we can see that their relation to
reconciliation processes in post-conflict societies is
an exceedingly indirect one. Rwanda’s experience is
salutary in that regard. The establishment there at the
national level of a system of local justice, in the form
of semi-traditional Gacaca courts, played a significant
role in post-conflict reconciliation efforts that
emerged owing to the low level of effectiveness of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
which considered only the cases of the main organizers
of the 1994 genocide. In practice, the job of the Gacaca
16/33

19/11/2019

courts was not just to see justice done but also to
promote reconciliation within society by ensuring the
widest possible participation of the population in the
courts’ activities, enabling ordinary people to publicly
consider cases and hand down fair decisions. The
concept of cooperation and active participation in court
hearings has become part of the public consciousness.
Proof of the Gacaca courts’ effectiveness is the fact
that in 10 years they considered some 2 million cases,
at a cost 45 times less than what the ICTR spent in
handling fewer than 100 cases during the 20 years of its
existence. The results of the work of the Gacaca courts
are a testament to the effectiveness of seeking African
solutions to African problems.
In conclusion, in connection with what I have
said, I want to note that we believe that the work of
international criminal justice institutions in the context
of post-conflict reconciliation should not be considered
the last word. The harm that might be done could be far
more significant than the value it might add.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of this open debate on
the role of reconciliation in maintaining international
peace and security, as well as your presence here today,
Mr. President, which reflects the importance that
your country attaches to the issue. Côte d’Ivoire also
thanks the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
informative briefings and relevant recommendations.
According to the Constitution of UNESCO, since
wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of
men that the defences of peace must be constructed.
While that quotation, so dear to UNESCO, urges us to
mobilize our collective consciousness in order to prevent
conflicts, it also implicitly underlines the essential role
of reconciliation in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Reconciliation should therefore play a role throughout
the entire peace continuum and be a part of each of its
distinct phases, from prevention, through management,
to the consolidation of post-crisis stability. Above
all, it must involve the parties to conflicts and ensure
that they can overcome and forgive, reflecting values
without which no lasting peace is possible.
Côte d’Ivoire’s recent history has been marked by
events that while undoubtedly painful taught us many
lessons. We learned, in particular, that reconciliation
is a difficult, lengthy process that requires both
the willingness of the parties to conflicts to pursue
peace and the continued support of the international
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

community, including regional organizations. In that
regard, at the national level, reconciliation must be
the backbone of all post-crisis and peacebuilding
strategies. It must be part of a holistic approach that
takes into account the root causes of the conflict and
involves all national political and social actors, without
exception. In order to be a genuine nationwide cathartic
process, reconciliation must enable the perpetrators of
crimes, as well as their victims, to be heard, because
they must be encouraged to forgive one another and
agree to transform their differences and their traumas
into a new social contract.
In the light of those requirements, as soon as
Côte d’Ivoire’s post-electoral crisis ended in 2011,
our Government established a dialogue, truth and
reconciliation commission whose task was to restore
dialogue between all of the country’s sociopolitical and
ethnic elements and promote their peaceful coexistence.
During its two-year mandate from 2011 to 2013, the
commission held nearly 70,000 victim hearings and 80
public hearings. In its subsequent recommendations
the commission considered the effective application
of the law on rural land, improved consideration of
issues related to the status of women, the reduction of
regional disparities, the establishment of a republican
army and the holding of national days of remembrance
and forgiveness and days dedicated to dialogue. In
May 2015 a national commission for reconciliation and
victim compensation took over and was entrusted with
the responsibility of identifying and compensating the
victims of the post-electoral crisis.
While we recognize that reconciliation should be
central to post-crisis and peacebuilding strategies,
it must also be inclusive and ensure that there is a
significant arena for the voices of women and young
people, who are the primary victims of violence in
conflict situations but who can also be the architects
of peace and stability, as Ms. Elman just reminded us.
Also crucial to reconciliation are transitional justice and
the implementation of the principle of accountability,
particularly in cases of serious human rights violations,
including mass killings and sexual violence against
women and children. In that context, the support of
the international community and development partners
is essential to strengthening transitional justice
institutions as well as ensuring the compensation,
psychological care and social reintegration of war
victims. I want to underline the important role in that
regard of the Peacebuilding Fund, which is another tool

S/PV. 8668

for us in our efforts to consolidate peace when it has
been restored.
If reconciliation is to live up to the outcomes
expected of it, it must take into account social and
cultural regulatory mechanisms such as inter-ethnic
alliances and peace pacts and the work of religious
associations, and the leading roles, especially in the
context of Côte d’Ivoire, that schools and national
radio play through their ability to preserve social
equilibrium and coexistence among all sectors of
society. The creation of Côte d’Ivoire’s National
Chamber of Traditional Kings and Chiefs, with a view
to further strengthening the achievements of the two
post-conflict reconciliation commissions, has been an
effective response to the requirements of reconciliation,
working to establish harmonious relations between the
Government and the people and to strengthen national
unity and social cohesion.
Beyond the national arena, reconciliation is
also needed in cases of conflicts between States. In
that regard, the willingness of the warring parties
to reconcile and work for peace can benefit from the
support of regional organizations, which among other
things are responsible for promoting dialogue and
cooperation among State actors.
In conclusion, my delegation urges the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council, to continue
its multifaceted support for ongoing national and
inter-State reconciliation processes with a view to
strengthening international peace and security.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome your presence at today’s meeting,
Mr. President. We also commend the Secretary-General
and our briefers for their discussion of the best ways
to consolidate reconciliation efforts in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
Reconciliation
is
a
very
complex
and
multidimensional concept whose implementation in
response to the specifics of individual conflict situations
has the potential to contribute to re-establishing the
possibility of peaceful coexistence and cooperation
and transcends the concept of a mere ceasefire.
Reconciliation must be understood as a process and
a part of a much more ambitious and comprehensive
strategy, aimed at identifying and tackling the political,
social, legal and economic root causes of conflicts in
order to prevent them from recurring. We therefore
share the view that there is no single, invariable model

19-3730017/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

19/11/2019

that is applicable to all cases of conflict. However, we
believe that they always share certain characteristics.
They are voluntary. They recognize that the process
must be gradual and multifaceted, and that the
restoration of trust and the inclusion of every level of
society are crucial to the transformation of political,
social and historical relations that must be achieved.
In our view, religious, political, social, cultural and
media leaders, among others, now have a central role to
play, both in creating an environment conducive to the
launch of reconciliation politics and in implementing
them, while in particular promoting the participation of
women and young people.

committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, as well as the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Experience has shown us a range of actions that are
useful to those ends. For example, the formation of peace,
truth and reconciliation commissions clearly illustrated
the importance of gaining in-depth understanding
of the facts with self-reflective perspective in order
to interpret what happened and paving the way to
acceptance and forgiveness. Likewise, efforts around
events and symbolic gestures are especially valuable,
at the same time as establishing comprehensive policies
to deal with the memory of what happened, including
actions to locate those who disappeared in the course of
the conflict, in accordance with resolution 2474 (2019).

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General and the two other speakers for
their briefings. I also thank the British presidency for
having convened this debate.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes for former combatants are also an important
element of the reconciliation process, which also
eliminate a potential threat to peace.
In cases linked to atrocity crimes, such as genocide
and crimes against humanity, the need for justice and
the fight against impunity as well as various forms of
recognition and compensation of victims function as
conditional factors of credibility towards reconciliation.
When this does not occur, the international
community, including the Security Council, must
assume its responsibility, setting up special political
missions, ad-hoc tribunals and referring situations to
the International Criminal Court with a view to ensuring
that the perpetrators of serious human rights violations
and of violations of international humanitarian law
answer for their crimes.
In that context, we would like to echo the
representative of Germany in highlighting the value
of transitional consensus, such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
18/33

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
importance of preventive diplomacy in addressing the
root causes of conflict, especially to prevent human
rights violations. Such activities avoid the need to
establish reconciliation processes in future. To that end,
more active participation by regional and subregional
organizations and neighbouring States is necessary to
bring parties together before violence breaks out.

France supports the momentum the SecretaryGeneral has invested in diplomacy for peace. The
United Nations must invest more upstream of conflict,
in prevention, and downstream, to build lasting peace.
Strengthening United Nations capacities in mediation,
early warning and support for reconciliation, including
through the growing power of the Peacebuilding Fund,
is essential. The 2020 peacebuilding architecture review
should provide an opportunity to go even further.
Justice and the fight against impunity are essential
preconditions for fair and lasting reconciliation. There
can be no peace without justice. It is essential that justice
be done in the aftermath of conflict, particularly in cases
of serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. The aim is to ensure recognition
for victims and break the infernal cycle of vengeance.
That is why France is deeply convinced that the
International Criminal Court plays an essential role in
the fight against impunity, with respect for the principle
of complementarity.
France also welcomes the efforts made in Iraq
by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to collect
evidence of the crimes committed by Da’esh. We
will also continue to provide our full political and
financial support to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

To prevent the recurrence of atrocities,
reconciliation processes must place special emphasis
on memory and on victims. We welcome the activities
of transitional justice mechanisms, such as the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa, and of
international criminal tribunals, which have undeniably
contributed to reconciliation and peace in the regions
concerned. Their legacy and, more broadly, their work
on memory and the historical documentation of the
facts, must now be preserved.
Teaching young people must take over to prevent
any resurgence of divisions that fuel violence. This is
the responsibility not only of Governments and local
actors but also of the Security Council. In this respect,
it is disturbing to note the lingering denial in certain
areas of the genocide of Tutsi in Rwanda and the
glorification of war criminals in the former Yugoslavia.
This is another reason that transitional justice and the
fight against impunity in general must systematically
address the dimension of memory.
Protecting the rights of the survivors, including
through the establishment of compensation mechanisms,
is of crucial importance. France fully supports the
International Criminal Court Trust Fund for Victims.
Where jurisdictional structures are lacking or too weak,
it is essential that medical, psychological and social
support be provided to facilitate the reintegration of
survivors. This is the objective set by the International
Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence,
founded by Nobel Peace laureates Nadia Murad and
Denis Mukwege.
In this context, peacebuilding must integrate the
objective of reconciliation earlier on. We must promote
the most inclusive reconciliation processes possible.
They must involve women, youth, civil society actors
and community and religious leaders. I would like to
focus on the role of women, which is a priority for
France and for the Security Council, with the women
and peace and security agenda. Peace processes that
involve women are more effective and longer lasting.
We welcome the efforts of the Peacebuilding Fund, one
third of whose projects integrate such considerations.
There is also a need to investigate events that
could fuel the cycle of hate as swiftly as possible. In
the Sahel, for example, terrorists are high-jacking
inter-community conflicts. We welcome in that regard
the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to investigate

S/PV. 8668

human rights violations and develop reconciliation
initiatives. The visits to Mali by the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide and by the United Nations
Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in
Mali were also very helpful. While such efforts should
continue, it is also crucial to support national strategies
for conflict prevention and reconciliation, because it
is primarily up to local authorities to, in a neutral and
impartial manner, ensure their communities coexist.
I would like to underscore the outstanding work
carried out in the Central African Republic by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic to promote the
signing of local peace and reconciliation agreements,
which paved the way for the signing, on 6 February,
of a comprehensive peace agreement. Local monitoring
committees under the agreement have since been
playing an essential role in ensure genuine ownership
of the peace process.
Reconciliation is essential for building lasting
peace. It must therefore be systemically included among
the objectives set by the Security Council.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me
to join others in warmly welcoming your presence,
Mr. President, among us today. We thank the
United Kingdom for convening this open debate on
reconciliation. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Alpaslan Özerdem and Ms. Ilwad Elman for their
very insightful briefings.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Philippines later
today on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN).
With the rise in conflicts and their complexities,
solutions are not always easy. Reconciliation rebuilds
trust, confidence and relations in societies afflicted
by conflict. It heals the wounds of conflict and helps
societies move towards a peaceful future. Coupled with
peacebuilding and development, reconciliation prevents
the recurrence of conflict and ensures durable peace.
Indonesia has first-hand experience in promoting
successful reconciliation to resolve communal conflicts
in Ambon, Poso and Aceh in the early 2000s. It is
on the basis of our own experience that we share the
following points.
First, national ownership and inclusiveness are key
to achieving lasting reconciliation. For reconciliation

19-3730019/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to work, it must be nationally driven — it cannot be
imposed from the outside. Lasting reconciliation also
requires all segments of society to be onboard. In that
regard, I would like to echo what was mentioned earlier
by the Secretary-General on the fact that reconciliation
must come from within, with the full participation
of all segments of society. Therefore, it must involve
the parties to the conflict as well as civil society
organizations, community and religious leaders, women
and youth. Women in particular have proven to be
important actors in reconciliation. Our own experience
shows that women have played an extensive role in
advancing reconciliation at the grass-roots level in a
variety of ways. Indonesia strongly supports the greater
participation of women in reconciliation, as well as
throughout the entire continuum of the peace process.
Secondly, for reconciliation to take root, an
enabling environment is required. First of all, the
underlying causes of the conflict must be addressed;
immediate humanitarian needs must be met; the rule of
law and the judicial system must be restored to ensure
justice for all; and democracy needs to be established
to provide a platform for open and genuine dialogue.
At the same time, economic development must be
accelerated so that the peace dividends can be directly
felt by the people. Only through this effort can we
materialize the strong nexus between sustaining peace
and sustainable development.
Thirdly, the international community must provide
the necessary support for reconciliation. While
reconciliation is a nationally driven process, the role of
the international community is indispensable. The United
Nations, through its peacekeeping operations, special
political missions and the Peacebuilding Commission,
must continue working to facilitate dialogue and create
conditions conducive to reconciliation. To assist postconflict countries in rebuilding their economies, the
United Nations and the international community need
to mobilize financial and technical support. In that
regard, continued support for the Peacebuilding Fund
is of crucial importance.
For its part, Indonesia has been active in
supporting peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts,
including through capacity-building programmes
within the framework of South-South and triangular
cooperation. At the regional level, Indonesia initiated
the establishment of the ASEAN Institute for Peace
and Reconciliation, which is based in Jakarta. The
Institute promotes capacity-building and the sharing
20/33

19/11/2019

of experiences and best practices on peace and
reconciliation in the region and beyond.
In conclusion, Indonesia stands ready to further
share its experience in reconciliation. We are also
committed to continue assisting post-conflict countries
in promoting reconciliation, peacebuilding and
sustainable peace.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to welcome the Minister
of State for the Commonwealth, the United Nations
and South Asia, His Excellency Lord Tariq Ahmad of
Wimbledon, and thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for the excellent initiative to convene this
important debate. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral and our other briefers today, Mr. Alpaslan
Özerdem and Ms. Ilwad Elman, for their comprehensive
and enlightening presentations. We would also like to
commend the Peacebuilding Commission for its support
in post-conflict situations, as well as its role assisting
in the prevention of conflicts.
Among the various approaches to conflict
prevention and resolution, our delegation believes
that the promotion of social reconciliation is a
strategic means of preventing and resolving conflicts.
Therefore, we believe that it is necessary to harness
political instruments to promote social reconciliation
initiatives, such as establishing peace commissions,
fostering dialogue, raising awareness through the
media and advancing reconciliation among young
people and women.
It is for that reason that, under the successful
initiative of His Excellency Mr. Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, my Government periodically
holds national dialogues between all established
and recognized political parties in the country. They
serve to provide a broad forum for discussion and
interaction among all political stakeholders on a wide
variety of aspects concerning the political, economic
and sociocultural life of the country. Those dialogues
underpin the sustained climate of reduced tensions
and national harmony that has prevailed in the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea for the past 40 years,
thereby guaranteeing participatory and sustainable
development in infrastructure, education, health,
energy and water supply, to mention but a few. These
matters are addressed at the economic conferences that
are also held periodically in the country.
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The establishment of peace commissions, which
serve as grass-roots organizations to mobilize local
leaders and community members, helps to prevent
outbreaks of violence and foster tolerance. Their work
can involve a series of tasks, such as countering rumours
and exaggeration, advocating non-violent solutions
to conflicts, providing education for peace through
community programmes and acting as mediators for
conflicting groups. In the appropriate conditions and
where requirements are met, peace commissions can
facilitate communication among different groups and
engage with opposition parties to reduce violence
and promote a degree of tolerance. Consequently,
peace commissions have become the focal point of
institutional strengthening efforts aimed at capacitybuilding and ensuring some uniformity in practice
and procedure.
Finally, resolution 2419 (2018), on youth and peace
and security, reminds us that the inclusion of young
people is key to advancing national peacebuilding
processes and objectives, while ensuring that the needs
of all segments of society are taken into account. In
that regard, we believe it is crucial to consider the
active participation and inclusion of young people in all
aspects of peacebuilding.
Promoting reconciliation among young people could
serve as a strategic way of building on peacekeeping.
Young people suffer psychological wounds caused by
the trauma that they or their families have personally
experienced, which breeds bitterness and mistrust
vis-à-vis their communities. Reconciliation with young
people fosters restoration and rebuilds societal relations.
Along the same lines, efforts to ensure public
education for young people, such as media campaigns,
can help to dispel the rumours and propaganda spread
by extremists, which fuel social and political tensions.
It is also important to take heed of the role that
women can play in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
through reconciliation.
Let me conclude by saying that we wish to pay
well-deserved tribute to the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Mr. Abiy Ahmed, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, for
his efforts at reconciliation with Eritrea. They have
established a new dynamic of a calming of tensions in
the Horn of Africa.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
It is great to see you here, Sir, with us today. I thank
the briefers for their very insightful and concrete

S/PV. 8668

recommendations. It was good to have the SecretaryGeneral here, as always.
The birth of the United Nations delivered a powerful
message of peace to a world shattered by war. Since
1945, this institution has been the world’s pre-eminent
multilateral forum for dialogue, debate and, perhaps
most importantly, reconciliation. These are initiatives
that the United States fully supports. We seek justice
for victims and accountability for those responsible for
atrocities. We create programming, provide technical
support and elevate the voices of those who are most
vulnerable, and we furnish significant funding for these
efforts. We also recognize the vital work of the United
Nations Special Representatives and Special Envoys,
as well as the United Nations fact-finding missions, to
bring greater reconciliation to communities battered by
conflict. We also recognize the role of women, as others
have this morning, in advancing lasting and sustained
reconciliation in peace agreements.
There are many specific opportunities for this body
to build towards reconciliation in our time, and I should
like to address just a few of them this morning.
In Syria, the United States firmly believes that the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria has a vital role to play in gathering information
on serious crimes committed in the country. We applaud
the progress that the Mechanism has achieved in the
last year, and we are proud to both provide an additional
$2 million this year and support efforts to fund the
Mechanism from the United Nations regular budget.
We honour the resiliency of Syrian civil-society
leaders who have risked their lives to document human
rights abuses and protect the victims of atrocities.
Their work is instrumental in promoting justice and
accountability in Syria, both of which will be critical to
any real solution to the conflict.
In Burma, addressing security-force abuses of
ethnic minority groups will be essential to meaningful
reconciliation. To that end, we welcome the United
Nations independent international fact-finding mission
on Myanmar’s documentation of human rights abuses
committed in Myanmar since 2011, including against
the Rohingya in Rakhine state and against other
vulnerable communities in Kachin, Shan and elsewhere
across the country. I would also like to reiterate our
strong support for the Independent Investigative
Mechanism for Myanmar. As in Syria, the United States
is deeply appreciative of the Burmese civil-society

19-3730021/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

organizations that, under conditions of great danger,
continue to document human rights abuses and pursue
accountability for those responsible for atrocities.
In Iraq, we must not waver from holding the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) accountable
for the atrocities it has committed against all Iraqis. No
segment of Iraqi society, including those from diverse
faiths and communities, has escaped ISIS’s terror. To
begin a process of healing and reconciliation, we must
develop a balanced and truthful account of events.
Supported by the Government of Iraq and unanimously
endorsed by the Security Council again this September,
the United States continues to be a strong supporter of
the mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to collect,
store and preserve evidence of ISIS’s atrocities, which
may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide. Also in Iraq, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq is playing a pivotal role in partnering
with the Government and the people of Iraq to advance
inclusive political dialogue towards the aim of national
and community-level reconciliation.
In South Sudan, the United Nations Mission
there has engaged in peace talks and is empowering
communities to undertake similar dialogues, some of
which result in conflict resolution at the local level. But
while these efforts can help achieve some reconciliation,
they are insufficient without a larger, Government-led
effort to heal the wounds caused by the five-year war.
The United Nations has a unique ability to foster
peace and reconciliation around the world, and the United
States believes that through mediation, accountability
and justice for victims, the United Nations can make
proper use of this ability. The Council and the United
Nations can count on the United States to continue
supporting these efforts, for the work of reconciliation
in the name of human flourishing is nothing less than
our highest calling.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General as well as today’s
briefers, Mr. Özerdem and Ms. Elman, for their very
informative interventions. I would also like to thank
the British presidency and you personally, Sir, for
having organized this open debate, which addresses
one of the most crucial elements of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
22/33

19/11/2019

While there is neither a common definition of
reconciliation nor one universal model that countries
can simply implement, it is essential for us to exchange
views on every aspect of this complex process. The
common denominator of all of the different models
and perceptions of the reconciliation process should
be a survivor-centred approach. It is essential that
the process itself and the priorities be set by the
communities affected.
National reconciliation and peacebuilding cannot
work if certain vulnerable groups or minorities including displaced persons, persons belonging
to religious minorities, women, young people and
people with disabilities - are discriminated against
or marginalized. Here, working hand in hand with
communities, religious leaders have to play their part.
Often religions and beliefs are perceived as a
factor of conflict, but we should not forget that it may
also be a part of the solution. The recent history of
my own country illustrates clearly the positive role of
the Church in creating conditions for social dialogue,
which 30 years ago resulted in peaceful, democratic
changes in Poland.
As pointed out in the excellent concept note
prepared by the United Kingdom presidency
(S/2019/871, annex), community and faith leaders can
play a critical role in reconciliation efforts at all levels,
especially in struggling with issues around freedom of
religion and belief.
In this context, interreligious and intercultural
dialogue is vital to building a lasting peace. For this
dialogue to be effective, it must be carried out in good
faith and based on knowledge, mutual understanding
and tolerance.
On 22 August, we observed for the first time the
International Day Commemorating the Victims of Acts
of Violence Based on Religion or Belief, established by
the General Assembly on the initiative of Poland with
the support of a cross-regional group of countries. We
believe that this initiative will positively contribute to
combating hate crimes and acts of violence based on
religion or belief and further strengthen interreligious
dialogue and respect for religious diversity. It creates
a platform for discussions and allows victims and
survivors to have their voices heard.
The first-ever Arria Formula meeting devoted to
this topic, held during the Polish presidency of the
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Council last August, proved that the voices of victims,
while heartbreaking, give us hope and direction for the
way ahead.
The President: The representative of Germany has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The statement by the
representative of Russia was a frontal attack on the
international justice system, which Germany believes
is key to reconciliation. In that context, I would like to
ask the representative of Russia three questions.
First, with regard to the Nuremberg trials, which
serve today as a point of reference for international
courts, does he consider that those trials were wrong
and should not have happened? Secondly, with regard
to the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
which he criticized, does he believe that it was wrong
that Mr. Mladić and Mr. Karadžić were tried by that
court? Thirdly, with regard to his reproach of double
standards, does he acknowledge that a special court has
been established in The Hague to try Kosovo Liberation
Army fighters for possible crimes against humanity?
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to respond.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As I understand it, these questions are
addressed personally to Mr. Dmitry Polyanskiy, who is
at an event with the Secretary-General at the moment.
He will undoubtedly respond to them. I do not want
to turn the important subject of national reconciliation
into what is frankly an effort to dig up the past. In any
event, we will respond to him bilaterally.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. As a reminder, the red light on the collar of
the microphone will begin to flash after four minutes
have elapsed.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): I genuinely appreciate
your personal endeavours in this area, Mr. President. It
is great to see you and your wonderful country presiding
over the Security Council. We also appreciate the fact

S/PV. 8668

that you are personally emphasizing a topic that you
have put on the Council’s agenda. The world is changing
very rapidly, not just because of the new industrial
revolution we are witnessing but thanks to the many
political changes that are creating a completely new
world order and are definitely increasing the number of
conflicts around the world. Regrettably, when it comes
to the reasons for those conflicts and, more importantly,
to their resolution, we have to admit that there is too
much hypocrisy and political correctness in the air. If
we are to overcome the serious conflicts all over the
world, we will have to restore honesty and mutual
respect to our international discourse. We must address
our major global political dilemma. Honestly, we must
stop bashing, cornering and judging one another.
We should end stigmatization and the spread of fake
news, which can very easily lead to conflicts without
reason and create tensions that result in harmful and
dangerous situations.
I believe that an important precondition for
reconciliation is the recognition of the universal
right of nations and countries to maintain their
national identity and cultural, historic and religious
traditions. Questioning or challenging them can make
reconciliation impossible. Similarly, the idea that the
pursuit of national interests represents an extremist
ideology is also likely to make reconciliation impossible.
The idea that respect for one’s religious heritage is
retrograde or that it is acceptable to permit loud and
violent minorities to put pressure on silent, peaceful
majorities also makes reconciliation impossible. We
can help reconciliation happen if we universally and
globally recognize that we all have a fundamental
human right to lead safe and secure lives in our own
homes. We should switch the focus of international
efforts to helping people return home. We should all
focus on creating the necessary conditions to realize
that. We consider the role of moderate and peaceful
religious leaders, and of intercultural dialogue among
young people, to be extremely important in that regard.
In the case of Hungary, we put special emphasis
on support to persecuted Christian communities around
the world so that they are not forced to leave their homes
and can live in peaceful conditions there. We also invite
students from all over the world to study in Hungary,
fully funded by the Hungarian State, to meet other
young people from other parts of the world, encounter
different cultural and religious backgrounds and learn
how to respect one another and live together. This

19-3730023/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

semester we are hosting 7,440 students from various
countries and cultures studying in Hungary. Next
semester that number will grow to 9,500. We genuinely
believe that if we can provide young people from
different historic, cultural and religious backgrounds
with these kinds of opportunities to meet one another,
that is the best way we can help reconciliation happen.
In conclusion, we are once again grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the United Kingdom for putting
so much effort into promoting reconciliation. Although
we are a small country with very limited resources, I
promise that we will make our contribution so that this
very important goal is met.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway. We
thank the United Kingdom for convening this important
open debate.
In the transition to lasting peace, relationships
must be rebuilt and victims’ rights must be at the
centre of any peace process. The Final Agreement for
the Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a
Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia has established
a new standard for dealing with victims’ rights,
transitional justice and truth. The broad participation
at the negotiation table, which included victims and
women, was essential. It led to the establishment of the
Truth Commission, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
and the International Commission on Missing Persons,
which are now fully operational.
In war-torn and polarized societies in particular,
the voices and leadership of civic, social and religious
leaders are critical to ensuring the creation of a dynamic
of reconciliation and dialogue. A clear example of that
was South Africa, whose reconciliation process has
been an inspiration to many peacebuilding efforts since.
Inter- and intrareligious dialogues may prove vital and
useful policy tools that help foster social cohesion
and sustainable peace. Religious actors can provide a
gateway to understanding and working with different
local communities.
In any conflict, reconciliation efforts must include
the affected communities and their people and be owned
by them, but the United Nations has powerful tools at
its disposal to help parties bring about reconciliation.
24/33

19/11/2019

I would like to highlight five ways we can maximize
that role.
First, the Security Council must remain engaged
long enough not only to foster but to sustain peace. It
must make full use of the tools at its disposal to promote
reconciliation, including at stages where outbreaks of
hostilities may be imminent.
Secondly, the Council must continue to develop its
partnerships with regional organizations, including the
African Union. Regional actors are often best placed to
support lasting reconciliation.
Thirdly, the Peacebuilding Commission has an
important role to play in sustaining peace, and its role
and resources should be better utilized.
Fourthly, the United Nations must assist in
addressing the root causes of conflict. The promotion
of economic and social development should, wherever
possible, be connected to efforts to sustain peace.
Fifthly, we support the Secretary-General’s call
for a surge in peace diplomacy, and we welcome the
recently enacted United Nations reforms to this end.
We must draw on the strengths of United Nations
country teams, the Mediation Support Unit, United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. The United Nations system should now be
better positioned to take a holistic approach, linking the
promotion of security, development and human rights.
In all those efforts, women’s empowerment is key.
Excluding half the population from peacemaking simply
does not work. Engaging with young people is also
crucial if we are to build strong and resilient societies.
Finally, the Nordic countries would like to
stress that all of the foregoing is possible only if the
States Members of the United Nations ensure that
the Organization is given adequate resources and the
support it needs to play an effective role in peace efforts.
The President: May I add my own voice to
that of my Minister in asking speakers to limit their
statements to four minutes. If we do not adhere to the
time limits, some colleagues will not be able to speak
in today’s debate. It is to help and guide the discussion
that I say that the presidency sees no need to thank us
for organizing the debate, or for any remarks on our
wisdom and sagacity in choosing the theme. When the
time has reached four minutes, a light will begin to
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8668

flash, following which my very friendly colleague will
come with a note asking the speaker to wind up.

influence the values and narratives shaping a country’s
political culture.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Switzerland.

The United Nations can do better in engaging
with more diverse interlocutors. For its part, the
Council must recognize civil society’s essential role
in reconciliation and peacebuilding, as proven by the
many civil society briefers who have come before the
Council. The Council must also take a clear stance in
the relevant items on its agenda on the need to protect
human right defenders.

Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): For
more than 15 years and in many partner countries,
Switzerland has supported and assisted transitional
justice and other efforts to deal with the past, by which
societies are trying to cope with atrocities they have
experienced. Switzerland is convinced that dealing
with the past can, in the right circumstances, contribute
to reconciliation. Echoing several delegations in their
statements from this morning, we remain convinced
of the critical importance of national and international
criminal justice in reconciliation and lasting peace. I
would like to highlight three issues in that regard.
First, a process-based approach is crucial if we are to
help transform relationships, which is a central element
of reconciliation. Efforts to deal with the past must be
holistic and properly sequenced. Too often, scattered
initiatives, sometimes imposed from the outside, have
deepened the rifts in societies rather than repaired
them. Ongoing coordination and concerted action
within the United Nations, including in the Security
Council, with national authorities and other relevant
stakeholders is needed. We also join those members of
the Council members who highlighted the key role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in this regard.
Secondly, experience shows that efforts undertaken
at the local level stand a good chance of succeeding.
Local approaches result in concrete initiatives and
skills that can be of great use at other levels of the State
structure. The United Nations, including the Security
Council, should serve as a catalyst for these positive
dynamics and help to enhance them. The United Nations
has the important responsibility of raising stakeholder
awareness when such initiatives may violate human
rights or other peremptory norms of international law.
Thirdly, inclusion is key. While national authorities
and, where appropriate, the international community,
must assume the primary responsibility for working
towards reconciliation, dialogue among political elites
alone cannot ensure lasting peace. Other leaders and
representatives of political and social groups, including
women, young people and minority representatives,
need to be part of the process. Religious leaders, for
example, play a crucial role as providers of social
services and spiritual and moral guidance. They often

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important debate
and express our appreciation for the United Kingdom’s
efforts aimed at supporting peace and reconciliation
processes all over the world. We also welcome the
focus in Lord Tariq Ahmad’s statement on the issue of
peaceful coexistence among religious groups, which is
an important issue for my country.
The Middle East is going through a critical period
and complex challenges, but the current conditions
may be giving rise to an opportunity to build a new
regional order based on respect for sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States if these
conditions are addressed with wisdom and patience
and if political processes that lead to firm positions
against extremism and terrorism are established. In
this vein, mediation and other reconciliation processes
can narrow differences and support reaching political
settlements consistent with international law and the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples, especially those
that reject sectarianism and subordination and that seek
strong and able national States.
The United Arab Emirates has always and
enthusiastically promoted the principles of tolerance
and dialogue so as to spare our region further conflicts
and wars. Tolerance is crucial for reconciliation. My
country does not promote tolerance as a mere slogan;
rather, it has made it a cornerstone for its domestic and
foreign policy, having undertaken numerous initiatives
and practical steps to that end. For example, since
declaring 2019 the Year of Tolerance, the United Arab
Emirates has launched more than 1,500 initiatives
to promote the values of peaceful coexistence and
religious and cultural exchange in the country and
abroad. Furthermore, as part of our efforts to spread

19-3730025/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

a message of openness and moderation, the United
Arab Emirates, in cooperation with UNESCO, has
supported the reconstruction of several archaeological
and cultural sites in Mosul that were destroyed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
Accordingly, we urge the United Nations to continue
working to create an atmosphere of reconciliation among
local communities, especially those torn by conflict.
The Organization’s rich experience in reconciliation,
stretching over seven decades, can be a useful source of
lessons learned and best practices shared on the role of
reconciliation, while taking into account regional and
local contexts.
Reconciliation can only be achieved if it is
accompanied by a comprehensive peacebuilding
process that includes the strengthening of the rule
of law, the preservation of national institutions and
reconstruction, and support for those affected by
conflict. In this regard, we urge the international
community to ensure the broad participation of all
members of society, especially women and young
people, due to their important role in advancing peace
processes and making them succeed.
We cannot ignore the active role that regional
organizations and neighbouring States can play in
mediation and reconciliation, as they have extensive
knowledge and expertise and share a direct interest
in ensuring regional stability. In this regard, we
appreciate the sincere efforts of the brotherly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia aimed at unifying the Yemeni ranks,
as well as the pivotal role it played in the adoption of
the Riyadh Agreement, which has served to enhance
efforts to address the risks and threats Yemen is facing.
Similarly, the success of the mediation efforts in the
Sudan underscores the important role that regional
organizations and neighbouring States can play in
the peaceful settlement of conflicts. We therefore
urge the Security Council to step up its consultations
with regional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we would like to note that
reconciliation processes do not succeed overnight
or through the mere signing of an agreement.
Reconciliation requires continuous and gradual efforts
aimed at healing the wounds of conflict and the laying of
a solid foundation for peaceful coexistence. As we have
stressed elsewhere, parties to conflicts should engage
in mediation and reconciliation processes in good faith.
26/33

19/11/2019

They must refrain from exploiting such processes for
political ends and stop misusing mass media to fuel
tensions. We reaffirm that the United Arab Emirates
is committed to spreading the principles of tolerance
and coexistence and to pursuing political solutions as
the best way to address the many challenges we all
face together.
The President: It gives me great pleasure
to welcome to the Chamber for the first time the
Ambassador of Japan, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I just arrived in New York
last night, and this is the very first meeting in which I
am participating as the new Permanent Representative
of Japan. I am truly grateful to be in the Chamber.
In the year 2000, the Council heard a briefing on
peacebuilding by Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, with an emphasis
on reconciliation (see S/PV.4219). In her briefing,
Mrs. Ogata said that, for her agency, peacebuilding
was not an abstract concept. She saw the concrete,
sometimes desperate, needs of returnees in places
where communities remained deeply divided. She said
that she was exploring new avenues, in particular in
the promotion of community coexistence, as the first
step towards reconciliation. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees launched
a project in the returnee areas of Rwanda and Bosnia
called Imagine Coexistence, which consisted essentially
of support to small community-based, inter-ethic and
income-generating activities around which they built
clusters of such other activities as sports.
It has been nearly 20 years since Mrs. Ogata,
who passed away last month, made her statement in
the Security Council Chamber. Nonetheless, I believe
her thoughts and actions on how to achieve tangible
reconciliation are not obsolete. She was a true trailblazer
in the field of peacebuilding and will be remembered
for her quest for human security.
Over the ensuing two decades, Japan has sought to
build on Mrs. Ogata’s work and address the question
of reconciliation in devastated areas of the world. We
have supported national reconciliation processes in
several countries and will continue to do so. Based on
this experience, I would today like to highlight three
key qualities that Japan believes are necessary for
supporting lasting reconciliation processes.
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

First, they must be inclusive, welcoming the
voices of women, youth, community leaders and faith
leaders, and the private sector. Secondly, they must
offer socioeconomic development, ensuring that those
who have been affected by inequality, in particular
young people, are given employment opportunities.
Thirdly, they must have sustainable frameworks that
allow for the building of strong institutions with broad
national ownership.
The foregoing three elements — inclusiveness,
socioeconomic development and strong institutions — are
not independent, but rather parts of a whole. How, then,
can we, as the international community, accelerate all
three to promote reconciliation? In our view, one of the
most effective ways is to ensure that the voices of the
people on the ground are reflected in our efforts. Each
reconciliation process is unique and must include the
personal perspectives of those who live it. We therefore
need to ensure a people-centred approach, emphasizing
the value of human security.
I would also like to point out that the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) is a useful platform where we can
share good practices and learn lessons. Through its
convening power and its advisory role to the Council,
the PBC, together with the Peacebuilding Fund, can
help connect New York and the field more closely.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan’s
belief in the importance of reconciliation in addressing
the root causes of conflict and contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): As the cornerstone of reconciliation,
Guatemala recognizes the crucial importance of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, which
refers to the peaceful settlement of disputes, along with
the provisions of Chapter VII to maintain or restore
international peace and security.
As a country that promotes peace, Guatemala
believes that reconciliation complements good offices
and mediation, which are acknowledged as important
measures for preventing or resolving disputes and
conflicts, in accordance with international law. If
reconciliation processes were launched sufficiently in
advance to address the root causes and dynamics of
conflicts, while taking into consideration the traditions

S/PV. 8668

and sociopolitical idiosyncrasies of the affected
population, conflicts could be prevented in time.
As the Council knows, my country was affected
by a domestic armed conflict that ended with the
signature of firm and lasting peace agreements in
1996. We welcome the efforts made at the time by the
international community and the United Nations to
implement those agreements. Based on our experience,
Guatemala firmly believes that the efforts of the
international community must be guided by national
sociopolitical and historical contexts, so as to ensure
significant ownership. In other words, the parties to
a reconciliation process in a post-conflict society can
address the root causes of their differences to ensure
that reconciliation efforts are not in vain.
Local leadership is an important element in all
national reconciliation processes. It is our view that, to
a large extent, local and community leaders help ensure
that reconciliation processes are effective, with longterm results. In many cases, the leaders of such elected
authorities as mayors, governors, community leaders,
as well as faith leaders and religious leaders, set the
tone to ensure that existing differences in a specific
reconciliation process can be overcome. Such efforts
can notably contribute to initiatives of the United
Nations and to the work conducted by the special envoys
or special representatives of the Secretary-General and
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
The Council has at its disposal various tools to
strengthen national reconciliation processes. The
concept of sustaining peace was reaffirmed through
identical resolutions adopted in 2016: Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262. With this concept, the international
community decided to address in any conflict situation
the observance of and respect for human rights, the
furthering of sustainable development, all under a
comprehensive peace and security framework. There
is no conventional practice that can be imposed by
one State on another to obtain an immediate positive
impact for social peace. Reconciliation and reparation
processes take time. However, these efforts must be
revitalized, using as a basis caring for the needs of the
population, which, if not met, could lead to conflict,
including human rights violations, the denial of
opportunities and social exclusion.
Last but not least, we should recall the content of
resolution 1325 (2000), which stresses the importance

19-3730027/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

19/11/2019

of women as essential stakeholders in conflict
resolution. Women are agents of positive change,
efficient administrators and experts on the realities
of their immediate environments. Accordingly, their
involvement in peace and reconciliation processes, as
agents of reconciliation, is essential.

sensitivities surrounding national reconciliation, great
attention needs to be paid to the technical aspects
of reconciliation processes, such as the archiving
of data. We welcome the Council’s initiative to have
representatives from civil society and academia as
today’s key briefers.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.

Allow me to share a few practical lessons learned
from Kenya’s experience. Following our 2017 elections,
His Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta and the
leader of the opposition, The Honourable Mr. Raila
Odinga, agreed to form a national reconciliation process
referred to as “the handshake” and the Building Bridges
Initiative. That has significantly transformed Kenya’s
sociopolitical and economic landscape and confirms
that effective leadership is key to exemplifying the path
to peace. The handshake has put the country on the path
to reconciliation, created space for the resumption of
daily socioeconomic activities and set us on the path to
creating a united Kenya for all generations, today and
in the future.

Ms. Mwangi (Kenya): I would like to begin
by commending the United Kingdom for initiating
today’s timely and important discussion in which
we are exploring implementable actions to rally the
multilateral community around nationally-owned and
nationally-led reconciliation processes.
National reconciliation is a transitional-justice
phenomenon and a global endeavour. Countries whose
values support entrenching democracy allow spaces for
national reconciliation forums. It is therefore beneficial
to have discussions and regular exchanges that draw
on best practices and address persistent challenges
that indeed include, but also go beyond, the conflictaffected countries. Effective national reconciliation
processes are important tools that help an entire nation
to collectively and inclusively address important
national issues, including moments of remembrance
and commemoration.
The protection of witnesses, victims and
individuals at risk against reprisal or intimidation is
crucial in order to give credibility to the process and
promote popular participation. Related legal reforms
also allow for efficiency and accountability. National
truth and reconciliation commissions play a critical
role. The diverse character of such commissions, which
involves all ethnicities, regions, religious groups and
political viewpoints, will ensure broad acceptance in
the population.
Drawing on well-established traditional mediation
and reconciliation processes ensures the acceptance
of a reconciliation process among the populace. The
identification and integration of key players, including
trusted faith leaders and community leaders, is
important in ensuring that national, traditional and
local-level reconciliation initiatives work coherently
and inclusively to ensure sustainability. It is also
important to create space and integrate other initiatives
that come from local actors, civil society and academia
in order to support national reconciliation. Schools
and universities are important partners. Given the
28/33

The Building Bridges Initiative is an ongoing
process that focuses on addressing various forms of
antagonism and competition, the challenge of ensuring
inclusivity, the devolution of Government services,
enhancing safety and security, tackling corruption,
fostering shared prosperity and guaranteeing the
protection of rights. We are hopeful that the Initiative
will translate into concrete political outcomes.
Women leaders have been both at the forefront
and working behind the scenes of peacebuilding and
bridge-building activities in Kenya. More than 200
women have also been trained and are actively engaged
in the mediation of community conflicts across various
counties, including the women-led Embrace Women
Building Bridges for Kenya movement, which is one
of the grass-roots implementation strategies of the
handshake initiative.
In conclusion, the role of the international
community should be one of support, at the request of
respective States Members of the United Nations,\ in
order to build the capacities of national and grass-roots
conflict resolution and reconciliation initiatives. We
commend the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund, as highlighted by the
various briefers, for their investments in national
reconciliation processes. Financial and technical
support gain value when approached from a national
ownership perspective. The mandates of truth and
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

reconciliation commissions should remain under
the purview of Member States so as to allow for a
timeline that enables a comprehensive reconciliation
process. The Security Council can systematically and
contextually integrate nationally led reconciliation
processes into its work within the broader framework
of transitional justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank the United Kingdom
for organizing this important debate on the role of
reconciliation in sustaining peace. I also thank the
briefers for their invaluable reflections.
Brazil has a long-standing history of advocacy
for the mainstreaming of peacebuilding in the United
Nations. While reaffirming our support for this agenda,
I would like to further explore two topics.
The importance of reconciliation was underscored
in the 2016 twin General Assembly resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. The twin resolutions were the result of a
collective understanding that sustaining peace requires
more than the containment of hostilities through the
maintenance of fragile ceasefire agreements. Indeed,
the concept of sustaining peace entails a commitment
to broader stabilization and recovery, both of which
require the long-term engagement of the international
community. Lasting peace comes when we address the
root causes of conflicts and strengthen the drivers of
peace, including through prevention, mediation and
reconciliation efforts. By helping to mend the gravest
fractures in the social fabric of conflict-affected
communities, reconciliation plays an important role
in sustaining peace. The core of reconciliation lies
in promoting social unity and inclusion, based on
the common vision of society. Ensuring an equitable
distribution of peace dividends among all segments of
the population is also key for reconciliation.
Brazil has supported post-conflict reconciliation
efforts in countries across many different regions, from
Asia to Latin America. Those experiences have made
it clear that there is no single template for successful
reconciliation. National ownership is essential to
ensuring that reconciliation processes relate to the
unique circumstances of each country. That said, the
Security Council does have a responsibility to support
national-led reconciliation efforts, especially when

S/PV. 8668

they represent a critical priority of transition settings
and a crucial threshold for stabilization and lasting
peace. It is also paramount that the Security Council
guarantee that the support of the United Nations for
reconciliation efforts is fully aligned with nationally
defined peacebuilding and development priorities.
There are inextricable links between reconciliation
and other peacebuilding elements, such as economic
revitalization, the reintegration of demobilized
combatants and vulnerable populations, security sector
reform and promoting and protecting the rights of
women, youth and children.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again the
growing importance of the peacebuilding architecture
to the effectiveness of United Nations efforts in terms
of peace and security. To mention but one concrete
example, last year the Peacebuilding Fund made a
decisive contribution to the achievement of peace in
the Central African Republic by financing the African
Union-led mediation initiative that led to the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic. While advising the Council during
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the Peacebuilding
Commission also provided its own specialized
perspective, emphasizing the role of the political process
and the women and peace and security agenda. The
added value of the Peacebuilding Commission’s advice
comes from its universal composition and capacity
to focus on the foundations of peace. Founded in the
twenty-first century, the Peacebuilding Commission
seems to be more adaptable to discussing peace
efforts from a broader perspective, seeking to achieve
nationally owned solutions to contemporary peace and
security challenges.
With that in mind, Brazil would like to strongly
encourage the Security Council to seek the specialized
advice of the Peacebuilding Commission during
discussions on the mandates of all peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. From our
perspective, greater coordination between these
institutions could bring about positive change in favour
of more inclusive peace and reconciliation processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.

19-3730029/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mrs. Zappia (Italy): We thank the United Kingdom
for organizing this open debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General and today’s briefers.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Experience has shown that recourse to the peaceful
prevention and settlement of disputes is the best and most
cost-effective solution in promoting peace and security.
There is no single recipe for success. Given that every
conflict and ensuing settlement is different, so too the
related reconciliation process may vary. Nevertheless,
we need to take into account a few elements.
First, reconciliation is a long-term process that
takes time and cannot be rushed. It applies not only to
victims and perpetrators but to everyone in society. It
must therefore be nationally owned and not imposed.
It must take place at all levels, from national to grass
roots, and be inclusive. Local communities, faith
leaders and civil society play an essential role. Their
unique position enables them to engage and represent
large segments of society.
Women’s participation in particular is crucial to
guaranteeing such inclusivity. Today, however, too few
women are involved in reconciliation and mediation
efforts. In order to address those limitations, Italy
launched the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network.
We are proud of the results it has achieved so far. New
members have joined; the first two local antennas, in
Cyprus and Turkey, have been established; training,
capacity-building and networking opportunities have
been provided; and fruitful synergies with the United
Nations, the African Union and other regional networks
have developed. The latest achievement is the creation
of the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator
Networks, which successfully launched in New York
in September.
Secondly, in order for peace to be lasting, there must
be a linkage between national and local reconciliation
initiatives. Italy firmly believes in the essential
contributions that local authorities and communities can
make to reconciliation processes, and I would mention
Libya and Mali as examples in that regard. Religious
leaders and civil society have proven to be key partners.
One such example is the support of the Comunità di
Sant’Egidio for the Central African Republic peace
process, aiming to carefully balance its work on the
need to ensure accountability without jeopardizing the
final outcome of the reconciliation process. Another
30/33

19/11/2019

example was the key role of the National Episcopal
Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
during the recent political crisis in that country. As a
national best practice, I would like to recall the activity
of the Italian non-governmental organization Rondine
Cittadella della Pace, an organization committed to
reducing global armed conflicts by educating young
generations in conflict resolution, track-two diplomacy
and the promotion of peace and human rights.
Finally, to make reconciliation an effective tool, we
must continue to look at this process in a systematic
and comprehensive way, both as the Organization
and as Member States. In drafting the mandates of
peace operations, for example, actionable and precise
deliverables should be associated with reconciliation
activities, in particular linking national and local
perspectives. The Peacebuilding Commission could
also serve as an important platform to monitor this
process. The review of the peacebuilding architecture
in 2020 may also serve as an opportunity to reinforce
that role. As a Member State, our contribution is of the
utmost importance. I refer to our action as a troopcontributing country, a function in which our ability to
dialogue and bring together opposing sides could make
a tangible difference in reconciliation processes.
Let me conclude by recalling the fifth edition
of the Mediterranean Dialogue, which we will host
in Rome on 6 and 7 December, as an example of our
tireless efforts to create opportunities and platforms for
dialogue and reconciliation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal): Allow me
to congratulate the United Kingdom on convening
this timely debate. Portugal fully acknowledges the
importance of reconciliation in ensuring that peace
agreements take root, that conflict does not recur and
that the foundations are laid for sustainable peace. Our
contribution more directly to reconciliation processes
in East Timor and Angola provided valuable lessons.
Successful examples of reconciliation are present
on every continent. Some current Security Council
members have remarkable first-hand experience.
Yet, despite such successes, the forces of separation
and conflict continue to destroy families, tear apart
communities, destabilize States and spread insecurity.
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Reconciliation rebuilds, or creates anew, the social,
economic and political projects that bind societies
together. As such, it cannot be an afterthought following
a peace agreement. It must be integrated into the policy
framework from the outset in any peace effort. The
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to
play through the development of integrated strategies
for post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery. Its
capacity to coordinate relevant actors, to ensure
catalytic funding through the Peacebuilding Fund and
to mobilize other appropriate financing must also be
seized and strengthened.
Reconciliation must rely on national appropriation,
with the involvement of the whole of society. Bringing
justice to individuals and communities affected by
conflict can play a central role in overcoming hatred
and in fostering recovery. Transitional justice tools,
such as truth commissions, independent fact-finding
missions and arbitration mechanisms, have proved to be
effective. We should learn from such best practices to
address the singularity of every post-conflict scenario.
The role of women in reconciliation merits
particular attention. Resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, remains a milestone
in that regard. Portugal is now implementing its third
national action plan on implementing resolution 1325
(2000). We call on all Member States to develop their
own action plans, supporting the role of women in
peacebuilding, including reconciliation. To that same
end, we also participate in the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network.
The role of young people, too, cannot be overstated.
Last June, Portugal organized in Lisbon the World
Conference of Ministers Responsible for Youth 2019
and Youth Forum Lisboa+21, which resulted in the
adoption of the Lisbon+21 Declaration on Youth
Policies and Programmes by both Governments and
youth representatives. That document acknowledges
young people’s contribution to peace processes and
conflict prevention and resolution.
Allow me to end on this note of hope regarding
the imperative need to give voice to young people in
peace processes for, as much as reconciliation may be
a post-conflict necessity, through youth participation,
it also becomes a powerful tool for conflict prevention,
embodying our common goal of sustaining a future of
peace and security.

S/PV. 8668

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the assumption by the United
Kingdom of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I thank you for organizing
today’s open debate on this important topic.
If one looks at the never-ending list of unresolved
conflicts and the amount of time that this Council
spends annually on debating and seeking resolution to
conflicts, please forgive me for drawing the conclusion
that peace must be boring. Otherwise, how do we
explain the persistent presence of conflicts. Of course,
we recognize the seriousness of this matter and we
therefore want to begin our intervention by highlighting
that for peace to prevail, conflicts should have been
prevented in the first place.
To that end, early warning and intelligence
gathering are most crucial. For those to be successful,
the need for dialogue between aggrieved parties is of
the utmost importance. We recognize that the success
of dialogue is linked to the parties’ desire to resolve
conflict. Maintaining peace after such negotiations
would require ongoing dialogue to assist with
reconciling the parties.
Reconciliation has long been recognized as an
essential step that countries must take in their path
to achieve full peace and stability after violence and
conflicts. If we want to ensure that conflicts do not
re-emerge or reignite, some form of reconciliation
between parties must take place. Reconciliation is part
and parcel of any peacebuilding process. Reconciliation
requires that structural injustices in the political,
social, judicial and economic spheres be addressed.
Reconciliation can take different forms, most notably
truth and reconciliation commissions and court
systems. The United Nations has long taken a leading
role in promoting and ensuring reconciliation.
At independence, Namibia faced a daunting task
of reconciliation and nation-building, subsequent to
the collapse of the apartheid system. which thrived on
the principle of divide and rule. Namibia was fortunate
to have had United Nations Special Representatives in
the persons of Sean MacBride of Ireland and Martti
Ahtisaari of Finland, among others, who, together
with the United Nations Transition Assistance Group,
worked tirelessly to bring about an internationally
acceptable transition to independence for Namibia.

19-3730031/33

S/PV.8668

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

My country had to go back to the basics to ensure
that Namibia could enjoy freedom, peace and stability,
while holding hands as “one Namibia, one Nation”.
Today we are proud that out of two warring factions
during our liberation struggle, Namibia has succeeded
in integrating those who were fighting on the side of the
apartheid South African Government with the People’s
Liberation Army of Namibia into one unified national
defence force.
With the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2005, the United Nations further
cemented the importance of peacebuilding and
reconciliation. The aim of the Commission is to propose
integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery, to bring together all the relevant actors
and to marshal resources. The Commission notably
advocates for and ensures the inclusion of young people
and women in peacebuilding processes, two essential
actors in peace and reconciliation processes.
However, Namibia wishes to caution that, while the
need to promote dialogue in reconciling parties cannot
be overemphasized, the impact of external parties in
such processes should not be ignored. There are real
dangers that the vested interests of external parties
could jeopardize reconciliation processes in some cases.
As Namibia prepares to mark 30 years of
independence in March next year, we take pride in the
steps we have taken to ensure our smooth transition to
an independent, free State. With the essential help of
the United Nations and the international community at
large, our reconciliation process has by and large been
a successful one. That success is notably demonstrated
by the fact that we will hold our sixth presidential and
general elections next week.
While some countries continue to be plagued by
conflict and violence around the world, notably in the
Middle East and on the African continent, others are
emerging from them. Reconciliation processes should
form an essential element of any peace process and
should include women. Reconciliation in different
forms allows for wounds to be healed and truth to be
spoken. It remains a fundamental step towards ensuring
a country’s peace, security, harmony and prosperity.
The President: I now welcome to the Council the
Ambassador of Pakistan, who will be speaking in the
Council for the first time in his current mandate.
32/33

19/11/2019

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, allow me
to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming
the presidency for this month and on organizing
today’s debate.
Reconciliation is an important thematic area in
post-conflict peacebuilding. I recall participating in
a debate on national reconciliation in this Chamber
in 2004 (S/PV.4903). I welcome the resumption of the
consideration of this important issue.
We would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Mr. Özerdem for their briefings.
As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations next year, we should not forget that
the United Nations itself is a symbol of reconciliation.
It is an Organization that was born from the conviction
that animosity and discord can indeed be put to rest
and that nations can rise above their differences to
build a shared future. The development of peace and
cooperation in Europe following two devastating world
wars is an illustration and example of the benefits of
political reconciliation. I must add that I am sure that
Brexit will not reverse that.
We have made some progress over the years
in reconciling conflicts, such as in Côte d’Ivoire,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. Pakistani peacekeepers have
contributed to bringing protracted wars and conflicts
like those to an end. Such efforts should be maintained,
avoiding, however, a one-size-fits-all approach. Besides
being a leading troop contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping, Pakistan has also been a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission since its inception in
2005. I would like to share some key points based on
our experience.
First, nationally owned reconciliation processes
firmly anchored in the principles of inclusiveness
and victim-centred transitional justice offer the best
hope of rebuilding and sustaining peace. Secondly,
reconciliation is an extended process and should
not replace accountability; both processes should
be mutually reinforcing. Thirdly, inclusivity is key
to advancing national peacebuilding processes. All
communities must be taken on board and their concerns
addressed judiciously. Fourthly, development is an
essential, yet insufficient, part of rebuilding peace in
communities ravaged by conflict. The root causes of
conflict need to be identified and addressed.
19-37300

19/11/2019

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Pakistan has supported an Afghan-led, Afghanowned peace process. With the mutual release of
hostages and prisoners yesterday, we hope that the
peace process will be quickly revived. Furthermore,
we are host to 3 million Afghan refugees. They should
return home and have a voice in the intra-Afghan
reconciliation process that we hope will start soon. The
international community must support the early and
dignified return of Afghan refugees.
As conflicts continue across the globe,
reconciliation will remain a relevant mechanism in
post-conflict peacebuilding. However, the central
purpose of the United Nations is to prevent and resolve
conflict to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has had an uneven record in resolving threats to and
breaches of international peace and security, which
is its primary mandate. Both its endeavours and their
outcomes have been inconsistent. We have witnessed
prolonged inaction and silence in some cases.
In particular, Pakistan is deeply concerned at
the absence of action by the Security Council to halt

S/PV. 8668

India’s violations of human rights and Security Council
resolutions in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir.
In contrast, the Council has been propelled in other
instances to rapidly resort to sanctions and enforcement
action. Resolving that issue will require political
will and commitment on the part of the international
community. Given that less than 0.5 per cent of global
defence expenditures is invested in peace, it is a telling
commentary on the commitment required to build
peace in the world.
The President: In my national capacity, let me
briefly reassure the representative of Pakistan that
the United Kingdom will remain a strong European
economic and security player after Brexit.
Resuming my capacity as President of the
Council, I would like to thank our interpreters for
their forbearance. There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting and I intend,
with the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m. sharp.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

19-3730033/33
