General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

also General Assembly resolution 2446 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968 entitled "Measures to achieve the
rapid and total elimination of all forms of racial discnmination in general and of the policy of apartheid in
particular", in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States,' to
prepare a programme for the observance in 1971 of
the International Year for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination,
1. Designates the year 1971 as International Year
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimina-

tion;
2. Considers that the International Year for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination should

be observed in the name of the ever-growing struggle
against racial discrimination in all its forms and manifestations and in the name of intematiomil solidarity
with those struggling against racism;
·
3. Approves the programme for the observance of
the International Year for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination prepared by tbe SecretaryGeneral8 and calls upon all States to co-operate in
every possible way in its implementation;
4. Urgently appeals to all States to intensify and
expand their efforts at the national and the international
levels towards ensuring the rapid and total eradication
of racial discrimination, including the policy of
apartheid, nazism and all of its contemporary forms,
as well as other manifestations of racism;
S. Invites the organs of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies concerned to co-operate and
participate in the preparatory work and in the observance of the International Year for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session a progress
report on the preparations for the International Year
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination based on any information which he may receive
from States, the organs of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies concerned.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2545 (XXIV). Measures to be taken against
nazism and racial intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2331 (XXII) of 18 December 1967 and 2438 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 on
measures to be taken against totalitarian ideologies
such as nazism and racial intolerance,
Observing that on 1 September 1939 Hitlerite nazism
began the Second World War, and recognizing the
danger that the revival and development of nazism,
which inflicted intolerable suffering on mankind, represent today1
Reaffirming that nazism, including its present-day
manifestations, racism and similar totalitarian ideologies
and practi~es, which are based on terror and racial
intolerance, are incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
constitute a gross violation of human rights and funda•t)/iclal Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Sa.Ioli, Annexes, agenda it.em 55, document A/7649.

mental freedoms which may jeopardize world peace
and the security of peoples,
Expressing its profound concern at the further intensification of activities by groups 8nd organizations
which are carriers of the malignant ideologies and
practices of nazism, including its present-day manifestations, racism and other similar ideologies and practices,
Profoundly disquieted by the foct that not all the
States concerned are responding to its appe:1ls, with due
regard to the principles contained in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, to outlaw and prohibit
nazi and racist organizations and groups and to make
membership in them a criminal offence,
1. Renews its strong condemnation of racism,
nazism, apartheid and all other totalitarian ideologies
and practices;
2. Urgently calls upon those States concerned which
have not yet done so to take immediate and effective
measures, including legislative measures, with due
regard to the principles contained in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, for the complete prohibition of nazi and racist organizations and groups and
for their prosecution in the courts;
3. Calls upon all States to take effective measures
to inculcate the purposes and principles of !he Charter
of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights in young people and in that way
to protect them against any influence of nazism and
similar ideologies and practices;
4. Calls upon all States and national and international organizations to set aside a day, to be observed
each year on an appropriate date to be determined by
each State and organization, in memory of the victims
of the struggle against nazism and similar ideologies
and practices based on terror and racial intolerance;
5. Recommends Governments of all States to promote the publication and dissemination of material
connected with United Nations efforts to combat nazism
in the past and material publicizing the danger of the
present revival of nazism in a number of countries;
6. Requests States Members of the United Nations
or members of specialized agencies to submit to the
Secretary-General, for consideration by the General
Assembly at its twenty-fifth session, information on the
measures they have adopted and are adopting under
the present resolution;
7. Decides to retain on its agenda as a matter of
priority the item concerning measures to be taken
against nazism and racial intolerance.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2546 (XXIV). Respect for and implementation
of human rights in occupied territories

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War of 12 August 19499 and the provisions
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling the humanitarian resolutions regarding the
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
11 United Nations, Treaty

Series, vol. 7S (19S0), No. 973.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

in the territories occupied by Israel, especially Security
Council resolutions 237 (1967) of 14 June 1967 and
259 (1968) of 27 September 1968, Commission on
Human Rights resolutions 6 (XXIV) of 27 February
1968 10 and 6 (XXV) of 4 March 1969, 11 and the
relevant resolutions of the International Conference
on Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968, the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
World Health Organization,
Further recalling its resolutions 2252 (ES-V) of
4 July 1967 and 2443 (XXIII) and 2452 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968,
Concerned that the provisions of these resolutions
have not been implemented by the Israeli authorities,
Gravely alarmed by fresh reports of collective punishments, mass imprisonment, indiscriminate destruction
of homes and other acts of oppression against the
civilian population in the Arab territories occupied by

Israel,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions relating to the violations
of human rights in the territories occupied by Israel;
2. Expresses its grave concern at the continuing
reports of violation of human rights in those territories;
3. Condemns such policies and practices as collective and area punishment, the destruction of homes and
the deportation of the inhabitants of the territories occupied by Israel;
4. Urgently calls upon the Government of Israel to
desist forthwith from its reported repressive practices
and policies towards the civilian population in the occupied territories and to comply with its obligations
under the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
relevant resolutions adopted by the various international organizations;
5. Requests the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of tte
Population of the Occupied Territories, 1 ~ established
under General Assembly resolution 2443 (XXIII), to
take cogniz:mce of the provisions of the present resolution.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.

2547 (XXIV). Measures for effectively combating racial discrimination and the policies
of apartheid and segregation in southern
Africa

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2396 (XXIII) of 2 December 1968 by which it, inter alia, reaffirmed its recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle of the people of
South Africa for all human rights, condemned the
Government of South Africa for its cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment of political prisoners and delOSee Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/4475), chapter
XVIIl.
11 lbid., Forty-sixth Session, document E/4621, chapter
XVIIl.
12 The Committee is composed of the representatives of the
following Member States: Ceylon, Somalia and Yugoslavia
(see A/7495/ Add.3 ).

SS

dared that captured freedom fighters should be treated
as prisoners of war under international law,
Further recalling paragraph 1 of its resolution 2395
(XXIII) of 29 November 1968, by which it reaffirmed
the inalienable right of the peoples of the Territories
under Portuguese domination to self-determination,
freedom and independence. and also paragraph 12 of
the same resolution, by which it called upon the Government of Portugal, in view of the armed conflict and
inhuman treatment of prisoners, to ensure the application to that situation of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 12 August
1949, 13
Taking into account paragraph I of its resolution
2383 (XXIII) of 7 November 1968, by which it reaffirmed the inalienable right of the people of Zimbabwe
to freedom and independence and the legitimacy of
their struggle to attain that right, am! also p:ir:1graph 13
of the same resolution, by wl1ich it called upon the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, in view of the armed conflict
prevailing in the Territory and the inhuman treatment
of prisoners, to ensure the applic:1tiun to th:1t situation
of the Geneva Convention relatiw to the Treatment
of Prisoners of War of 12 August I 949,
Recalling also its resolution 2403 (XXI!l) of 16 December 1968 bv which it, inter aliu, reiterated its condemnation of the Government of South Afric:1 for its
persistent refusal to withdraw from Namibia,
Noting the feeling of grave cnncern, expressed in
its resolution 2465 ( XXIII) of 20 December 1968,
about the dev::l:1pment in southern Afric:1 of the
entente between the Governments of Portugal and
South Africa and the illeg:tl r::eist minority rc'gime in
Southern Rhodesia, which, intC'r alia, c:1n only result in
further suffering being inflicted upon pnlitic;d prisnners
and detainees in prisons ;md in police custody as well
as upon captured freedom fighters,
Further noting its resolution 2440 ( ',' X Tfl) of
19 Dcce!T'her 1968 relating to tl'e first report 11 of the
Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts on the treatment
of political prisoners in South Afrir:a established by
resolution 2 (XXIII) of 6 March 19(,7 of t 1,e Commission on Human Rights, 1 "
Recalling Ec,momic and Social Council resolution
1412 (XLVI) of 6 June 1969 reg:m!ing the infringements of trade-union rights in southern Afric:1,
Determined to promote immediate and urgent action
with a view to restoring the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the oppressed peoples of southern
Africa,
1. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle by the opponents of apartheid, racial discrimination and Portuguese colonialism in southern Africa
to realize their human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Again condemns the Government of Snuth Africa
for the inhuman and degrading treatment and torture
meted out to political prisoners and detainees and to
captured freedom fighters;
3. Further condemns the Government of South
Africa for its refusal to permit an impartial inquiry
into the deaths of political prisoners and detainees,
1s United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 ( 195n, No. 972.

14 E/CN.4/950.

15 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Forty-second Session, Supplement No. fi (F '4'.L'~ and Corr.I)'
para. 268.
··'
