IV. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Polltlcal Committee

Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space and to designate the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space as the Preparatory Committee for the Conference,
Having considered the part of the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space28 concerning
its work in its capacity as Preparatory Committee for
the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
Noting with satisfaction that the Committee, in its
capacity as Preparatory Committee for the Conference,
has submitted detailed recommendations on the preparation and organization of the Conference,
1. Endorses the detailed recommendations submitted in paragraphs 84 to 115 of its report 28 by the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in its
capacity as Preparatory Committee for the Second
United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Adopts the provisional agenda for the Conference as set out in paragraph 99 of the report of the
Committee;
3. Endorses in particular:
(a) The recommendation of the Committee that the
Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space should be held in the
latter half of 1982;
(b) The recommendations ,of the Committee concerning the preparation and organization of the Conference, including the secretariat, bureau and form of the
Conference;
(c) The recommendation of the Committee on the
ceiling for the cost of the Conference;
4. Requests the Committee to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a recommendation on
the venue of the Conference;
5. Requests the Committee to continue with its preparatory work for the Conference;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make, within
the ceiling for expenditure established for the Conference, the necessary organizational and administrative
arrangements, as set out in the relevant paragraphs of
the report of the Committee.
89th plenary meeting
5 December 1979

34/68.

Agreement Governing the Activities of States
on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in the field of the exploration and peaceful
uses of outer space, including the moon and other
celestial bodies, and of promoting the rule of law in this
field of human endeavour,
Recalling its resolution 2779 (XXVI) of 29 November 1971, in which it requested the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Legal SubCommittee to consider the question of the elaboration
of a draft international treaty concerning the moon, as
well as its resolutions 2915 (XXVII) of 9 November
1972, 3182 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3234
(XXIX) of 12 November 1974, 3388 (XXX) of 18 No28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/34/20), sect. 11.C.

77

vember 1975, 31/8 of 8 November 1976, 32/196 A of
20 December 1977 and 33/16 of 10 November 1978,
in which it, inter alia, encouraged the elaboration of the
draft treaty relating to the moon,
Recalling, in particular, that in resolution 33/16 it
endorsed the recommendation of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Legal SubCommittee at its eighteenth session should continue as
a matter of priority its efforts to complete the draft treaty
relating to the moon,
Having considered the relevant part of the report of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 24
in particular paragraphs 62, 63 and 65,
Noting with satisfaction that the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, on the basis of the
deliberations and recommendations of the Legal SubCommittee, has completed the text of the draft Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies,
Having considered the text of the draft Agreement
Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies, 25
1. Commends the Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,
the text of which is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to open the
Agreement for signature and ratification at the earliest
possible date;
3. Expresses its hope for the widest possible adherence to this Agreement.
89th plenary meeting
5 December 1979
ANNEX
Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies

The States Parties to this Agreement,
Noting the achievements of States in the exploration and use
of the moon and other celestial bodies,
Recognizing that the moon, as a natural satellite of the earth,
has an important role to play in the exploration of outer space,
Determined to promote on the basis of equality the further
development of co-operation among States in the exploration
and use of the moon and other celestial bodies,
Desiring to prevent the moon from becoming an area of international conflict,
Bearing in mind the benefits which may be derived from the
exploitation of the natural resources of the moon and other
celestial bodies,
Recalling the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including
the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 26 the Agreement on the
Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return
of Objects Launched into Outer Space, 27 the Convention on
International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects, 28
and the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into
Outer Space, 29
Taking into account the need to define and develop the provisions of these international instruments in relation to the
moon and other celestial bodies, having regard to further progress in the exploration and use of outer space,
Have agreed on the following:
Ibid., sect. 11.A.7.
Ibid., Supplement No. 20 (A/34/20), annex II.
26 Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.
2 1 Resolution 2345 (XXII), annex.
28 Resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex.
29 Resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex.

24

25

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

78

Article I

I. The prov1s1ons of this Agreement relating to the moon
shall also apply to other celestial bodies within the solar system,
other than the earth, except in so far as specific legal norms
enter into force with respect to any of these celestial bodies.
2. For the purposes of this Agreement reference to the moon
shall include orbits around or other trajectories to or around it.
3. This Agreement does not apply to extraterrestrial materials which reach the surface of the earth by natural means.
Article 2
All activities on the moon, including its exploration and use,
shall be carried out in accordance with international law, in
particular the Charter of the United Nations, and taking into
account the Declaration on Principles of International Law con.
ceming Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 30 adopted
by the General Assembly on 24 October 1970, in the interest of
maintaining international peace and security and promoting international co-operation and mutual understanding, and with
due regard to the corresponding interests of all other States
Parties.
Article 3

I. The moon shall be used by all States Parties exclusively
for peaceful purposes.
2. Any threat or use of force or any other hostile act or
threat of hostile act on the moon is prohibited. It is likewise
prohibited to use the moon in order to commit any such act or
to engage in any such threat in relation to the earth, the moon,
spacecraft, the personnel of spacecraft or man-made space
objects.
3. States Parties shall not place in orbit around or other
trajectory to or around the moon objects carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction or place
or use such weapons on or in the moon.
4. The establishment of military bases, installations and fortifications, the testing of any type of weapons and the conduct
of military manoeuvres on the moon shall be forbidden. The use
of military personnel for scientific research or for any other
peaceful purposes shall not be prohibited. The use of any equipment or facility necessary for peaceful exploration and use of
the moon shall also not be prohibited.
Article 4

I. The exploration and use of the moon shall be the province
of all mankind and shall be carried out for the benefit and in
the interests of all countries, irrespective of their degree of
economic or scientific development. Due regard shall be paid
to the interests of present and future generations as well as to
the need to promote higher standards of living and conditions
of economic and social progress and development in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
2. States Parties shall be guided by the principle of cooperation and mutual assistance in all their activities concerning
the exploration and use of the moon. International co-operation
in pursuance of this Agreement should be as wide as possible
and may take place on a multilateral basis, on a bilateral basis
or through international intergovernmental organizations.
Article 5

I. States Parties shall inform the Secretary-General of the
United Nations as well as the public and the international scientific community, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable,
of their activities concerned with the exploration and use of
the moon. Information on the time, purposes, locations, orbital
parameters and duration shall be given in respect of each mission
to the moon as soon as possible after launching, while information on the results of each mission, including scientific results,
shall be furnished upon completion of the mission. In the case
of a mission lasting more than sixty days, information on conduct of the mission, including any scientific results, shall be
given periodically, at thirty-day intervals. For missions lasting
80 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

more than six months, only significant additions to such information need be reported thereafter.
2. If a State Party becomes aware that another State Party
plans to operate simultaneously in the same area of or in the
same orbit around or trajectory to or around the moon, it
shall promptly inform the other State of the timing of and
plans for its own operations.
3. In carrying out activities under this Agreement, States
Parties shall promptly inform the Secretary-General, as well
as the public and the international scientific community, of any
phenomena they discover in outer space, including the moon,
which could endanger human life or health, as well as of any
indication of organic life.
Article 6
There shall be freedom of scientific investigation on the
moon by all States Parties without discrimination of any kind,
on the basis of equality and in accordance with international law.
2. In carrying out scientific investigations and in furtherance
of the provisions of this Agreement, the States Parties shall
have the right to collect on and remove from the moon samples
of its mineral and other substances. Such samples shall remain
at the disposal of those States Parties which caused them to be
collected and may be used by them for scientific purposes. States
Parties shall have regard to the desirability of making a portion
of such samples available to other interested States Parties and
the international scientific community for scientific investigation.
States Parties may in the course of scientific investigations also
use mineral and other substances of the moon in quantities appropriate for the support of their missions.
3. States Parties agree on the desirability of exchanging
scientific and other personnel on expeditions to or installations
on the moon to the greatest extent feasible and practicable.
1.

Article 7
In exploring and using the moon, States Parties shall
take measures to prevent the disruption of the existing balance
of its environment, whether by introducing adverse changes in
that environment, by its harmful contamination through the introduction of extra-environmental matter or otherwise. States
Parties shall also take measures to avoid harmfully affecting the
environment of the earth through the introduction of extraterrestrial matter or otherwise.
2. States Parties shall inform the Secretary-General of the
United Nations of the measures being adopted by them in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article and shall also, to the
maximum extent feasible, notify him in advance of all placements by them of radio-active materials on the moon and of
the purposes of such placements.
3. States Parties shall report to other States Parties and to
the Secretary-General concerning areas of the moon having
special scientific interest in order that, without prejudice to the
rights of other States Parties, consideration may be given to the
designation of such areas as international scientific preserves for
which special protective arrangements are to be agreed upon in
consultation with the competent bodies of the United Nations.
1.

Article 8
States Parties may pursue their activities in the exploration and use of the moon anywhere on or below its surface,
subject to the provisions of this Agreement.
2. For these purposes States Parties may, in particular:
(a) Land their space objects on the moon and launch them
from the moon;
(b) Place their personnel, space vehicles, equipment, facilities, stations and installations anywhere on or below the
surface of the moon.
Personnel, space vehicles, equipment, facilities, stations and installations may move or be moved freely over or below the
surface of the moon.
3. Activities of States Parties in accordance with paragraphs
1 and 2 of this article shall not interfere with the activities of
other States Parties on the moon. Where such interference may
occur, the States Parties concerned shall undertake consultations
in accordance with article 15, paragraphs 2 and 3, of this
Agreement.
1.

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

Article 9

1. States Parties may establish manned and unmanned stations on the moon. A State Party establishing a station shall use
only that area which is required for the needs of the station and
shall immediately inform the Secretary-General of the United
Nations of the location and purposes of that station. Subsequently, at annual intervals that State shall likewise inform the
Secretary-General whether the station continues in use and
whether its purposes have changed.
2. Stations shall be installed in such a manner that they do
not impede the free access to all areas of the moon of personnel, vehicles and equipment of other States Parties conducting
activities on the moon in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement or of article I of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. 2 G
Article JO
1. States Parties shall adopt all practicable measures to safeguard the life and health of persons on the moon. For this purpose they shall regard any person on the moon as an astronaut
within tl,e meaning of article V of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use
of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies 26
and as part of the personnel of a spacecraft within the meaning
of the Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of
Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer
Space. 27
2. States Parties shall offer shelter in their stations, installations, vehicles and other facilities to persons in distress on the
moon.
Article 11
1. The moon and its natural resources are the common
heritage of mankind, which finds its expression in the provisions
of this Agreement, in particular in paragraph 5 of this article.
2. The moon is not subject to national appropriation by any
claim of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation, or by any
other means.
3. Neither the surface nor the subsurface of the moon, nor
any part thereof or natural resources in place, shall become
property of any State, international intergovernmental or nongovernmental organization, national organization or non-governmental entity or of any natural person. The placement of
personnel, space vehicles, equipment, facilities, stations and installations on or below the surface of the moon, including
structures connected with its surface or subsurface, shall not
create a right of ownership over the surface or the subsurface
of the moon or any areas thereof. The foregoing provisions
are without prejudice to the international regime referred to in
paragraph 5 of this article.
4. States Parties have the right to exploration and use of
the moon without discrimination of any kind, on the basis of
equality and in accordance with international law and the
provisions of this Agreement.
5. States Parties to this Agreement hereby undertake to
establish an international regime, including appropriate procedures, to govern the exploitation of the natural resources of
the moon as such exploitation is about to become feasible. This
provision shall be implemented in accordance with article 18 of
this Agreement.
6. In order to facilitate the establishment of the international regime referred to in paragraph 5 of this article, States
Parties shall inform the Secretary-General of the United Nations as well as the public and the international scientific community, to the greatest extent feasible and practicable, of any
natural resources they may discover on the moon.
7. The main purposes of the international regime to be
established shall include:
(a) The orderly and safe development of the natural resources of the moon;
(b) The rational management of those resources;
(c) The expansion of opportunities in the use of those
resources;

79

An equitable sharing by all States Parties in the benefits derived from those resources, whereby the interests
and needs of the developing countries, as well as the
efforts of those countries which have contributed either
directly or indirectly to the exploration of the moon,
shall be given special consideration.
8. All the activities with respect to the natural resources of
the moon shall be carried out in a manner compatible with the
purposes specified in paragraph 7 of this article and the provisions of article 6, paragraph 2, of this Agreement.
(d)

A rticlc 12

1. States Parties shall retain jurisdiction and control over
their personnel, space vehicles, equipment, facilities, stations
and installations on the moon. The ownership of space vehicles.
equipment. facilities, stations and installations shall not be affected by their presence on the moon.
2. Vehicles, installations and equipment or their component
parts found in places other than their intended location shall be
dealt with in accordance with article 5 of the Agreement on the
Rescue of Astronauts. the Return of Astronauts and the Return
of Objects Launched into Outer Space. 27
3. In the event of an emergency involving a threat to human
life, States Parties may use the equipment, vehicles, installations, facilities or supplies of other States Parties on the moon.
Prompt notification of such use shall be made to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations or the State Party concerned.
Article I 3

A State Party which learns of the crash landing, forced landing or other unintended landing on the moon of a space object,
or its component parts, that were not launched by it, shall
promptly inform the launching State Party and the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
Article 14
1. States Parties to this Agreement shall bear international
responsibility for national activities on Ute moon, whether such
activities are carried out by governmental agencies or by nongovernmental entities, and for assuring that national activities
are carried out in conformity with the provisions of this Agreement. States Parties shall ensure that non-governmental entities
under their jurisdiction shall engage in activities on the moon
only under the authority and continuing supervision of the appropriate State Party.
2. States Parties recognize that detailed arrangements concerning liability for damage caused on the moon, in addition to
the provisions of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies 26 and the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space
Objects, 28 may become necessary as a result of more extensive
activities on the moon. Any such arrangements shall be elaborated in accordaoce with the procedure provided for in article
18 of this Agreement.

Article 15

Each State Party may assure itself that the activities of
other States Parties in the exploration and use of the moon are
compatible with the provisions of this Agrr.ement. To this end,
all space vehicles, equipment, facilities, stations and installations on the moon shall be open to other States Parties. Such
States Parties shall give reasonable advance notice of a projected visit, in order that appropriate consultations may be held
and that maximum precautions may be taken to assure safety
and to avoid interference with normal operations in the facility
to be visited. In pursuance of this article, any State !.'arty may
act on its own behalf or with the full or partial assistance of
any other State Party or through appropriate international
procedures within the framework of the United Nations and in
accordance with the Charter.
2. A State Party which has reason to believe that another
State Party is not fulfiJling the obligations incumbent upon it
pursuant to this Agreement or that another State Party is interfering with the rights which the former State has under this
Agreement may request consultations with that State Party. A
1.

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

80

State Party receiving such a request shall enter into such consultations without delay. Any other State Party which requests
to do so shall be entitled to take part in the consultations. Each
State Party participating in such consultations shall seek a
mutually acceptable resolution of any controversy and shall
bear in mind the rights and interests of all States Parties. The
Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be informed of
the results of the consultations and shall transmit the information received to all States Parties concerned.
3. If the consultations do not lead to a mutually acceptable
settlement which has due regard for the rights and interests of
all States Parties, the parties concerned shall take all measures
to settle the dispute by other peaceful means of their choice
appropriate to the circumstances and the nature of the dispute.
If difficulties arise in connexion with the opening of consultations or if consultations do not lead to a mutually acceptable
settlement, any State Party may seek the assistance of the
Secretary-General, without seeking the consent of any other
State Party concerned, in order to resolve the controversy. A
State Party which does not maintain diplomatic relations with
another State Party concerned shall participate in such consultations, at its choice, either itself or through another State
Party or the Secretary-General as intermediary.

Article 16
With the exception of articles 17 to 21, references in this
Agreement to States shall be deemed to apply to any international intergovernmental organization which conducts space activities if the organization declares its acceptance of the rights
and obligations provided for in this Agreement and if a majority
of the States members of the organization are States Parties to
this Agreement and to the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. 26 States members of any such organization which are States Parties to this
Agreement shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that the
organization makes a declaration in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Article 17
Any State Party to this Agreement may propose amendments
to the Agreement. Amendments shall enter into force for each
State Party to the Agreement accepting the amendments upon
their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Agreement and thereafter for each remaining State Party to the
Agreement on the date of acceptance by it.
Article 18
Ten years after the entry into force of this Agreement, the
question of the review of the Agreement shall be included in the
provisional agenda of the General Assembly of the United Nations in order to consider, in the light of past application of the
Agreement, whether it requires revision. However, at any time
after the Agreement has been in force for five years, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, as depository, shall,
at the request of one third of the States Parties to the Agreement
and with the concurrence of the majority of the States Parties,
convene a conference of the States Parties to review this Agreement. A review conference shall also consider the question of
the implementation of the provisions of article 11, paragraph S,
on the basis of the principle referred to in paragraph 1 of that
article and taking into account in particular any relevant technological developments.
Article 19
This Agreement shall be open for signature by all States
at United Nations Headquarters in New York.
2. This Agreement shall be subject to ratification by signatory States. Any State which does not sign this Agreement before its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this
article may accede to it at any time. Instruments of ratification
or accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.
3. This Agreement shall enter into force on the thirtieth
day following the date of deposit of the fifth instrument of
ratification.
1.

4. For each State depositing its instrument of ratification or
accession after the entry into force of this Agreement, it shall
enter into force on the thirtieth day following the date of
deposit of any such instrument.
5. The Secretary-General shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature, the date
of deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession to this
Agreement, the date of its entry into force and other notices.
Article 20
Any State Party to this Agreement may give notice of its
withdrawal from the Agreement one year after its entry into
force by written notification to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. Such withdrawal shall take effect one year
from the date of receipt of this notification.
Article 21
The original of this Agreement, of which the Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, who shall send certified copies thereof to all signatory
and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement, opened for signature at New York on .... 31

34/90.

Report of the Special Committee to Invesdgate
Israeli Practices Affecdng the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories

A

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as the principles and provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 32
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 33 as well as of other
relevant conventions and regulations,
Recalling all its resolutions on the subject, in particular resolutions 32/91 B and C of 13 December 1977
and 33/113 C of 18 December 1978, as well as those
adopted by the Security Council, the Commission on
Human Rights and other United Nations organs concerned and by the specialized agencies,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories, 84 which contains, inter alia, public statements
made by leaders of the Government of Israel,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories for its efforts in
performing the tasks assigned to it by the General Assembly and for its thoroughness and impartiality;
2. Deplores the continued refusal by Israel to allow
the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
3. Calls again upon Israel to allow the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
4. Deplores the continued and persistent violation by
Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, and other applicable international instruments,
81 The Agreement was opened for signature on 18 December 1979.
32 Resolution 217 A (III).
88 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
34 A/34/631.
