46

General A111embly-Twenty-ninth Se111ion

nomic Commission for Latin America in co-operation
with the United Nations Development Programme, 15
Also bearing in mind the report on the ninth extraordinary session of the Committee of the Whole of the
Economic Commission for Latin America, 16
Recognizing the urgency and importance of implementing the measures which the Committee of the
Whole of the Economic Commission for Latin America
unanimously recommended in resolution 343 ~AC.67)
of 22 October 1974, entitled "International co-operation to deal with the natural disaster which occurred in
Honduras during the period 18 to 20 September 1974",
1. Conveys to the people and Government of Honduras its feeling of solidarity in the face of the tragedy
they have suffered;
2. Endorses resolution 343 (AC.67), adopted by
the Committee of the Whole of the Economic Commission for Latin America at its ninth extraordinary
session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the international organizations of the United Nations system to
ensure the dedicated and prompt execution of the
recommendations contained in resolution 343 (AC.67).
2303rd plenary meeting
29 November 1974
3243 (XXIX). Strengthening of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971, by which it created the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and established
its primary functions of co-ordinating disaster relief,
especially through its role as an information clearinghouse, and of assisting in disaster prevention and
preparedness,
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution
1891 (LVII) of 31 July 1974, in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to investigate the feasibility of measures to strengthen the disaster prevention,
pre-disaster planning and co-ordinating roles of the
Office c: the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and to submit his findings to the Council at its
fifty-ninth session, and in which the Council recommended that the General Assembly, at its twenty-ninth
session, should reconsider the proposals of the Secretary-General for additional staff resources,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on assistance in cases of natural
disaster and other disaster situations, 17 and of the
statement made to the Second Committee by the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator on the
activities of his Office, 18
Noting in particular the statements in the SecretaryGeneral's report that, while some progress has been
made in the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator in establishing its assigned func15 E/CEPAL/ AC.67 /2 and Corr.I and 2.
16 Official Records of the Economic and

Social Council,
Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 9A (E/5608/Add. I).
17 ,...,, 9637.
18 Official. Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Second Committee, 1620th meeting, paras. 1-7.

tion of mobilizing and co-ordinating relief, the lack of
staff and facilities, combined with the frequency, duration and simultaneity of disaster situations, has seriously impaired the effectiveness of the Office in discharging these and other responsibilities,
Concerned that Jack of adequate co-ordination on a
world-wide basis results, in some cases, in lapses in
meeting priority needs and, in others, in costly duplication and in the. supply of unneeded assistance,
Convinced that the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator is in a unique position,
given adequate staff and facilities, to provide a worldwide system of mobilizing and co-ordinating disaster
relief, including the collection and dissemination of
information on disaster assessment, priority needs and
donor assistance,
Convinced further that this capability should be
strengthened, as a matter of priority and urgency and
without prejudice to the disaster prevention and disaster preparedness roles assigned to the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
Convinced that disaster prevention and pre-disaster
planning should form an integral part of the international development policy of Governments and of international organizations,
1. Calls upon the Secretary-General to provide sufficient staff, equipment and facilities to strengthen the
capacity of the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator to provide an efficient and effective world-wide service of mobilizing and co-ordinating
disaster relief, including particularly the collection and
dissemination of information on disaster assessment,
priority needs and donor assistance;
2. Decides that the additional costs of providing
this strengthened capability should be met by voluntary
contributions during the first year, commencing as soon
as possible, and during the biennium 197 6-1977, at
which time the method of financing for succeeding
periods shall be subject to review in the light of experience, with the understanding that the additional resources made available under the terms of the present
resolution should be concentrated on strengthening the
co-ordinating capability of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, but without prejudice to any improvements that can be made in the
roles of that Office in disaster prevention and in predisaster planning within the resources otherwise
available to it;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures, drawing upon the aforementioned voluntary funds, to prepare a plan and budget for this increased capability, and to proceed with its immediate
implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, as called for in
Economic and Social Council resolution 1891 ( LVII),
to continue to investigate the feasibility of measures to
strengthen the United Nations machinery with regard
to disaster prevention and pre-disaster planning;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the Economic and Social Council at its fifty-ninth session and
to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2303rd plenary meeting
29 November 1974
