General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

22

rivalry, prepared by the Secretary-General with the
assistance of qualified experts28 pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 3080 (XXVIII),
Deeply concerned that the competitive expansion of
the military presence of the great Powers in the Indian
Ocean would constitute a serious intensification of the
arms race, leading to an increase of tension in the
area,
1
Considering that the creation of a zone of peace in
the Indian Ocean requires:
(a) The elimination of all manifestations of great
Power military presence in the region, conceived in
the context of great Power rivalry,
( b) Co-operation among the regional States to ensure conditions of security within the region as envisaged in the Declaration,
Further believing that for the realization of the
objective of the Declaration it is necessary that the
great Powers enter into immediate consultations with
the States concerned with a view to adopting positive
measures for the elimination of all foreign bases and
of all manifestations of great Power military presence
in the region, conceived in the context of great Power
rivalry,
1. Urges the littoral and hinterland States of the
Indian Ocean, the permanent members of the Security
Council and other major maritime users of the Indian
Ocean to give tanl!ible support to the establishment
and preservation of the Indian Ocean as a zone of
peace;
2. Calls upon the great Powers to refrain from increasing and strengthening their military presence in
the region of the Indian Ocean as an essential first
step towards the relaxation of tension and the promotion of peace and security in the area;
3. Endorses the recommendations concerning the
future work of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian
Ocean, as contained in paragraph 35 of the report
of the Committee;
4. Requests the littoral and hinterland States of the
Indian Ocean to enter, as soon as possible, into consultations with a view to convening a conference on
the Indian Ocean;
5. Invites an States, especially the great Powers,
to co-operate in a practical manner with the Ad Hoe
Committee in the discharge of its functions;
6. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General
for his efforts in the preparation of the factual statement of the great Powers' military presence in the
Indian Ocean;
7. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to continue
its work and consultations in accordance with its mandate and to report to the GeneraJ Assembly at its
thirtieth session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee.
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2992 {XXVII) of 15 December 1972 by which it decided to establish an Ad
2s Ibid., aMex.

Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean consisting of no
more than fifteen members,
Notinf? that some littoral and hinterland States of
the Indian Ocean have expressed deep interest in becoming members of the Ad Hoe Committee in view
of their geographical position and adherence to the
concept of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace,
Noting further that since the establishment of the
Ad Hoe Committee new States have been admitted to
membership in the United Nations,
Recognizing that the establishment and preservation
of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace is a matter
that concerns all littoral and hinterland States,
Decides to enlarge the composition of the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Indian Ocean by the addition of
Bangladesh, Kenya and Somalia.

2309th plenary meet~ng
9 December 1974

•

•

•

As a result of the appointments set forth in resolution B
above, the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean is com•
posed of the following Member States: AUSTllALIA, BANGLA•
DESk, CHINA, INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, JAPAN, KENYA,
MADAGASCAR, MALAYSIA, MAURITIUS, PAKISTAN, SOMALIA, SRI
LANKA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, YEMEN and ZAMBIA,

3260 (XXIX).

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972
and 3183 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the United Nations
under the Charter for the maintenance of intemational peace and for disarmament,
Reiterating its conviction that all peoples of the
world have a vital interest in the success of disarmamenc negotiations and that a1l States should be in a
position to contribute to the adoption of measures for
the achievement of this goal,
Stressing anew its belief that a world disairmament
conference, adequately prepared and convened at an
appropriate time, could promote the realization of
such aims and that the co-operation of all nuclear
Powers would considerably facilitate their attainment,
Bearing in mind the ,report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the World Disarmament Conference29 and
the annex thereto containing a summary of views and
suggestions expressed by Governments on the convening of a world disarmament conference and relateci
problems, inoluding conditions for the realization of
such a conference,
Considering that it does not yet seem possible to
reach a final conclusion with regard to the convening
of a world disarmament conference,
1. Invites all States to communicate to the Secretary-General, before 31 March 1975, their comments
_on the main objectives of a world disarmament conference in the light of the views and suggestions compiled in section II of the summary annexed to the
report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the World Disarmament Conference;
29 Jbid.,

Supplement No. 28 (A/9628).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First ~mmittee

2. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall resume
its work, in accordance with the procedure established
in General Assembly resolution 3183 (XXVIII), on
1 April 1975 and that in discharging its assigned task
it shall give priority to the following two functions:
(a) To prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session, on the basis of consensus,
an analytical report, including any conclusions and
recommendations it may deem pertinent, concerning
the comments received pursuant to paragraph 1 above;
(b) To maintain close contact with the representatives of the States possessing nuclear weapons in order
to keep currently informed of any change in their
respective positions;
3. Renews its invitation to the States possessing
nuclear weapons to co-operate or maintain contact
with the Ad Hoe Committee, it being understood that
they will enjoy the same rights as the appointed members of the Committee;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee in its
work, including the preparation of summary records;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "World Disarmament Conference".
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3261 (XXIX). General and complete disarmament
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it declared the decade of the
1970s the Disarmament Decade,
Having received the reports of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament since 1970 relating to
the question of general rnd complete disarmament
under effective international control,
Mindful of the grave dangers involved in the continuing development of new nuclear weapons through
a spiralling nuclear arms ract: and proliferation of
nuclear weapons,
Reaffirminf! its conviction that the diversion of
enormous resources and energy, human and material,
from peaceful economic and social pursuits to an unproductive and wasteful arms race, particularly in the
nuclear arms race, impairs the security and the economic and social well-being of both the developed and
developing countries,
Recalling the link between the Disarmament Decade
and the Second United Nations Development Decade,
1. Reaffirms the purposes and objectives of the
Disarmament Decade;
2. Requests the Secretary-General and Governments
to <report to the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session on the action and steps which they have taken
so far tQ publicize the Disarmament Decade in order
to . acquaint the general public with its purposes and
ob1ect1ves;
3. Invites Member States to report to the General
As~embly at its thirtieth session, through the SecretaryGeneral, on the measures and policies they have
adopted to achieve the purposes and objectives of the
Disarmament Decade;

-----

- - -

- - - - - - -----------

4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Mid-term review
of the Disarmament Decade".

2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1660 (XVI) of 28 November 1961 and 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961 on
the composition of a Disarmament Committee of
eighteen members,
·
Recalling further its resolution 2602 B (XXIV) of
16 Decem~er 1969 by which it endorsed the agreement that had been reached on the title of the Committee as "Conference of the Committee on Disarmament" and on an enlarged composition of the following
twenty-six members: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burma, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Mongolia, Marocco, Netherfands, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland, Romania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Arab Republic, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Yugoslavia,
Noting that the German Democratic Republic, Germany (Federal Republic of), Iran, Peru and Zaire
have expressed an interest in becoming members of the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament and
that the present members of the Committee have agreed
to invite them to become members beginning on 1 January 1975, as stated in the report of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament,8°
Reaffirming that all States have a deep interest in
disarmament negotiations,
1. Endorses the agreement that has been reached
to the effect that the composition of the Conforence
of the Committee on Disarmament will be enlarged as
from 1 January 1975 by the addition of the following
members: German Democratic Republic, Germany
(Federal Republic of), Iran, Peru and Zaire;
2. Welcomes the five new members of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament;
3. Expresses its conviction that, to effect any
change in the composition of the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament specified in the present
resolution, the procedure followed on this occasion
should be observed;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the necessary assistance and services to the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament.

2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
C

The General Assembly,
Recallimt its resolution 2602 A (XXIV) of 16 Dec_e~ber 1969 relating to the initiation of bilateral negot1attons between the Governments of the Union of
so A/9708-DC/237, para. 7. For the printed text, see 01/icial
Records of the General Assembly, Twenf)'-ninth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/9627).
