S/2000/657

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 July 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 5 July 2000 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I am pleased to forward to you the attached note from the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), which summarizes actions taken to date as a
follow-up to the meeting on human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) in Africa, which was held in the Security
Council on 10 January 2000 (see annex).
I would be grateful if you would make the note available to members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

00-52115 (E) 060700
`````````

S/2000/657

Annex
Follow-up to the Security Council meeting on HIV/AIDS in Africa
Note prepared by Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
Introduction
1.
The present note summarizes actions taken to date, in responding to the
requests and recommendations made at the Security Council meeting on human
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) in
Africa, held on 10 January 2000. The meeting helped to raise the issue of the
HIV/AIDS epidemic to new levels of understanding and sharpened awareness of its
impact far beyond the health and social sectors.
Intensifying United Nations clearing house efforts on HIV/AIDS in Africa within
the United Nations
2.
Several concrete steps have been taken and further progress is under way. A
system for the regular sharing of information via electronic information bulletins
and web sites is now operational. Not only will this improve information flow but it
will also foster the exchange of learning and experience on an unprecedented scale.
3.
One of the most comprehensive initiatives in this regard is the country
response monitoring project, which will take shape beginning in July 2000. This
effort, supported by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
the United States Agency for International Development, the Department for
International Development of the United Kingdom and the Swedish International
Development Agency, will enable easy access through the World Wide Web to the
latest summary information on the epidemic in specific countries. This information
will include regular updates on the Programme and on the financial support of
various international partners to national responses to the epidemic.
4.
The two measures outlined above are part of a broader communications
strategy that is being developed in consultation with a wide range of partners. The
objectives of this strategy are to enhance both the dissemination of information and
the systematic collection of data from countries.
5.
In regard to more systematic follow-up on HIV/AIDS issues within the various
United Nations system governing boards, councils, committees and conferences,
progress includes the following: a special meeting of the Economic and Social
Council was held at the request of the President of the Security Council on the
development aspects of the HIV/AIDS epidemic; an informal meeting of the
Economic and Social Council Ambassadors with the Board of Directors of the
World Bank discussed HIV/AIDS, among other issues; the inclusion of AIDS as an
item for discussion at the Development Committee meeting during the World Bank’s
annual session in April 2000; a focus on the impact of HIV/AIDS by the Preparatory
Committee for the Special Session of the General Assembly for Follow-up to the
World Summit for Children in 2001; a special discussion on HIV/AIDS during the
spring session of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, held in April
2000; a session dedicated to HIV/AIDS as part of the International Labour
Conference on 8 June 2000; and consideration of key issues and the issuing of

2

S/2000/657

resolutions by the World Health Assembly, as well as by the Governing Board of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in May 2000.
Intensifying efforts to address HIV/AIDS in emergencies, conflict situations and
in the uniformed services in Africa
6.
As a follow-up to the Security Council discussions, the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee (IASC) working group met in February 2000 to discuss the development
of strategies for addressing HIV/AIDS. On 19 May 2000, the IASC working group
was presented with an action plan developed by IASC members and the UNAIDS
secretariat. The plan fully integrates HIV/AIDS into humanitarian action and
focuses on the following issues: the role of the military and peacekeeping forces in
the prevention and spread of HIV; the epidemic’s potential to contribute to social
instability and emergency situations; and the need for a set of basic measures to
ensure minimum standards of prevention and care before, during and immediately
after conflicts or disasters occur. IASC endorsed the work plan and asked the
UNAIDS secretariat to facilitate its implementation in collaboration with IASC
members and other key partners. To fulfil this responsibility, the UNAIDS
secretariat has established the Humanitarian Coordination Unit as of 1 June 2000.
7.
Discussions have also been held with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Civil Military Alliance, a UNAIDS collaborating centre,
focusing on ways in which conflict and humanitarian situations sometimes bring
about an elevated risk of HIV transmission for refugees and host communities as
well as for United Nations and NGO personnel. The goal is to promote responsible
and safe behaviour among staff providing humanitarian aid and peacekeeping
troops, as well as to ensure that they are fully aware of preventive measures to
protect themselves against infection. Specific follow-up actions include the
following: expanding the pool of training expertise; briefing and updating those who
are going to the field before and during deployment; and the development of a
United Nations medical policy on HIV/AIDS for personnel associated with United
Nations missions, including ensuring adequate supplies of condoms etc. The
UNAIDS secretariat will be working closely with the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Population Fund and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in all of the above-mentioned areas.
Progress in developing the International Partnership against AIDS in Africa
8.
The Framework for Action of the International Partnership against AIDS in
Africa (IPAA) is now completed and comprises a set of principles, goals, and targets
that have been agreed upon by all five constituencies of the Partnership. IPAA
brings together, under the leadership of African Governments, the United Nations
system, donor Governments, the private sector and the community sector. The IPAA
Framework for Action provides the basis for moving forward in this path-breaking
endeavour; it will be continually discussed, shaped and refined in response to the
evolution of the epidemic as well as the expansion of the Partnership itself.
9.
The Framework has so far been endorsed by the Conference of the African
Ministers of Health in Ouagadougou in May 2000 and by the Programme
Coordinating Board of UNAIDS. In endorsing the Framework, the Board asked for
its immediate implementation, stressing the need for clear ownership by the African

3

S/2000/657

Governments involved; scaled-up action; improved communication flows; and
mobilization of financial and human resources.
10. In addition to the development of the Framework, some progress has also been
made at the country level. In Malawi, a round-table meeting was organized to
mobilize funds for the implementation of the national HIV/AIDS strategic
framework. This was successful in mobilizing commitments that cover 70 per cent
of the US$ 121 million required. In Burkina Faso and Ghana, special funds have
been created for the purpose of responding to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In Ethiopia,
mechanisms for channelling resources to rural communities, such as the inclusion of
an HIV/AIDS component within the Ethiopian Social Rehabilitation and
Development Fund, are being identified. In Mozambique, comprehensive sector
plans in health and education have been completed, and in the United Republic of
Tanzania efforts have been undertaken to establish a national body to coordinate the
multisectoral response.

4
