S/2002/607

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 May 2002
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
At the Council’s 4538th meeting, on 22 May 2002, which was presided over by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Singapore, S. Jayakumar, the Chairman of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, Ambassador
Jagdish Koonjul, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Mauritius, provided
the wider membership with a comprehensive “outreach” briefing on the role,
function and programme of work of the Working Group. Member States were also
given an opportunity to provide their views and inputs on the Group.
The interactive debate following the briefing was rich, deep and wide-ranging.
At the end of the debate, the President of the Security Council, Professor Jayakumar,
drew, on his own responsibility, some specific conclusions to be fed into the future
work of the Group as well as the work of the Council on African issues. A copy of
the President’s concluding remarks is attached (see annex I), and is also available on
the Singapore presidency web site, at www.mfa.gov.sg/unsc/. This was a first step
towards culling the many important points made during the debate. These points
have since been further refined with a view to distributing them to all United
Nations Member States.
Also attached are the consolidated summary conclusions drawn from the
meeting on 22 May 2002 (see annex II), which have been conveyed to the Chairman
of the Working Group for its consideration. These conclusions have been drawn on
the responsibility of the Singapore presidency. The points are not arranged in any
particular order, nor are they exhaustive. The conclusions could be used in
conjunction with the verbatim record of the 4538th meeting of the Security Council
(S/PV.4538 and Resumption 1) as a starting point for further discussion in the
Working Group. It is hoped that they can be built upon in our future debates on the
issue.

02-40812 (E)

050602

*0240812*

S/2002/607

Annex I
Conclusions drawn by S. Jayakumar, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Singapore, presiding over the Security Council at its open
meeting on the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa, 22 May 2002
1.
Let me thank all speakers for their kind words addressed to me and to my
delegation. When I opened the meeting this morning, I indicated that I would, at the
end of the debate, try to draw, on my own responsibility, some specific conclusions
from our discussions, which I hope will feed into both the future work of the
Council’s Working Group on Africa and the work of the Council on African issues. I
also hope to further refine these points and to distribute them eventually to all
United Nations Member States on my own responsibility.
2.
Before stating these conclusions, I would like once again to thank Ambassador
Jagdish Koonjul, Ambassador Amadou Kébé, Ambassador Ivan Šimonović and
Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall for their excellent contributions. On
behalf of the Security Council, let me also express our deep appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Fall for the invaluable contributions he has made to the
work of the Security Council. We have immensely benefited from his incisive
analysis of issues and his tremendous vision, and we wish him all the best in his new
endeavours. There can be no doubt that we have had a rich debate today. When
Mauritius and Singapore sent out the letter of invitation to all Members, we had no
idea that it would receive such an overwhelming response, with 35 non-members of
the Council addressing the Council. The response indicates that there is a great
desire on the part of the membership to provide inputs and recommendations for the
Council’s work on Africa.
3.
It is not easy in a brief summary like this to capture the many points that were
made today. My remarks should therefore be seen as a first step towards culling the
important points made today. I will divide my remarks into two parts. First, I will try
to draw out some general points that were made. Secondly, I will try to list some of
the specific suggestions that were put across for the Working Group to follow up.
Let me apologize in advance if I have left out any major points made by the
speakers. We will capture these points in our consolidated summary.
General conclusions
4.
Several general points were made. First, as the President of the Economic and
Social Council, Ambassador Ivan Šimonović said, “Effective strategies to deal with
conflict prevention and recovery require a comprehensive approach” (S/PV.4538,
p. 6). Indeed, this is probably one of the main conclusions we could draw from
today’s debate. Many speakers observed that there had been a series of initiatives on
Africa, ranging from the broad New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)
initiative to more specific initiatives. The challenge is to ensure that all these
initiatives work together coherently. Here, too, the Working Group can make a
valuable contribution.
5.
The second general point that emerged from our meeting was a strong appeal
made by non-members of the Council for Council members to consider carefully all
the points of view put forward today, especially by the African Member States. I

2

S/2002/607

have no doubt that Council members have indeed listened carefully to the points
made and, as requested by the African Group, some members also responded to
some of these points. As a result, we have had a rich and interactive dialogue. But
dialogue is not an end in itself. Several speakers emphasized that the Council needs
to work out a partnership with African States in responding to African challenges.
We hope that the healthy dialogue we have had today will help create the partnership
that many have called for.
6.
Thirdly, it was suggested that the Working Group could work out a balance
sheet of successes, failures and lessons learned in tackling the problems in Africa.
Ambassador Greenstock, for example, suggested a lessons-learned exercise on
Sierra Leone. I am citing only one example, but many other concrete examples were
cited for lessons-learned exercises.
7.
Fourthly, it was suggested that, unlike the Security Council, which tends to be
more formal and more reactive, the Working Group, as an informal and ad hoc body,
could be more proactive and experiment with innovative measures. This was
suggested by the Chairman of the African Group, the Permanent Representative of
Benin, and his suggestion may be worth reflecting on.
8.
Fifthly, there was broad agreement among all speakers that the Working Group
should not duplicate the work carried out by the Security Council. Rather, it would
assist the Security Council in its work and provide value-added contributions.
9.
Let me turn now to some of the specific suggestions that were conveyed to the
Working Group. The specific suggestions relate to the seven items outlined in the
programme of work of the Group.
On the Economic and Social Council, the following suggestions were made:
• The Working Group could appoint a representative to work with the Economic
and Social Council’s advisory group, when it is created, in preparation for the
high-level General Assembly meeting on Africa on 16 September, which
would include discussions on NEPAD.
• There is a need for the Working Group to adopt an integrated approach and
ensure the smooth transition from peacekeeping to peace-building, another
area for cooperation between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council.
• The cooperation between the Working Group and the Economic and Social
Council could also address the “failure of partnership” between members of
the United Nations family and help to address the economic and social causes
of conflict.
On confidence-building in the Mano River region, it was suggested that:
• The Council should listen to the views of African regional organizations, such
as the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), on what
needs to be done for the region.
• The Working Group could look for joint solutions affecting the three Mano
River Union countries, such as joint disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, a joint plan of action against the illicit arms trade

3

S/2002/607

(European Union) and possibly a rationalization of the posts of the two Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General.
On the role of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in Africa, it
was suggested that:
• The Special Representatives should work closely with each other, despite their
different geographical mandates, especially in the field of preventive
diplomacy.
On assistance to electoral processes, speakers noted that:
• While the Security Council had no direct role in election observation, the
Working Group could reflect on formulating rules acceptable to all on a
possible partnership between the United Nations Secretary-General and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Secretary-General to observe electoral
processes in the months preceding elections, during elections and during the
announcement of the results. This obviously requires careful consideration.
• The Working Group should also help ensure that the Council remains seized of
the situation in conflict areas even after successful elections. Premature
withdrawals from such areas in the past have led to the re-emergence of factors
that could embroil States in yet another conflict.
On the establishment of groups of friends, speakers noted that:
• The idea of groups of friends was a good one, particularly “useful for
gathering information about specific situations” (ibid., p. 18) and in the areas
of mediation and providing good offices. However, they could not replace the
Council in its work.
On the question of cooperation with OAU and subregional organizations, there
was a particularly rich discussion:
• One suggestion was for the Working Group to facilitate the circulation of all
Central Organ decisions and those of security organs of subregional
organizations as United Nations Security Council documents to ensure their
effective implementation. It was also suggested that the Working Group could
facilitate periodic interaction and dialogue between the Council and OAU and
that there could be regular exchanges of early warning information between
the Working Group and OAU.
On the question of inviting non-governmental organizations and academics to
participate in the work of the Group, many speakers noted that:
• It is useful to have exchanges and seminars involving non-governmental
organizations and think tanks, which can contribute to the Council’s decisionmaking.
10. As I said, this brief summary cannot do justice to the rich debate that we had
today. My officers had given me a long list of suggestions to mention in my
concluding remarks, but, given the lateness of the hour, I could mention only a few.
I have no doubt that the Working Group will study in great detail the verbatim

4

S/2002/607

record of all the suggestions and proposals made at this meeting (S/PV.4538 and
Resumption 1).
11. The main purpose of today’s debate was to provide a stepping stone for the
Council to continue focusing actively on the many challenges we face in Africa. We
hope that when the next debate is held on this subject, Members will refer to the rich
debate we had today and will build on the ideas and suggestions we have received. I
am pleased to hear that the United Kingdom will be building on the results of
today’s debate during its presidency in July. Finally, let me thank you once again for
your participation and for your contributions to this debate.

5

S/2002/607

Annex II
Consolidated summary conclusions from the open meeting of the
Security Council on the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa
1.
At the end of the Security Council’s open meeting on 22 May 2002 on the Ad
Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, the President
of the Security Council, S. Jayakumar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Singapore,
drew, under his own responsibility, oral conclusions to be fed into the future work of
the Group. The conclusions were divided into two parts, the first part, drawing out
the general points that were made and the second, listing some of the specific
suggestions that were put across for the Working Group to pursue. The President
undertook to distribute the consolidated summary conclusions and also noted that
members of the Council were committed to ensuring serious follow-through on the
proposals made at the debate.
2.
The key points raised at the open meeting, relating specifically to the seven
items outlined in the programme of work of the Group, are detailed in this
document. The items in the programme were the following:
(a) Enhancing cooperation between the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council;
(b)

Confidence-building in the region of the Mano River Union;

(c)

Role of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in Africa;

(d)

Assistance to electoral processes;

(e)

Establishment of groups of friends for specific conflict situations;

(f) Cooperation with the Organization of African Unity and subregional
organizations;
(g) Inviting non-governmental organizations and academics to participate in
the work of the Group.
3.
The points below are neither arranged in any particular order nor intended to
be exhaustive. The conclusions may be used in conjunction with the verbatim record
of the 4538th meeting (S/PV. 4538 and Resumption 1) as a starting point for further
discussion in the Working Group.
Enhancing cooperation between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council
• Consideration could be given to the participation of a representative of the
Working Group in the work of the proposed Economic and Social Council
advisory group on African countries emerging from conflicts, when it is
established, in preparation for the high-level General Assembly meeting in
September on Africa, which would include discussions on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD).
• The Working Group, jointly with the Economic and Social Council, could
organize donor conferences, encourage joint missions to assess humanitarian
situations and ensure that programmes for reconstruction and rehabilitation,

6

S/2002/607

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are effectively included in all
peace agreements.
• There is a need for the Working Group to adopt an integrated approach that is
sensitive to social, economic and political developments. There is also a need
to ensure the smooth transition from peacekeeping to peace-building. In this
respect, the Working Group and the Economic and Social Council advisory
group could develop modalities for cooperation.
• There should be coordination between the respective working groups of the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly.
The Security Council should note that post-conflict peace-building is not a
Security Council responsibility.
• Cooperation between the Working Group and the Economic and Social Council
would address the “failure of partnership” and help to address the economic
and social causes of conflict.
• The Working Group can, through facilitating cooperation and interaction
among the various United Nations agencies, assist Africa in rebuilding its
capacity to manage all aspects of conflict.
• The respective Presidents of the Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council could be invited to participate in each other’s meetings. There should
also be regular meetings between the two organs.
Confidence-building in the Mano River region
• The Security Council should listen to the views of African regional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), on what can be done to enhance confidence-building in the Mano
River region.
• The Working Group can look for joint solutions affecting the three Mano River
Union countries, such as joint disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, a joint plan of action against the illicit arms trade and possibly a
rationalization of the posts of the two Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral.
Role of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in Africa
• The Working Group should encourage Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in Africa to meet regularly, possibly with the SecretaryGeneral as well, to discuss issues of common interest. Increased coordination
among Special Representatives of the Secretary-General, tapping into their
collective wisdom, is desirable.
• Special Representatives of the Secretary-General could be invited to
participate in meetings of the Working Group to exchange views and discuss
obstacles they face in their work, as well as possible solutions.
Assistance to electoral processes
• The Working Group could look into the different ways the United Nations
Secretariat could provide assistance to electoral processes, from start to finish,

7

S/2002/607

at the request of Member States, in accordance with the established election
assistance procedures. Alternatively, it could examine whether the Security
Council should be limited to announcing its political support for conclusions
of United Nations electoral observers on specific elections and to requesting
the national actors to respect the outcome of elections.
• While the Security Council has no direct role, the Working Group should
reflect on formulating rules acceptable to all on a possible partnership between
the United Nations Secretary-General and the OAU Secretary-General to
observe electoral processes in the months preceding elections, during elections
and during the announcement of the results.
• The Working Group should look into logistical and financial assistance for
elections, because successful elections depend on reliable electoral rolls,
which, in turn, require proper and credible censuses.
• Alternatively, the United Nations and OAU could consider the creation of a
joint monitoring unit.
• The Working Group should also help ensure that the Security Council remains
seized of the situation in conflict areas even after successful elections.
Premature withdrawals from such areas in the past have led to the reemergence of factors that could embroil states in yet another conflict.
Establishment of groups of friends
• The Working Group should ensure that groups of friends are open to any
Member State that can and is willing to make a difference. It should also
ensure that African members are actively involved.
• Groups of friends are particularly useful for gathering information about
specific situations and in the areas of mediation and providing good offices.
However, they should not replace the Security Council.
Cooperation with OAU and subregional organizations
• The Working Group should facilitate, to the extent possible, the circulation of
all OAU Central Organ decisions and those of security organs of subregional
organizations as United Nations Security Council documents to ensure their
effective implementation.
• It could also facilitate periodic interaction and dialogue between the Council
and members of the Central Organ (the future African Union Peace and
Security Council), with the Secretaries-General of the two institutions and in
formal meetings of the Security Council. These periodic interactions should be
aimed at reviewing approaches for further collaboration between OAU and the
Security Council in the following areas:

8

(a)

Conflict prevention, peace-building and post-conflict reconstruction
and rehabilitation;

(b)

Regional dimensions of conflicts in Africa;

(c)

Regular briefings by Special Representatives and Envoys of the
Secretaries-General of the two organizations, preferably carried out
jointly.

S/2002/607

• The Working Group Chairperson and African members of the Security Council
could, when the need arises, be invited to statutory meetings of the OAU
Central Organ.
• There should be regular exchanges of early warning information between the
Working Group and OAU.
• The Working Group could ensure that Council missions to Africa include a
representative of the OAU secretariat. Consideration could be given to joint
missions to the field between the Council and the OAU Central Organ.
• The OAU policy of not allowing Heads of Government who came to power
through a coup d’état to participate in the organization’s deliberations and
activities is a most welcome one that the United Nations could consider
emulating.
• The Working Group should facilitate periodic meetings and constructive
dialogue between members of the Security Council and members of the future
African Union Peace and Security Council. It could also rationalize the system
of international exchanges between the Security Council, the United Nations
Secretary-General and all African regional and subregional organizations.
Inviting non-governmental organizations and academics to participate in the
work of the Group
• It is useful to have exchanges and seminars involving non-governmental
organizations and think tanks, which can contribute to Council’s decisionmaking.
• While the importance of civil society is accepted, it is also important to note
that non-governmental organizations and academia have proved more
successful in resolving socio-economic issues than political ones, which fall
under the purview of the Security Council.
Other proposals for inclusion in the programme of work
• The Working Group could look into the practical implementation of schemes
to eliminate the illicit arms trade, through regional initiatives such as the
ECOWAS moratorium on small arms, and taking into account the work of the
respective panels of experts for Angola, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The
Working Group could also approach the Permanent Representatives of Member
States whose nationals may be involved in supplying such illicit arms to find
ways to end such trade.
• The Working Group should encourage local initiatives in preventing conflicts,
particularly through civil society and councils of elders.
• The Working Group should review all Security Council resolutions on Africa
and assess which promises have materialized and which ones have not, thereby
giving the Security Council a better sense of what works and what does not.
• While the Working Group can look into the implementation of Security
Council decisions, care must be taken to avoid duplicating the mechanisms and
work currently undertaken by the Secretariat, the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General, etc.

9

S/2002/607

• Partnership and dialogue generated through the Working Group could be used
to help improve the implementation of sanctions, particularly in terms of how
exit strategies could be better devised. Reference was made to the need for
targeted sanctions that would not affect civilians and neighbouring countries.
• As Africa undertakes its own initiatives under NEPAD, the Working Group can
provide a channel for the international community to reciprocate and to initiate
reinforcing programmes.
• The Working Group can also identify and engage prominent regional and
subregional leaders who can play useful roles in bringing peace to their
respective areas. The critical role of such leaders in the past has yielded
positive results.
• The Working Group could address issues concerning internally displaced
persons and refugees as an integral part of conflict resolution.
General points
• Like the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa should also brief non-members
regularly, if not after every meeting. Such transparency is desirable and will
enable interested non-members to remain engaged and involved in the process.
• All the Security Council members have in a sense “become Africans” in
embracing the hopes and problems of the continent. Only by continuing to be
actively involved in Africa will Security Council members be able to deal
decisively with the issues of the continent.
• The Security Council must engage with all African Members equally. It should
not use the excuse of “waiting for good governance” before intervening
effectively.
• Peace and development are linked. The Security Council and the Working
Group cannot consider peace and security alone without due consideration of
development for Africa.

10
