20

General Asaembly-Twenty-11econd Seesion

Noting with grave concern that the racial policies of
the Government of South Africa have led to violent
conflict and an explosive situation,
Convinced that the situation in the Republic of South
Africa and the resulting explosive situation in southern
Africa continue to pose a grave threat to international
peace and security,
Considering it essential to promote a greater and
closer co-ordination of international efforts to eliminate
apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism in
southern Africa,
·
1. Reiterates its condemnation of the policies of
apartheid practised by the Government of South Africa
as a crime against humanity ;
2. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the people of South Africa for human rights
and fund:unental freedoms for a11 the people of South
Africa irrespective of race, colour or creed ;
3. Strongly reiterates its conviction that the situation
in South Africa constitutes a threat to international
peace :md security, that action under Chapter VII of
the Chnrter of the United Nations is essential in order
to solve the problem of apartheid and that universally
applied mandatory economic sanctions are the only
means of achieving a peaceful solution;
4. Once again draws the attention of the Security
Council to the grave situation in South Africa, and in
southern Africa as a whole, and requests the Council
to resume consideration of the question of apartheid
with a view to ensuring the full implementation of its
resolutions and the adoption of more effective measures
to secure an end to the policies of apartheid of the
Government of South Africa ;
5. Condemns the actions of those States, particularly
the main trading partners of South Africa, and the
activities of those foreign financial and other interests,
all of which through their political, economic and
military collaboration with the Government of South
Africa and contrary to relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions are encouraging that Government to persist in its racial policies ;
6. Requests all States, particularly the main trading
partners of South Africa, to comply fully with the resolutions of the Security Council on this question, to take
urgent steps towards disengagement from South Africa
and to take all appropriate measures to facilitate more
effective action, under the auspices of the United
Nations, to secure the elimination of apartheid ;
7. Reiterates its request to the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development to deny financial,
economic and technical assistance to the Government
of South Africa and, in this connexion, expresses the
hope that the Bank will stand by its assurance that it
will avoid any action that might run counter to the
fulfilment of the great purposes of the United Nations;
8. Appeals to all States and organizations to provide
appropriate moral, political and material assistance to
the people of South Africa in their legitimate struggle
for the rights recognized in the Charter ;
9. Invites all States to encourage the establishment
of national organizations for the purpose of further
enlightening public opinion on the evils of apartheid
and to report annually to the Secretary-General on the
progress and activities of such organizations ;
10. R_equests all States to commemorate, during the
International Year for Human Rights, 21 March 1968

-the International Day for the Elimination of Racial
Dis~rimination-with appropriate solemnity, in solidarity with the oppressed people of South Africa;
11. Commends to the attention of all United Nations
organs the report of the Seminar on Apartheid held at
Brasilia1 and the report of the International Seminar
on Apartheid, Racial Discrimination and Colonialism
in Southern Africa held at Kitwe, Zambia ;
12. Requests the Special Committee on the Policies
of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of
South Africa to intensify its co-operation with other
special organs concerned with the problems of racial
?iscrimination and colonialism in southern Africa, taking
mto account the relevant General Assembly resolutions
and the conclusions and recommendations of the Intern~ti~nal Seminar held at Kitwe, in so far as they fall
w1thm the mandate of the Special Committee under
General Assembly resolution 1761 (XVII) of 6 November 1962;
13. Requests the Special Committee on the Policies
of Aparth~id of the Government of the Republic of
Sou~h Af:1ca _to continue to discharge its mandate and
to mt~ns1fy its efforts to promote an international
~amp~1gr:i against apartheid and, to this end, authorizes
it, w1thm the budgetary provisions made for this
purpose:
(a) To hold during the International Year for
Human Rights a special session away from Headquarters;
( b) In consultation with the Secretary-General to
arra?ge for the_ advisory services of experts or s~ial
studies on specific aspects of the campaign ;
( c) To consult with the Secretary-General and the
specialized agencies, regional organizations and nongovernmental organizations concerned and to submit
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session a
report on measur_es which might appropriately be taken
to ensure the widest dissemination of information on
the evils. of apartheid and the efforts of the international
commumty to secure its elimination ;
. 14. _Re~uests t~e Secr~tary-General to intensify the
d1ssemmatto~ of mf?rn:1at1on _on the ~vils of apartheid
and to publish penod1cally mformat1on on economic
and financial relations between South Africa and other
States;
!nvites States, specialized agencies, regional orgamzat1ons and non-governmental organizations to cooperat~ with the Secretary-General and the Special
Cormmttee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa in the accomplishment of their tasks under the present resolution.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.

1?·

2308 (XXD). Comprehensive review of the whole
question of peace-keeping operations in all
their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February
1965 and 2053 A (XX) of 15 December 1965,
Recalli'!g fu'!ther it~ resolution 2249 (S-V) of 23 May
1967, which, inte~ alw, requ~sted the Special Committee on Peace-keepmg Operations to continue the review
of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in all
11 ST/TAO/HR/27.

Resolution• adopted on the reports of the Speeial Politleal Committee

their aspects and to study the various suggestions made
by different delegations during the Special Committee's
sess~on held between February and May 1967, in
particular those related to :
(a) Methods of financing future peace-keeping
operations in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations,
(b) Facilities, services and personnel which Member
States might voluntari}y provide, in accordance with the
Charter, for United Nations peace-keeping operations,
Mindful of the importance which Member States
attach to the comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects,
Having received and examined the report of the
Special Committee,6
1. Reaffirms its resolution 2249 ( S-V) ;
2. Requests the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations to continue the work assigned to it by the
General Assembly in paragraph 2 of resolution 2249
(S-V);
3. Considers that the preparation of a study on matters related to facilities, services and personnel which
Member States might provide, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, for United Nations
peace-keeping operations would be appropriate;
4. Further requests the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations to prepare by 1 July 1968, for the
twenty-third session of the General Assembly, its report on the progress made, including the study referred
to in paragraph 3 above ;
5. Transmits to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations the records of the debates at the
present session on the item entitled "Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects", with the request that the
suggestions and proposals contained therein be taken
into account.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.
2341 (XXII). Report of the Commissioner•
General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December
1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, 393 {V) and
394 (V) of 2 and 14 December 1950, 512 (VI) and
513 (VI) of 26 January 1952, 614 (VII) of 6 November 1952, 720 (VIII) of 27 November 1953, 818 (IX)
of 4 December 1954, 916 (X) of 3 December 1955, 1018
(XI) of 28 February 1957. 1191 (XII) of 12 December 1957, 1315 (XIII) of 12 December 1958, 1456
(XIV) of 9 December 1959, 1604 (XV) of 21 April
1961, 1725 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, 1856 (XVII)
of 20 December 1962, 1912 (XVIII) of 3 December
1963, 2002 (XIX) of 10 February 1965, 2052 (XX)
of 15 December 1965 and 2154 (XXI) of 17 November 1966,
Noting the annual report of the CommissinnerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 37, document A/6815.

Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, covering the period from 1 July 1966 to 30 June 1967,'
l. Notes with deep regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees as provided for in J>ll'.r&•
graph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III) has
not been effected, that no substantial progress has been
made in the programme endorsed in paragraph 2 of
resolution 513 (VI) for the reintegration of refugees
either by repatnation or resettlement and that, therefore, the situation of the refugees continues to be a
matter of serious concern ;
2. Expresses its thanks to the Commissioner-General
and the staff of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for
their continued faithful efforts to provide essential
services for the Palestine refugees, and to the specialized agencies and private organizations for their valuable work in assisting the refugees ;
3. Directs the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to continue his efforts in taking
such measures, including rectification of the relief rolls,
as to assure, in co-operation with the Governments
concerned, the most equitable distribution of relief
based on need ;
4. Notes with regret that the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine was unable to find
a means to achieve progress in the implementation of
paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194
(III), and requests the Commission to exert continued
efforts towards the implementation thereof;
5. Directs attention to the continuing critical financial
position of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as outlined in the Commissioner-General's report;
6. Notes uiith concern that, despite the commendable
and successful efforts of the Commissioner-General
to collect additional contributions to help relieve the
serious budget deficit of the past year, contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East continue to fall
short of the funds needed to cover essential budget requirements ;
7. Calls upon all Governments as a matter of urgency to make the most generous efforts possible to
meet the anticipated needs of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, particularly in the light of the budgetary deficit
projected in the Commissioner-General's report, and,
therefore, urges non-contributing Governments to contribute apd contributing Governments to consider increasing their contributions.
1640th plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2252 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations of 15 September 1967, 8
Twenty-second Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/6713).
s A/6797. For the printed text of this document, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second Year, S•Pfltment for July, August and September 1967, document S/8 58.
7 Ibid.,
