Resolutions adopted on the report& of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its third report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session. 6
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

D
VOLUNTARY FUNDS ADMINISTERED BY THE UNITED
NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES

The General Assembly
l. Accepts the accounts of the voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the financial year ended 31 December
1965 and the certificates of the Bqard of Auditors ;7
2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its fourth report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session. 8
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
2140 (XXI). Appointments to fill vacancies In
the membership of the Committee on Contributions
A

The General Assembly
I. Appoints the following person as a member of
the Committee on Contributions:
Mr. John I. M. Rhodes;
2. Declares Mr. Rhodes to be appointed for a period
beginning on the date of the present resolution and
ending on 31 December 1968.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

B
The General Assembly
I. Appoints the following persons as members of
the Committee on Contributions :
Mr. Amjad Ali,
Mr. Jorge Pablo Fernandini,
Mr. Evgeny Nikolaevich Makeev,
Mr. Maurice Viaud;
2. Declares Mr. Ali, Mr. Fernandini, Mr. Makeev
and Mr. Viaud to be appointed for a three-year term
beginning on 1 January 1967.
1478th plenary meeting,
25 November 1966.

•

•

•

As a result of the above appointments, the Committee on
Contributions will be composed as follows: Mr. Amjad Au
(Pakistan), Mr. Raymond T. BOWMAN (United States of
America), Mr. Jorge Pablo FERNANDINI (Peru), Mr. LouisDenis HUDON (Canada), Mr. F. Nouredin KIA (Iran), Mr.
Evgeny Nikolaevich MAKEEV ( Union of Soviet Socialist Re8 Ibid.,

Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 72, docu-

ment A/6378.

7 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Supple»u!'nt No. 6C (A/6306/
Add.3).
8 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 72, document A/6379.

publics), Mr. Stanislaw RACZKOWSKI (Poland), Mr. John I. M.
RHODES (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Mr. David SILVEIRA DA 1foTA (Brazil) and Mr. Maurice
VIAUD (France).

2141 (XXI). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the United Nation11
Staff Pension Committee

The General Assembly
I. Appoints the following persons as members of
the United Nations Staff Pension Committee:
Mr. John I. M. Rhodes,
Mr. Wilbur H. Ziehl;
2. Declares Mr. Rhodes and Mr. Ziehl to be appointed for a period beginning on the date of the present resolution and ending on 31 December 1967.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

•

•

•

As a result of the above appointments, the members and
alternate members elected by the General Assembly to the
United Nations Staff Pension Committee will be the following:
MEMBERS
Mr. Jose ESPINOZA (Chile);
Mr. John I. M. RHODES (United Kingdom of Great BritaiJJ

and Northern Ireland);
Mr. Wilbur H. ZIEHL (United States of America).
ALTERNATE MEMBERS
Mr. Brian J. LYNCH (New Zealand);
Mr. Jean-Oaude RENAUD (France) ;
Mr. Shilendra K. SINGH (ilndia).

2150 (XXI). Report of the Ad Hoe Committee
of Experts to Examine the Finances of the
United Nations and the Specialized Agencies

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2049 ( XX) of 13 December
1965 establishing the Ad Hoe Committee of Experts to
Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the
Specialized Agencies,
Noting with appreciation the work done by the Ad
Hoe Committee with the co-operation of the United
Nations Secretariat, the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency and other United
Nations organs and related bodies,
Noting further that the Ad H oc Committee, in compliance with paragraph 6 ( b) of the above-mentioned
resolution, has submitted its recommendations to the
General Assembly in its report dated 19 July 1966,9
Be(J;ring in mind that certain subsequent actions must
be taken by Member States, the United Nations organs
and related bodies, and the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency, to ensure
the effective implementation of the recommendations
made by the Ad H oc Committee,
Recognizing that the full implementation of the
recommendations made by the Ad Hoe Committee
would also require the co-operation of the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
9 Ibid.,

agenda item 80, document A/6343.
