S/PV.8595

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8595th meeting

Saturday, 10 August 2019, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Talavera
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Mogashoa
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-25137 (E)
*1925137*

S/PV.8595

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Condemnation of attack on the United Nations in
Benghazi, Libya
The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I should like to condemn in the
strongest terms the outrageous, deadly and totally
unacceptable attack on the United Nations that occurred
today in Benghazi, Libya. We understand that three
United Nations staff members were killed, and others
were injured. The members of the Security Council
convey their deepest condolences to the families of the
victims. Those brave workers were operating under a
mandate given by the Council in order to provide a more
secure future for the people of Libya. We commemorate
their ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace.
I ask those present to now rise and observe a minute
of silence for those killed.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita: I begin with the tragic news of the car
bomb explosion that took place in Benghazi today.
There were a number of casualties, including United
Nations staff working and living in Benghazi. We are
now in a position to confirm that three United Nations
staff members were among the fatalities. Two others
were injured and are now being treated. Scores of
Libyans are also among the injured.
This horrific attack came as the people in Benghazi
were preparing for the Eid Al-Adha holiday, in an area
2/12

10/08/2019

supposedly under the full security control of General
Haftar’s Libyan National Army (LNA) forces. It serves
to highlight the continued danger of terrorism across
the country and the limits of effective security control
in the absence of one Government and one military
and police force working across the country. It also
confirms that this latest bout of hostilities is creating a
vacuum that is easily exploited by radical elements that
thrive on chaos and violence. The United Nations does
not intend to evacuate from Libya. For the foreseeable
future, our place remains alongside the Libyan people,
like our brave colleagues who gave their lives today.
There are other significant developments today
in Libya. It is a positive development that both Prime
Minister Serraj and General Haftar’s Libyan National
Army forces have agreed to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General’s 29 July call for a truce for
the period of Eid Al-Adha to begin this evening. I can
only hope that both sides will genuinely abide by their
public commitment in good faith. This senseless and
absurd violence needs to stop.
We have made it clear on several occasions, in
front of this same audience, that no party can emerge
as the winner from the current conflict. Today is
clear evidence that there are already many losers, the
majority of whom are innocent Libyan civilians. This
message has resonated both with Libyans directly party
to the conflict and to those international and regional
stakeholders in Libya, who have seen that after more
than four months of conflict there is no quick military
win capable of resolving the complex situation on the
ground. Terrorism cannot be effectively fought under
the current circumstances on the ground, the tragedy
of illegal migration cannot be adequately addressed
and Libya’s substantial economic potential cannot be
realized for the benefit of the Libyan people or as a
stabilizing influence in the region and beyond.
In the days leading up to the truce, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya worked hard to
build confidence between the parties. The proposed
immediate humanitarian measures, including the
exchange of prisoners, the exchange of mortal remains
and visits to prisoners or phone calls, can re-establish
contacts and lower tensions to enable a truce. We urge
the parties to seize this opportunity. This is the first
step in returning to a political process. It is essential
that the truce be deepened and strengthened through
these important confidence-building measures and
that the parties quickly participate in an international
19-25137

10/08/2019

The situation in Libya

meeting to recommit to a road map to transition the
country from conflict back to a peaceful, democratic
process. Consistent with the Special Representative’s
initiative, such a meeting would then be followed by a
meeting of Libyans themselves.
The Council’s press statement of 5 July (SC/13873)
in support of the call for a truce was certainly an
important element in demonstrating the renewed
unity of the international community, its faith in the
Special Representative and its commitment to his
three-point initiative to end the conflict. The public
and private support of key Member States has also
played a considerable role in building the credibility
and necessity for the truce that is now about to start.
The situation on the ground necessitates a
countrywide truce. The continued brutal descent of
southern Libya into chaos and intercommunal feuds
is a disturbing harbinger of what may ensue should
the wider conflict persist. Simmering intercommunal
tensions between Tebu and Ahali groups in Murzuq,
exacerbated by countrywide political polarization,
took a turn for the worse. On 4 August, three LNA
air strikes against Tebu elements, including a number
of civilians, resulted in approximately 45 fatalities.
Murzuq suffers from the same environment as much
of Libya — an absence of State institutions manifested
through the absence of services, an almost total lack of
governance, a lack of impartial security forces and an
absence of hope.
It is a tragedy that so many have died in a town where
there are deep-rooted grievances that, in the current
circumstances, risk taking on a national dimension. It
is essential that the intracommunal violence in Murzuq
not spread to other towns in the south. I therefore ask
the Council to express its emphatic support to ensure
that the truce takes place not only in the areas under
the clear control of specific security forces but also in
areas where there is no clear security actor. The United
Nations family has been active in trying to address the
urgent humanitarian priorities in Murzuq through the
provision of safe passage for the injured and emergency
supplies of food, shelter and medicine.
I would like to conclude by raising an issue that
the Special Representative and many Member States
have been following closely, that is, the fate of abducted
lawmaker Siham Sergewa. Ms. Sergewa was abducted
from her home in Benghazi on 17 July and has not been
heard from since. This unacceptable attack on a female

S/PV. 8595

lawmaker constitutes a serious crime against women
and the prospect for women playing a role in political
life in Libya. We are grateful to those Member States
that have continued to follow the case closely and
reiterate our demand that the authorities in Benghazi
assume their responsibility and find those responsible
for this cowardly abduction of a female parliamentarian
in front of her family.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting at
France’s request. I also thank Ms. Bintou Keita for
her briefing. It was essential for the Security Council
to meet today in an emergency meeting given the
developments in Libya over the past few hours. The
Libyan conflict is indeed at a critical juncture.
My thoughts go out, first and foremost, to the
personnel of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) who were victims of an attack on a Mission
convoy to Benghazi, which, as Ms. Keita indicated,
killed three and injured at least two Mission personnel.
France condemns that attack in the strongest terms and
extends its condolences to the families and relatives of
the victims. France demands an immediate investigation
of the circumstances surrounding the events and calls
for the parties responsible to be held accountable. In
these tragic circumstances, I reiterate France’s firm
support for the Special Representative and staff of
UNSMIL, who work tirelessly work for peace in a very
difficult and dangerous context.
France welcomes the truce accepted today by
both sides, which represents an important first step to
alleviate the suffering of the Libyan people and create
the conditions to move towards a lasting political
solution allowing Libya to restore peace and stability.
We met here on the 29 July (see S/PV.8588) to
call on the Libyan parties to work with the Special
Representative to strike a truce for Eid Al-Adha. We
reiterated this call in our press statement of 5 August
(SC/13910) and expressed the unanimous support
of the Security Council for the efforts of Ghassan
Salamé. Since then, France, like many of its partners
and, naturally, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ghassan Salamé, has worked tirelessly with
the parties to persuade them to commit to today’s truce.

19-251373/12

S/PV.8595

The situation in Libya

We call on the Libyan National Army and the
Government of National Accord to uphold this truce
across Libya in the long term so that the discussions
necessary to going even further can be held. There is and
can be no military solution to the crisis, and continued
fighting would benefit only criminals and terrorists.
This truce is therefore essential to prevent any further
deterioration in the situation, to allow civilians to leave
conflict areas and to allow humanitarian assistance to
reach those in urgent need.
The
truce
must
be
accompanied
by
confidence-building measures aimed at laying the
groundwork for a lasting ceasefire based on credible
guarantees. The solution lies exclusively in the
implementation of a lasting ceasefire, as part of a
resumed political process under the auspices of the
Special Representative. This conclusion is shared
by Council members, and we must join together to
achieve it. France calls on the Libyan parties to resume
talks on this basis, under the auspices of the Special
Representative, so as to swiftly forge the elements of
an agreement that addresses the concerns of all parties
and, above all, the expectations of the of the Libyan
population, based on the principles agreed in Paris,
Palermo and Abu Dhabi.
These parameters must be based on security
and economic reforms that prioritize the swift
implementation of transparent governance in the
Central Bank, reformed management of oil revenue and
the unification of financial and security institutions for
the good of all Libyans. They must be complemented
by robust security provisions supported by respect
for Security Council, especially with respect to the
arms embargo.
We strongly urge all parties to seize the opportunity
provided by the truce to move towards a comprehensive
political solution, as the Council has always called for.
In this regard, we support the principles of the press
statement proposed by the United Kingdom.
I express my thanks once again and wish a happy
Eid to all those who are celebrating it.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I express my thanks
to France and to you, Madam President, for having
arranged this meeting. I also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for her briefing on this very
sobering occasion.
4/12

10/08/2019

I join others in condemning, in the strongest
terms, today’s attack on the United Nations convoy in
Benghazi. We send our deepest sympathy to the families
of the victims. The United Nations exists to help and
protect people. An attack against its representatives is
an attack on the international community at large. We
salute the work that the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) is doing in Libya.
At the same time, as the Assistant SecretaryGeneral said, scores of Libyans have also been injured.
I would like, therefore, through the representative
of Libyan, to convey my country’s condolences and
sympathies to his country and to his people and to the
families and friends of the victims. It was an appalling
act, and we agree that it should be investigated and that
those behind it should be identified and held to account.
It was particularly cruel and did great disrespect to the
Libyan people to conduct such an attack on the Eid
Al-Adha holiday.
Until this moment, we all had very high hopes for
the truce that the Security Council and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General had called
for. We call on all the parties to ensure that the truce
takes place, that it holds and that the parties commit
to confidence-building measures. In that connection,
I want to reiterate our full support for the leadership
of Special Representative Ghassan Salamé and to
thank him for his efforts in securing this truce, which
I think we all know is badly needed. As the Assistant
Secretary-General said, among all of the sadness and
violence, it is a welcome step. We need to go further.
I agree with the representative of France that this is a
critical moment for the Libyan conflict. The parties
need to go beyond the truce to commit to a permanent
ceasefire and a return to political dialogue.
There can be no military solution to the conflict
in Libya. What do we mean by that? Well, first of all,
we salute the United Nations for not evacuating in the
face of all these dangers. I echo what the Assistant
Secretary-General said to the effect that the potential of
Libya cannot be unlocked while the violence continues.
What it means to have no military solution is that we
must all call in a unified voice for the truce to take
place and to be followed by a ceasefire. We need to
implement the arms embargo and call on all States to
do so. We need to hold to account groups that violate
our resolutions or do not support the United Nations-led
process, and we need to get back into international and
then local dialogue.
19-25137

10/08/2019

The situation in Libya

Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita for her statement and for being with
us today.
At the outset, I would like to state that Belgium
deplores and condemns the attack in Benghazi this
morning against personnel of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), and to offer our
condolences for the deaths of three mission personnel
and the suffering of the others wounded. It is the
responsibility of the local authorities to identify and
convict the criminals responsible for this attack.
Moreover, international humanitarian law has
again been flagrantly violated in recent days in Libya,
with civilians being the principal victims. I therefore
denounce recent renewed attacks against Tripoli
airport and the air attack in Murzuq in the far south
on 5 August — further evidence that fighting has
spread far from the capital. It is the responsibility of the
parties to protect civilians, and I wish to reiterate my
country’s commitment to ensuring that these crimes do
not go unpunished, whether in domestic courts or the
International Criminal Court.
Belgium welcomes the truce proposed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and strongly supported by the Security Council, and
insists that the agreement between the Government of
National Accord and the Libyan National Army must
be respected. Belgium calls on the parties to refrain
from resuming military operations once the truce is
over, and to transition instead to a lasting ceasefire. At
the same time, political dialogue must resume, without
preconditions and under the mediation of Special
Representative Salamé, with a view to free Libya from
the military mindset. It is now undeniable that a such an
approach leads nowhere.
It is also crucial that the arms embargo be
respected, arms transfers stop and the recruitment of
fighters, including foreign mercenaries and terrorists
and criminals listed by the Security Council, cease.
Belgium would like the Council to take an explicit
position in this regard at the end of the meeting.
In conclusion, I should like once again to
recognize, at this painful moment, the courage and
determination of all UNSMIL staff, especially Special
Representative Salamé.

S/PV. 8595

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized this
meeting at the request of France.
We would like, in particular, to thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General, for her statement.
We likewise deplore the attack near a shopping centre
in Benghazi on the eve of Eid. We also support the
press statement condemning that criminal attack on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
We extend our sincere condolences to the families
of the victims, including UNSMIL staff members.
We hope that those who were injured will make a
speedy recovery.
Those terrorist attacks underscore the importance
of the Council’s support for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, to facilitate a comprehensive
political process commensurate with the United Nations
plan to improve the humanitarian situation by ensuring
access to humanitarian aid for those who need it.
Libyans have been facing a very difficult
humanitarian situation, which has deteriorated in
particular as a result of the recent military operations
around Tripoli. We call on all parties to ensure the
delivery of humanitarian aid without delay and without
discrimination. We also welcome the fact that the parties
to the conflict have accepted the ceasefire proposed by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
which has been supported by the Security Council.
The Council must be strongly united in support of
the ceasefire and call on all parties to the conflict to
uphold the ceasefire so that it goes hand in hand with
confidence-building measures.
We also reiterate our position that there is no
military solution to the crisis. As we said, we call on the
Libyan parties to respect and build on the Eid Al-Adha
truce while practicing restraint and showing respect for
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We also call on the Libyan parties to reach
a political settlement in line with the understandings
agreed upon in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi to ensure
transparent, comprehensive and peaceful presidential
and parliamentary elections.
The Libyan parties must uphold their national
interests above and beyond all other interests. They
must also work concretely and constructively with
the United Nations efforts to establish stability in
that brotherly Arab country and to reach a settlement

19-251375/12

S/PV.8595

The situation in Libya

in line with the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan
people to live in security and safety while ensuring the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya.
In conclusion, I would like to sincerely congratulate
the Arab and Muslim nations on the occasion of Eid
Al-Adha. We ask Allah Almighty that the Arab and
Muslim countries may repeatedly celebrate this
occasion with stability, security and prosperity.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): We thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa for her update and briefing.
We strongly condemn the cowardly attack that
took the lives of staff members of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and injured
others, including Libyan nationals. We extend our
heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims and
to the Government and the people of those injured and
killed. Our thoughts and prayers are with them today.
We look forward to the results of the investigation into
the incident by the local authorities and trust that the
perpetrators will be brought to justice.
Today’s events remind us of two things. First of
all, they again remind us of the laudable courage and
determination with which United Nations mission staff
all over the world carry out their duties in difficult and
dangerous environments. We express our firm support
to all UNSMIL staff members, under the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya, Mr. Salamé, and their tireless work for peace
and stability for the benefit of all people in Libya.
Secondly, these events also remind us of the
tragedy suffered by the people in Libya and of the
extremely high number of people in Libya who have
lost their lives or been injured or displaced due to the
outbreak of hostilities since the beginning of April.
We therefore very much welcome the announcements
by the parties to honour the truce proposed by Special
Representative Salamé on 29 July for the Eid Al-Adha
festivities. It is high time for the fighting to stop and for
the humanitarian disaster caused by it to finally end.
The Eid truce could be the first step and the parties
need to hear an unequivocal message from the Council
today. The truce needs to hold so as to relieve the
suffering among civilians and to open the door for a
return to the negotiating table. The only solution to the
conflict is political, not military. Therefore, we appeal
to all international actors to impress upon the parties
the importance of preserving the truce.
6/12

10/08/2019

Today we focus on the next hours and days in
Libya. The commitment of the parties to honouring
the truce is of key importance and no effort should be
spared to successfully implement it. At the same time,
we need to look simultaneously beyond the next few
days and hours. To that end, it is imperative that all
Libyan parties commit to a permanent ceasefire and a
return to a United Nations-facilitated political process
that paves the way for lasting peace, political stability
and unified institutions.
We therefore call on all parties to return to the
negotiating table. We strongly support the three-point
plan that Special Representative Salamé has proposed,
aimed at reviving an inclusive political process under
United Nations auspices. We ask all international
actors to support the implementation of the three-point
plan and use their influence to bring all parties back
to the political process. In that vein, we also call on
all United Nations Members to fully respect their
obligations to contribute to Libya’s peace and stability,
and in particular to respect the arms embargo, in line
with relevant Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Madam President,
for convening today’s urgent meeting. We also thank
Ms. Bintou Keita for her briefing.
The Dominican Republic rejects and totally
condemns the attack on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). Regrettably, today’s
attack in the neighbourhood of Al-Hawari, in the city
of Benghazi, claimed the lives of at least three of the
Mission’s staff members and injured several others, some
seriously. We extend our condolences to the relatives
of those who lost their lives and to UNSMIL, through
Mr. Ghassan Salamé. We hope that the approximately
12 people, including children, who were injured in the
cowardly attack will make a speedy recovery. We urge
the authorities to conduct an in-depth investigation into
the attack and bring those responsible to justice.
In June, we were shaken to the core by the bombing
of a detention centre in Tajoura. Dozens of innocent
people lost their lives in an instant. This week, we
again learned of the harrowing events that occurred
in the district of Qalaa, in the town of Murzuq, which
claimed more than 100 victims — 42 dead and more
than 60 injured — and was the result of not one, not
two, but three consecutive attacks targeting a meeting
in that community.
19-25137

10/08/2019

The situation in Libya

As we have warned since May, attacks and clashes
are resulting in an ever-increasing number of fatalities
because of a surge in the military capacity of the parties
involved. External aid, in clear violation of the arms
embargo, only exacerbates the crisis and fuels the
conflict week after week. The Council must act to end
those violations.
For the good of the Libyan people and their
interests, we call on all parties to respect the sanctity of
Eid Al-Adha, allow the festivities to take place and not
interfere with the safe return of pilgrims. We remain
hopeful that the ceasefire brokered by UNSMIL and to
which the parties committed until the end of the Eid
Al-Adha festivities will serve as a forum for reflection
and the re-evaluation of their strategies.
The Dominican Republic demands that the
ceasefire be upheld and a return to United Nationsfacilitated political dialogue. What we have seen since
the beginning of April confirms that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Libya and the parties must
recognize that fact. We call on the aggressors to commit
to protecting civilians and civilian infrastructure and to
allow, without discrimination, access for humanitarian
aid into areas affected by the conflict.
In conclusion, we call for respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her sobering
briefing today.
The United States strongly condemns the attack
in Benghazi that killed and injured United Nations
staff members and a number of civilians. We extend
our condolences and sympathies to the victims, their
families and indeed the entire United Nations family.
Today’s violence in Benghazi underscores the
need for an immediate reduction in violence and a
prompt return to the United Nations-mediated political
process. We welcome the United Nations Special
Representative’s call for a truce and commitments from
the Libyan parties to halt military activities during the
Eid Al-Adha holiday. All sides should now take durable
steps to de-escalate and reduce the ongoing violence
and to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. We
urge the sides to support confidence-building measures
also proposed by the Special Representative as steps
that could lead to a sustainable ceasefire and inclusive

S/PV. 8595

dialogue. We also urge both sides to allow humanitarian
access via protected corridors.
As it has often been repeated in the Security
Council Chamber, durable peace in Libya requires a
political solution.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Assistant Secretary General
Bintou Keita on her briefing on the security challenges
in Libya following the car-bomb attack in Benghazi
that today killed three workers from the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
Côte d’Ivoire condemns unreservedly and in the
strongest terms this attack perpetrated in a commercial
area. It addresses its most heartfelt condolences to the
grieving families at the United Nations, as well as to
UNSMIL, to which our country renews its support for
its determined commitment to finding a solution to the
Libyan crisis. Finally, my delegation wishes a prompt
and full recovery to the wounded of this barbaric attack.
As it did following the bombing of the Tajoura
detention centre, which killed 53 emigrants on 3 July,
Côte d’Ivoire calls for the perpetrators of these heinous
attacks to be brought before the competent courts.
More than four months after the beginning of hostilities
for the control of the capital, Tripoli, the Libyan crisis
is more than ever at an impasse, and today’s attack on
UNSMIL personnel must challenge our Council on the
need to bring the belligerents to accept a ceasefire.
Like the other States members of the Council, Côte
d’Ivoire has always expressed its deep concern about
the consequences of the fighting on the integrity of
UNSMIL personnel, on the security and humanitarian
situation, and on the political process for ending the
crisis in Libya.
Unfortunately, the confirmed deliveries of weapons
to the parties to the conflict, in flagrant violation of
the arms embargo, remain a source of deep concern,
especially as they fuel a conflict whose stalemate
makes it difficult to achieve a ceasefire and an
immediate resumption of the inter-Libyan dialogue. In
this context, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes General Khalifa
Haftar’s announcement today of a truce on the eve of
the Muslim holiday of Eid Al-Adha. It also welcomes
the commitment of the Government of National Accord
to alleviate the suffering of the population and its
readiness to also accept a humanitarian ceasefire for
the celebration of Eid Al-Adha. My delegation therefore
calls on the belligerents to translate their commitments

19-251377/12

S/PV.8595

The situation in Libya

into action and urges them to extend the truce in order
to relaunch the political process to end the crisis.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and for the UNSMIL staff, who
are working in a very delicate security environment.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Madam President, for calling today’s
emergency open meeting. I wish also to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Keita for her briefing.
We very strongly condemn today’s car bombing in
Benghazi, Libya. We mourn the loss of three security
officers of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and we offer our condolences to their
families and to the Mission. We wish the wounded and
injured an early recovery.
China commends UNSMIL for its work in very
challenging conditions. Nearly two weeks ago, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé
made a three-part action proposal to end Libyan
conflict, which includes the appeal to the parties to
call a humanitarian truce during Eid Al-Adha (see
S/PV.8588). The Government of National Accord’s
Presidency Council already announced its conditional
acceptance of the humanitarian truce during the
holiday. The Libyan National Army also announced
a halt of military operations during the same period.
China welcomes these developments. We hope that all
relevant parties will effectively implement the relevant
commitments and continue to respond positively to the
Special Representative’s three-part proposal and meet
each other halfway so as to create conditions for the
resumption of political talks.
The eight-year-long conflict in Libya has affected the
country itself and its neighbours, causing great suffering
to the Libyan people and threatening international peace
and security. We call upon the Libyan parties to focus
on the overall interests of the country and the people
and to work for a peaceful settlement through political
dialogue. To this end, the international community
should provide constructive assistance, bolster the
United Nations-facilitated the political settlement
process, support Special Representative Salamé in
his work, respect Libya’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, and promote peace talks, so
as to play a positive role in enabling the ceasefire and
restarting the political dialogue.
8/12

10/08/2019

China stands ready to work with international
community to assist Libya in achieving peace and
stability and in helping its people living a happy and
peaceful life at an early date.
Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to extend its sincere condolences
to the families of the United Nations staff members
who lost their lives. South Africa also wishes a speedy
recovery to all those who were injured.
My delegation thanks Ms. Bintou Keita, the
Assistant Secretary-General, for her briefing on the
events surrounding today’s incident. South Africa
echoes the Secretary-General’s condemnation of the carbombing incident that took place outside the mall in the
Al-Hawari neighbourhood of Benghazi. We further call
on all parties to the conflict to respect the humanitarian
truce that they have committed themselves to during
the Eid Al-Adha holiday, and we urge them to turn this
truce into a permanent ceasefire.
My delegation remains deeply concerned with
the human cost of the battle for Tripoli. To date over
1,100 people have been killed, with more than 100,000
persons being displaced. Equally dire is the price paid
by the African migrants who endeavour to cross the
Mediterranean Sea seeking safety. We wish to remind
the Security Council that the humanitarian ship Open
Arms has remained stuck in the Mediterranean Sea
off Italy’s southernmost island for nine days, having
received no offer for safe harbour for the 121 migrants
aboard. We therefore call on the Council to treat all
issues related to the Libyan conflict with the same sense
of urgency, which includes the plight of and attacks on
migrants. All human life matters equally.
South Africa calls on the Security Council to
support the agreement of both the Government of
National Accord and General Haftar to accede to calls
by the Secretary-General, Special Representative
Salamé and the Security Council for a humanitarian
truce. This positive development, which all of us have
been working towards, requires nurturing by all. This
humanitarian truce opens a window of opportunity for
all of us to focus on encouraging all parties to return
to negotiations and towards finding a lasting political
solution to the situation in Libya. South Africa reiterates
her position and that of the African Union that there is
no military solution to the Libyan crisis.
19-25137

10/08/2019

The situation in Libya

Lastly, in conclusion, we urge the Council to
support the African Union in bolstering the political
process to find a settlement to the conflict in Libya.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
emergency briefing on the situation in Libya. We also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita for
her briefing on such short notice. Our meeting today
is the culmination of the series of events that have
been transpiring since the beginning of April. What
we feared, and what we were constantly warned about,
happened. The lives lost in Benghazi are the result of a
prolonged conflict that has been left unresolved. Allow
me to make four pertinent points.
First, Indonesia strongly condemns in the strongest
terms the attack in Benghazi today that resulted in the
deaths0 of three staff members of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and a number of
civilian casualties. We extend our deepest condolences
to the families of the victims and to the United Nations
for their loss. Indonesia, as a contributor of personnel
to United Nations missions, also feels the loss of
those fallen.
Secondly, we call for an immediate investigation
into the attack and for its perpetrators to be brought
to justice. Attacks on humanitarian workers,
United Nations personnel and civilian facilities are
unacceptable. They must stop. We call for all parties to
the conflict to respect international humanitarian law
and human rights.
Thirdly, Indonesia reaffirms its full support to
Mr. Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and UNSMIL in restoring a unified
international position on Libya to end its current crisis.
We welcome his three-step proposal as a solution to
the conflict, which begins with the appeal for a truce
during the Eid Al-Adha holiday. We welcome the
decision by both parties for a truce during Eid Al-Adha.
We believe that our collective action in creating an
atmosphere conducive to the implementation of a truce
will be a strong building block for further steps. It is
also the very reason that we should spare no effort to
nurture and sustain confidence-building measures. It
is without a doubt that UNSMIL’s role in Libya is of
crucial importance. Any efforts, including villainous
acts towards UNSMIL personnel, will only destroy the
chance for achieving a peaceful future in Libya.

S/PV. 8595

Lastly, we urge those with ties and influence to
use their positions to push the parties to the conflict
to return to negotiating table as soon as possible. To
that end, we reiterate our call, in line with the Security
Council press statements of 5 July (SC/13873) and
5 August (SC/13910), for all States to refrain from
taking measures that will exacerbate the conflict.
On the eve of Eid Al-Adha and in the light of the
acceptance of a truce, I would like to once again appeal
for the unity of the Council to keep peace in Libya and
prevent the further loss of life.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We would like to sincerely thank and
commend Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita
for the clear and informative briefing she just delivered
on the recent developments in Libya, specifically
in Benghazi.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
unequivocal condemnation of the car bomb attack
carried out today in Benghazi, which led to the deaths
of three United Nations staff members. We convey our
deepest condolences to the United Nations, the entire
team of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and the respective families. We urge there
to be a thorough investigation to shed light on the
circumstances and for those responsible to be brought
to justice. We pay tribute to the three United Nations
staff members who lost their lives for the noble cause
of restoring peace and stability to the Libyan people.
We express our support to Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of UNSMIL, as well as his entire team. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea is profoundly dismayed
by the recent events, which is why we support the call
by Mr. Salamé for the Eid Al-Adha truce to be observed.
Today’s attack is part of the series of other attacks that
includes the one against the migrant detention centre in
Tajoura, in which 59 migrants died.
We are convinced that there is no military solution
to the situation in Libya. The only avenue forward
is direct, frank and inclusive dialogue, which is
Libyan-led and supported by the United Nations, in
coordination with the African Union. Similarly, we
would like to underscore the need to uphold international
humanitarian law and international human rights law in
order to ensure the safety and security of civilians.

19-251379/12

S/PV.8595

The situation in Libya

We strongly appeal for a definitive end to the
hostilities in Libya and for the arms embargo imposed
by the Security Council to be respected. We are also
worried that third-party agendas and interests seem to
be affecting the conflict, rather than the United Nations
and the interests of the Libyans themselves. As long as
that continues, serious doubts will be cast on the image
of this supreme institution of the United Nations.
We believe that we are sending the wrong message
to the world, specifically to those who are enduring
those barbaric attacks, the Libyans themselves, as well
as migrants and refugees stranded in that brotherly
country, who are victims of human smuggling networks
and targets of attacks in the conflict. We would like to
believe that there is still time to put this crisis on the
right path, where there is no place for external third
parties to play their damaging and negative role. We
have to be absolutely clear that what we are ultimately
talking about is innocent human lives, above all the
most vulnerable.
To conclude, we would like to reiterate our
unwavering solidarity with the Libyan people and
encourage the international community to pool its
efforts with a view to finding a peaceful solution to put
an end to the conflict. We extend our warm wishes to
the Muslim community as it celebrates Eid Al-Adha.
Mr. Talavera (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the timely convening of this emergency
meeting and the informative briefing delivered by
Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita. Peru
categorically condemns the horrendous attacks that
occurred today in Benghazi. We join other delegations
in expressing our profound condolences over the
loss of civilian civilians and those of United Nations
staff members.
In that regard, we reaffirm our support to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé and
his entire team, who are working tirelessly in very
difficult conditions. As Ms. Keita said, the ongoing
conflict is leaving behind voids that are being filled
by unscrupulous terrorist groups, which spread only
death and destruction. Peru reiterates its support for the
three-point plan presented by Special Representative
Salamé in July (see S/PV.8588). We hope that the
truce that was announced will be strictly upheld
by both parties and that it will be followed by highlevel meetings with the parties concerned, leading
to a Libyan-owned, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
10/12

10/08/2019

national dialogue. Peru urges the parties to return to the
negotiating table, with renewed mediation efforts, so as
to find a peaceful solution in an environment where a
military solution will lead only to more death.
Lastly, we urge countries able to influence the
parties to do so immediately and effectively to bring
them together and once and for all overcome all
economic and strategic considerations so as to allow
them to immediately ensure unconditional respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa Bintou Keita for her briefing on the
current situation in Libya.
The reason for our meeting today is very sad. We
listened with deep regret to the information that we
received from Libya pertaining to the terrorist attack
in Benghazi, which according to reports led to the
deaths of two staff members of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya. We offer our condolences to
the United Nations and the families and friends of the
victims. We condemn this and other terrorist attacks
that have resulted in the deaths of Libyan civilians.
Furthermore, I must note that, over the past two
to three weeks, several hundred migrants travelling to
Europe from Libya and other countries have drowned
after their boats capsized in the Mediterranean Sea.
Those are just some of the most recent among a multitude
of catastrophes that have befallen Libyans and other
Africans who have abandoned all hope for stability and
peace in their countries. During the minute of silence
that you declared, Madam President, our thoughts were
also with them. After all, all lives matter.
It is clear that the worst-case predictions that we
have made on many occasions are becoming a reality;
as a result of the strife, terrorist groups are becoming
increasingly active, in part, owing to the fact that
jihadists from other Arab States, especially Syria and
Iraq, are infiltrating Libya. All of that only further
reaffirms the urgency of our calls to join efforts in
the uncompromising fight against this universal evil.
At the same time, it is imperative to set aside double
standards and avoid fraternizing with radicals in order
to use them to opportunistic ends.
We are also concerned about the situation
concerning illegal migration, but the solution to that
problem hardly resides in imposing sanctions. The true
19-25137

10/08/2019

The situation in Libya

causes underpinning the mass movement of people
lie primarily in socioeconomic distress and conflict
situations. However, it is not the migrants that must be
dealt with, but rather the root causes of the problem.
All of the tragic events that I just mentioned only
underscore the instability of the internal situation in
Libya. What is happening there is a direct consequence
of the destruction of Libyan statehood during the
well-known events of 2011, as a result of which the
country has found itself in a catastrophic situation.
We would like to believe that those who were behind
that risky geopolitical adventure fully understand their
responsibility for the collapse of this State and the
terrorist chaos that African countries neighbouring
Libya continue to experience to this day.
It is also clear to us that the continued fighting in
Libya is only exacerbating the situation. The number
of people killed, injured and internally displaced is
increasing, and urban infrastructure is being destroyed.
Humanitarian organizations are sounding the alarm.
There are simply no alternatives to a political and
diplomatic solution to the issue of national reconciliation
and the re-establishment of unified and effective State
institutions. We regret to note that trust has eroded
among the warring parties. We draw the attention of
all the Libyan parties to our principled position based
on support for political outcomes and United Nations
mediation efforts. As we have repeatedly stressed, the
United Nations must play a central role in such efforts.
We support the immediate cessation of military
operations and the rejection by all parties of aggressive
statements. It is important that the Libyan parties
demonstrate calm and restraint. Calls to that end
should be made in a balanced manner on all parties to
the conflict. In that regard, we learned with optimism
about the ceasefire agreement reached among the
opposing Libyan parties thanks to the mediation efforts
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salamé. We hope that the ceasefire will
last, and we express our support for the efforts of the
Special Representative.
The problem of the illicit proliferation of weapons
in Libya, the flow of which is destabilizing the security
situation both in the country and in the Sahara-Sahel
region, remains pressing. In that regard, we believe that
it is important to refrain from taking steps, including
with regard to the arms embargo on Libya, that

S/PV. 8595

could hinder the process of establishing dialogue and
cooperation among key Libyan political forces.
In conclusion, we remain convinced that ascribing
guilt to members of the warring Libyan parties is
counterproductive. Attempts to selectively attribute
responsibility will only fuel passions and make it
difficult to resume the political process in Libya.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, for her
briefing on today’s tragic events in Benghazi. First
of all, let me express my sincere condolences on the
deaths of three staff members of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). In this moment
of mourning, our thoughts and prayers are with the
families and friends of the victims and all UNSMIL
personnel on the ground.
Poland condemns in the strongest terms today’s
attack on the UNSMIL vehicle carried out in Benghazi,
which resulted in the deaths of three staff members
and the injury of at least eight other people. Those
responsible for this cowardly act of violence must be
held accountable and brought to justice.
We very much regret that this heinous terrorist
attack took place one day before Eid Al-Adha, at the
beginning of the UNSMIL-facilitated truce. It clearly
shows that the full and comprehensive cessation of
hostilities is of the utmost importance. It also reminds
us that United Nations personnel very often pay the
ultimate price for their dedication to saving humankind
from hell, as Dag Hammarskjöld once said.
Therefore, I would like to reiterate Poland’s
full support for all efforts undertaken by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé and
UNSMIL in very challenging circumstances aimed at
bringing security, stability and national unity to Libya.
We fully support the press statement proposed by the
United Kingdom.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on Poland’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you every success in this

19-2513711/12

S/PV.8595

The situation in Libya

endeavour. Let me also thank you for convening this
important meeting to discuss the latest developments
in my country. I would also like to thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, for
her briefing.
We have followed with grief and interest the
cowardly terrorist attack on Benghazi today, which
killed three staff members of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and injured
other personnel, as well as Libyans who were present
there. The Government of National Accord strongly
condemns such cowardly terrorist attacks. It expresses
its deepest condolences to the families of the victims
and deplores the fact that UNSMIL personnel and other
civilians were injured as a result of that terrorist attack.
We wish them a speedy recovery.
The Government of National Accord reiterates its
commitment to fighting terrorism in all its forms. We
stress our continued readiness to fully cooperate with the
international community in ending this scourge in line
with the agreed regional and international mechanisms.
Today’s cowardly attack in Benghazi comes
after the abduction two weeks ago of a Member of
Parliament, Ms. Siham Sergewa, whose fate is as yet
unknown. All this refutes the claims that the so-called
Libyan Army has eradicated terrorism in Benghazi
and is working towards that end in other areas with a
view to cleansing Libya of terrorist groups. The truth is

12/12

10/08/2019

that what is happening is the opposite: the aggression
against Tripoli and its outskirts represents a real
disaster. This aggression has led to grave human and
financial losses, displaced more than 100,000 citizens
and caused tremendous damage to the infrastructure,
leading to power outages and water shortages, and has
exacerbated the humanitarian suffering of our citizens.
In response to the initiative of Mr. Ghassan Salamé
calling for a truce during holy Eid Al-Adha, as well
as the Security Council statement of 12 August 2019
supporting that initiative, the Presidential Council of
the Government of National Accord responded and
announced that it would be willing to accept the truce
provided it includes all areas of fighting; that all direct
and indirect shooting stops; that no military advance
takes place; that all aviation activities are prohibited
from all aerial bases; that such truce is not misused to
move soldiers or mobilize powers; and that UNSMIL
guarantees the implementation of the truce and
monitors any violations thereof.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that there can be
no military solution to the crisis in Libya. Peaceful
political dialogue among Libyans who believe in a civil
State is the only way to achieve security and stability
in the country.
Before I conclude, I wish to congratulate all
Muslims on holy Eid Al-Adha.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

19-25137
