UNITED NATIONS

/ NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

FIFTH
YEAR
462nd MEETING: 17 JANUARY 1950
CINQUIEME
ANNEE
462eme SEANCE: 17 JANVIER 1950

No. 4

C O N S E I L DE S E C U R I T E
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
LAKE SUCCESS,

NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

1. Provisional agenda

1

2. Adoption of the agenda

1

3. Regulation and reduction of conventional armaments and armed forces (continued)

3

4. Draft amendment to the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council (S/1447)

10

5. Draft resolution submitted by the representative of Yugoslavia at the 46lst meeting
of the Security Council on 13 January 1950 (S/1448/Rev. 1)

13

TABLE DES MATIERES
1. Ordre du jour provisoire

1

2. Adoption de 1'ordre du jour

1

3. Reglementation et reduction des armements de type classique et des forces armees (suite)

3

4. Projet d'amendement au reglement interieur provisoire du Conseil de securite (S/1447)

10

5. Projet de resolution soumis par le representant de la Yougoslavie a la 46leme seance
T dS Consril desecwriteYJe 13 Janvier 1950 (S/1448/Rev. 1)

13

* *. v. '" " v E D
Jl>.•• ; . 'J50

S/PV.462

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings of the
Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official Records.
All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital letters
combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans le texte
des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements mensuels aux
Proces-verbaux officiels.
Les documents des Nations Unies portent tous une cote, qui se compose de
lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte
signifte qu'il s'agit d'un document des Nations Unies.

FOUR HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SECOND MEETING
Held at Lake Success, New York on Tuesday, 17 January 1 9 5 0 , at 3 p.m.
QUATRE CENT SOIXANTE-DEUXIEME

SEANCE

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York, le mardi 17 Janvier 1 9 5 0 , a 15 heures

President:

Mr. T. F . TSIANG (China).

President:

M. T. F . TSIANG (Chine).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, France, India,
Norway, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Yugoslavia.

Presents:
Les representants des pays suivants:
Chine, Cuba, Equateur. Egypte, France, Inde, Norvege, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande
du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Yougoslavie.

1. P r o v i s i o n a l a g e n d a ( S / A g e n d a 4 6 2 )

1. O r d r e d u j o u r p r o v i s o i r e

(S/Agenda 462)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 6 December 1949 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council transmitting the text of a resolution concerning the regulation and reduction of conventional
armaments and armed forces adopted by the General Assembly at its 268th meeting on 5 December
1949 ( S / 1 4 2 9 ) .
3. Letter dated 13 January 1950 from the representative of India addressed to the President of the
Security Council transmitting the text of a draft
amendment to the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council ( S / 1 4 4 7 ) .
4. Draft resolution submitted by the representative uf
Yugoslavia at the 461st meeting of the Security
Council on 13 January 1950 (S/1448/Rev. 1).

3.

4

The PRESIDENT: During this meeting interpretation
will be simultaneous.

Adoption de 1'ordre du jour.
Lettre, en date du 6 decembre 1949, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par le Secretaire
general et transmettant le texte d'une resolution
relative a la reglementation et a la reduction des
armements de type classique et des forces armees, adoptee le 5 decembre 1949 par l'Assemblee
generale a sa 268eme seance pleniere ( S / 1 4 2 9 ) .
Lettre, en date du 13 Janvier 1950, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par le representant de l'lnde et transmettant le texte d'un projet
d'amendements au reglement interieur provisoire
du Conseil de securite ( S / 1 4 4 7 ) .
Projet de resolution soumis par le representant
de la Yougoslavie a la 461eme seance du Conseil
de securite, le 13 Janvier 1950 ( S / 1 4 4 8 ) .

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais): Le Conseil
utilisera Interpretation simultanee a la presente seance.

2. Adoption of the agenda

2.

Mr. BEBLER (Yugoslavia) (translated from French) :
Members of the Council, I think that there is hardly
any need to repeat the arguments which I advanced
at the 461st meeting when I presented orally the proposal which is now before the Council in the form of a
written draft resolution. I refer to document S/1448/Rev. 1.
I see that the question is on the provisional agenda
as item 4. As I stressed at the preceding meeting, I
consider it to be a question which should have precedence over any other question of substance the Council
may have to discuss or decide upon. It should have
priority because it involves a decision regarding the
presidency which would affect our method of work.

A d o p t i o n d e 1'ordre d u j o u r

M. BEBLER (Yougoslavie) : Messieurs les representants, je crois qu'il est a peine besoin de revenir
sur les arguments que j'ai soumis, lors de la 461eme
seance, alors que je vous saisissais oralement de la proposition qui est aujourd'hui devant vous sous la forme
ecrite, comme projet de resolution. II s'agit du document S/1448.
Je constate que cette question figure a 1'ordre du
jour provisoire comme point 4. Or, j'ai deja souldgne,
au cours de la derniere seance, que je considerais
cette question comme prejudicielle par rapport a toute
autre question de fond que le Conseil aurait a discuter ou sur laquelle il aurait a prendre une decision
Elle est prejudicielle, puisqu'elle tend a ce qu'une decision soit prise sur notre maniere de travailler, en ce
qui concerne la presidence.

1

I believe—and I shall only repeat my arguments very
briefly—that it is clear from our vote of the other day
that the powers of the delegation which presides over
our meeting at this time have been questioned and have
provoked very serious objections. My delegation does
not therefore consider it conducive to the authority
of the Council that it should meet under the presidency
of the delegation concerned.

Je crois — et je ne repete mon argumentation que
tres brievement — qu'il resulte clairement de notre
vote de l'autre jour que nos seances sont, pour le
moment, presidees par une delegation dont les pleins
pouvoirs ont ete mis en question et ont souleve des
objections tres graves. Par consequent, ma delegation
n'estime pas qu'il soit utile, pour l'autorite du Conseil, de sieger precisement sous la presidence de cette
delegation.

My delegation consequently believes that the order
of the items on the provisional agenda should be reversed, so that item 4 would become item 2 ; item 2 would
become item 3 ; and item 3 would become item 4 . 1 make
a formal proposal to that effect.

Ma. delegation considere done qu'il nous faudrait
adopter un ordre du jour dont les divers points figureraient en sens inverse: le point 4 deviendrait le
point 2 ; le point 2 deviendrait le point 3 ; et le point 3
deviendrait le point 4. J'en fais la proposition formelle.

The PRESIDENT: I understand that the representative
of France has some remarks to make on the question of
interpretation, and I therefore call upon him now.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais): Je crois que le
representant de la France a quelques observations a
presenter sur la question de l'interpretation; je lui
donne done la parole.

Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated
from
French) : I wish merely to draw the President's attention to the fact that my delegation has not yet been
consulted on his proposal regarding simultaneous interpretation of our discussion. I see no reason for deviating from the established rule.

M. DE LA TOURNELLE ( F r a n c e ) : J e voudrais simplement appeler l'attention du President sur le fait
que ma delegation n'a pas ete consultee au sujet de la
proposition qu'il a faite relativement a l'interpretation
simultanee de nos debats. J e ne vois aucune raison
pour que nous transgressions la regie qui a ete etablie.

I therefore have the honour to request the President
to call for consecutive, and not simultaneous, interpretation.

E n consequence, j ' a i l'honneur de demander au
President de bien vouloir faire proceder a l'interpretation consecutive, et non pas simultanee.

The PRESIDENT: The practice of employing the system of simultaneous interpretation was followed during
the month of December. During this month I allowed
it to drop, rather inadvertently. I had hoped that the
Secretariat would have made preparations for simultaneous interpretation at the first meeting held this
month, but when I arrived I found that the facilities
were not ready. That is the reason why we have not
adopted simultaneous interpretation until now. I hope
that the representative of France may find it possible
to accept simultaneous interpretation. If, however, he
insists on consecutive interpretation we shall return to
that system.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais): Durant le
mois de decembre, le Conseil s'est servi de l'interpretation simultanee. Ce mois-ci, c'est quelque peu par
inadvertance que j'ai laisse le Conseil abandonner ce
systeme d'interpretation. J'avais espere que le Secretariat aurait pris les mesures necessaires pour permettre l'emploi de l'interpretation simultanee au cours
de la premiere seance de Janvier, mais, au moment
ou je suis arrive, j'ai constate qu'on n'avait pas pris de
dispositions a cet effet. C'est la raison pour laquelle
nous n'ayons pas, jusqu'a maintenant, l'interpretation
simultanee. J'espere que le representant de la France
acceptera le systeme de l'interpretation simultanee. Si
toutefois il insiste pour que nous revenions a. l'interpretation consecutive, nous emploierions a nouveau ce
dernier systeme.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom): In
order to save time, would it be possible to revert to a
practice which we have employed in the past whereby,
if a member of the Council speaks in Spanish or in
Russian then, in order to avoid two consecutive interpretations, there is a simultaneous interpretation into
French or English and, thereafter, a consecutive interpretation into English or French? That does save the
necessity of having two consecutive interpretations
which take up a great deal of time.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni) (traduit
de Vanglais): Pour gagner du temps, ne serait-il pas
possible de revenir a la methode que nous avons appliquee dans le passe, selon laquelle, si un membre du
Conseil s'exprime en espagnol ou en russe, l'interpretation est donnee simultanement en francais ou en
anglais pour eviter deux interpretations consecutives,
et, ensuite, l'interpretation consecutive est donnee en
anglais ou francais? Cette methode permet d'eviter de
donner deux interpretations consecutives, ce qui necessite beaucoup de temps.

Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE ( F r a n c e ) (translated
from
French): I fully agree with the proposal made by the
United Kingdom representative.

M. DE LA TOURNELLE ( F r a n c e ) : J e m'associe entierement a la proposition faite par la delegation du
Royaume-Uni.

T h e PRESIDENT: The practice, therefore, will be consecutive interpretation into either English or French

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais): Si le Conseil
est d'accord, nous emploierons done l'interpretation

and simultaneous interpretation into the other language,
if that is agreeable to all representatives.

consecutive en anglais ou en franqais et l'interpretation simultanee dans la langue qui n'aura pas ete
l'objet de l'interpretation consecutive.

The representative of Yugoslavia has proposed that
item 4 of the provisional agenda should become item 2.
I wish to explain to the Council why I arranged the
agenda in its present form. Item 2 is unfinished business,
and in accordance with our rules of procedure it should
be placed at the head of our agenda. Item 3 consists
of a draft resolution which was submitted by the delegation of India [S/1447] and which was transmitted
to me before the draft resolution of the delegation of
Yugoslavia. Under the rules of procedure these draft
resolutions are put to the Security Council according
to the chonological order of their submission.

Le representant de la Yougoslavie a propose que le
point 4 de 1'ordre du jour provisoire devint le point 2.
Je tiens a. expliquer au Conseil les raisons pour lesquelles j'ai etabli 1'ordre du jour sous sa forme
actuelle. Le point 2 porte sur une question dont
l'examen n'est pas acheve, et, conformement a notre
reglement interieur, il doit etre inscrit au debut de
notre ordre du jour. Le point 3 a trait a un projet de
resolution qui a ete presente par la delegation de
L'lnde [S/1447] et qui m'a ete transmis avant le
projet de resolution de la Yougoslavie. En vertu du
reglement interieur, ces projets de resolution doivent
etre soumis au Conseil dans 1'ordre chronologique de
leur presentation.

As to the argument just advanced by the representative of Yugoslavia, I would say simply that while, in
his opinion, his draft resolution may be important, it
cannot be considered by its nature to be a privileged
resolution in a parliamentary sense. For those reasons
I have submitted the present order of business which
I hope the Council will maintain.

Quant aux arguments qu'a invoques le representant
de la Yougoslavie, je tiens a declarer simplement que,
si, a son sens, son projet de resolution revet une certaine importance, il ne peut, de par sa nature, avoir
la priorite du point de vue de la procedure parlementaire. C'est pour ces raisons que j'ai fixe 1'ordre des
differents points de 1'ordre du jour provisoire et j'espere que le Conseil le maintiendra tel quel.

The proposal before the Council is that item 4 of the
agenda should become item 2.

La proposition dont le Conseil est saisi tend a. intervertir 1'ordre des points 4 et 2.

A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

// est procede au vote a main levee.

In favour: Yugoslavia.

Vote pour: la Yougoslavie.

Against: China, Cuba, Egypt, France, Norway,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining: Ecuador, India.
Absent: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The proposal was rejected by 7 votes to 1, with 2
abstentions, one member being absent.
The agenda was adopted.

Votent contre: Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France, Norvege, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande
du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
S'abstiennent: Equateur, Inde.
Est absente: l'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.
Par 7 voix contre une, avec 2 abstentions, un des
membres du Conseil etant absent, la proposition est
rejetee.
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

3. Regulation and reduction of conventional
armaments and armed forces (continued)

3. Reglementation et reduction des armements de type classique et des forces
armees (suite)

Mr. GROSS (United States of America): At the close
of the 461st meeting I said that I had a brief remark
to make on the draft resolution introduced by the representative of France [S/1445] which called upon the
Security Council to transmit to the Commission for
Conventional Armaments General Assembly resolution
300 (IV) concerning the regulation and reduction of
conventional armaments and armed forces which, as
the members of the Council know, was adopted on 5
December 1949.

M. GROSS (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de
Vanglais) : A Tissue de la 461eme seance, j'ai indique
que j'aurais quelques breves remarques a faire sur le
projet de resolution presente par le representant de
la France [S/1445] et qui invite le Conseil de securite a transmettre a la Commission des armements
de type classique la resolution 300 (IV) de TAssemiblee generale relative a la reglementation et a. la
reduction des armements de type classique et des
forces armees, resolution adoptee, comme le savent
les membres du Conseil, le 5 decembre 1949.

Confining my comments to comparatively the same
brief compass which I intended for them on Friday,
I should like to say that my delegation will, of course,
support the draft resolution introduced by the repre-

Je ne developperai guere plus mes observations que
je n'entendais le faire vendredi dernier. Je tiens simpliment a. dire que ma delegation appuiera, bien entendu, le projet de resolution presente par le repre-

sentative of France. As I made clear during our last
meeting and, indeed, during the [460th] meeting before
that, my Government attaches great importance to the
matter of the regulation and reduction of conventional
armaments and armed forces.

sen tant de la France. Comme je l'ai indique clairement au cours de notre derniere seance et, en fait,
auparavant deja, lors de la 460eme seance, mon
Gouvernement attache la plus grande importance a la
question de la reglementation et de la reduction des
armements de type classique et des forces armees.

We followed with very close interest the concern
which was evidenced by Member nations during the
discussion of this question at the fourth session of the
General Assembly, to the effect that the circumstances
of the world situation have to date permitted so little
progress to be made in this field. We shared the regret
voiced by these nations that, because of the opposition
of the Soviet Union, it was not possible to take the constructive step provided for in the arms census and
verification proposals which had been developed by the
Commission for Conventional Armaments [S/1372],
This proposal [S/1399/Rev. 1], of course, had been
approved by an overwhelming majority of the Security
Council [452nd meeting], as well as by the Ad Hoc
Political Committee1 and by the fourth session of the
General Assembly itself in plenary meeting.2

Nous avons note avec le plus grand interet que les
Etats Membres, au cours de la discussion de cette
question a la quatrieme session de l'Assemblee generate, se sont inquietes de constater que la situation
mondiale n'avait permis jusqu'ici que tres peu de
progres dans ce domaine. Tout comme ces nations,
nous regrettons que, en raison de l'opposition de
l'Union sovietique, il n'ait pas ete possible de prendre
les mesures constructives prevues dans les propositions sur le recensement et la verification des armements elaborees par la Commission des armements de
type classique [S/1372]. Tout naturellement, ces
propositions [SI 1399/Rev. 1] ont ete approuvees par
une majorite ecrasante du Conseil de securite
[452eme seance], ainsi que par la Commission politique speciale1 et l'Assemblee generale reunie en
seance pleniere, lors de la quatrieme session de cet
organe2.

Despite the discouragement which we faced, however, and which makes it impossible at this time to put
into effect the arms census and verification proposal,
the General Assembly, at its fourth session, felt that
there was much useful planning work to be done by
the Commission for Conventional Armaments. In its
resolution of 5 December 1949, the General Assembly
called upon the Security Council, through the agency
of the Commission, to go forward with this work "in
order to make such progress as may be possible."

En depit des difficultes que nous avons rencontrees
et qui rendent actuellement impossible la mise en
ceuvre des propositions sur le recensement et la verification des armements, l'Assemblee generale, a sa
quatrieme session, a juge que la Commission des
armements de type classique pourrait accomplir un
tres utile travail de preparation. Dans sa resolution
du 5 decembre 1949, l'Assemblee generale a invite
le Conseil a poursuivre ses travaux, par l'entremise
de cette commission, "afin de realiser tels progres qui
seront possibles"

My Government shares the hope of the General
Assembly that, in continuing its study and planning
work, the Commission for Conventional Armaments
may succeed in finding some area of agreement for the
solution of the problems which have been assigned to it.

Mon Gouvernement souhaite, tout comme l'Assemblee generale, que la Commission des armements de
type classique, en poursuivant ses etudes et ses
travaux preparatoires, reussisse a trouver quelque
base d'accord en vue de resoudre les problemes dont
l'etude lui a ete confiee.

It is for these reasons that my Government supports
the draft resolution introduced by the representative
of France.

C'est pour ces raisons que mon Gouvernement
appuie le projet de resolution presente par le representant de la France.

Mr. SUNDE (Norway) : The General Assembly resolution which is now before us was, as the members of
the Council know, proposed jointly by the French and
Norwegian delegations. It is not necessary to repeat
here the reasons for which we joined with the French
delegation in making the proposal; they were carefully
explained during the deliberations both in the Ad Hoc
Political Committee and in the plenary meeting of the
General Assembly.

M. SUNDE (Norvege) (traduit de Vanglais):
Comme le savent les membres du Conseil, la resolution de l'Assemblee generale dont nous nous trouvons
actuellement saisis a ete presentee conjointement par
les delegations de la France et de la Norvege. II
n'est pas necessaire que je repete ici les raisons pour
lesquelles nous nous sommes joints a la delegation de
la France pour faire cette proposition. Ces raisons ont
ete clairement exposees au cours de la discussion, tant
a la Commission politique speciale qu'en seance pleniere de l'Assemblee generale.
Permettez-moi seulement d'ajouter que notre position est toujours dictee par un melange de prudence,
d'optimisme et d'espoir. L'objectif general que cons-

Let me just add that our position is still determined
by cautious optimism and hopefulness. The general objective of regulating armaments is too important for the

'See Official Records of the fourth session of the General 'Voir les Documents officiels de la quatrieme session de
Assembly, Ad Hoc Political Committee, 43rd meeting.
l'Assemblee generate, Commission politique speciale, 43eme
seance.
'Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 268th meeting.
2
Ibid., 268eme seance pleniere.

future security and happiness of mankind to be abandoned or postponed because major policy questions
remain stubbornly unresolved. We must not concede
defeat. A solution has to be found to the major problem of atomic energy, and in the meantime we must
proceed with the preparation of plans for the regulation
and reduction of conventional armaments which can
ultimately be integrated into a general plan covering
all types of armaments.

The Norwegian delegation fully agrees with the
statement of the representative of France and will vote
for his proposal.
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): My country was
among those Members of the United Nations which
approved General Assembly resolution 192 (III) of
19 November 1948 and, later on, General Assembly
resolution 300 (IV) of 5 December 1949. The objective
of both of these resolutions is the continuation of our
exploration of the possibilities for the reduction of armaments—a matter which, as the preceding speakers
have indicated, is of great importance to the United
Nations and to the whole world.

titue la reglementation des armements revet trop
d'importance pour la securite et le bonheur futurs de
l'humanite pour qu'on l'abandonne ou qu'on en remette la realisation parce qu'on a systematiquement
persiste a laisser sans solution certaines questions de
principe fondamentales. II ne faut pas admettre la
defaite; il faut trouver une solution au probleme
fondamental de Tenergie atomique et, dans l'intervalle,
poursuivre la preparation de plans en vue de la reglementation et de la reduction des armements de type
classique, plans qui pourront, finalement, s'integrer
dans un plan general s'etendant a tous les types
d'armes.
La delegation de la Norvege approuve sans reserve
ce qui a dit le representant de la France et votera
pour la proposition presentee par ce dernier.
Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de Vanglais): Mon pays se trouve parmi les Membres de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies qui ont approuve la
resolution 192 (III) de l'Assemblee generale en date
du 19 novembre 1948 et, par la suite, la resolution
300 (IV) de l'Assemblee generate en date du 5 decembre 1949. Ces resolutions tendent Tune et Tautre
a ce que nous continuions d'examiner les possibilites
d'une reduction des armements, question qui, comme
Tont indique les orateurs precedents, revet la plus
grande importance pour l'Organisation des Nations
Unies et le monde entier.

I am glad to recall in this connexion that, since 1946,
my country has been instrumental in the adoption of
resolutions aimed at the reduction of armaments. I am
equally glad to recall the close co-operation which has
existed between my delegation and the delegation of
France, particularly with regard to resolution 41 (I)
adopted during the second part of the first session of
the General Assembly.

Je suis heureux de rappeler, a ce sujet, que, depuis
1946, mon pays a contribue a l'adoption de resolutions
tendant a la reduction des armements. Je suis egalement heureux de rappeler la cooperation etroite qui
a existe entre ma delegation et celle de la France,
notamment en ce qui concerne la resolution 41 ( I ) ,
adoptee au cours de la seconde partie de la premiere
session de l'Assemblee generale.

The aim of the General Assembly resolution of 5
December 1949 is very clear indeed: it is to continue the
study of the reduction of armaments. The resolution
states that this is to be done despite the lack of unanimity among the permanent members of the Security
Council. Of course, we understand the importance of
unanimity in this matter—especially when it is noted
that, in speaking of a lack of unanimity, what is actually
meant is the absence of the agreement of one or more
of the great Powers of the world. I am not trying to
attribute the fault to one or the other party. Whatever
the cause may be the fact remains that unanimity is
lacking, and that one or more of those members who do
not give their approval to the proposed schemes happen
to be among the great nations which hold great stores
of—perhaps not exactly wisdom—but arms and armaments and possibilities of expansion and destruction.

L'objectif de la resolution adoptee par l'Assemblee
generale en date du 5 decembre 1949 est on ne peut
plus clair: cette resolution recommande que l'etude
de la reduction des armements soit poursuivie. La
resolution indique que cette etude doit se poursuivre
en depit de l'absence d'unanimite des membres permanents du Conseil de securite. Naturellement, nous
comprenons ^importance de l'unanimite dans ce domaine, surtout lorsqu'on songe que, dans ce cas, l'absence d'unanimite signifie en fait opposition d'une ou de
plusieurs des grandes Puissances mondiales. Je n'essaie
pas de rejeter la faute sur une ou sur une autre partie.
Quelle que soit la cause de cet etat de choses, un fait
demeure, c'est que l'unanimite fait defaut et que le ou
les membres qui ne donnent pas leur approbation au
plan propose se trouvent parmi les grandes nations
qui possedent de grandes reserves — reserves d'armes
et d'armements plutot peut-etre que de ponderation —
et qui ont des possiblites d'expansion et de destruction.

I need not—indeed I cannot—over-emphasize the
anxiety of the world about this growing tension due to
the hardening situation in connexion with armaments.
For a long time, the world has been expecting results,
practical and actual results, from us. Up to now, the
world has been getting merely words from us—and not
good words at that, just words. We have been trying,

II n'est pas besoin — en fait, il n'est pas possible
— d'exagerer Tinquietude qu'eveille dans le monde
cette tension croissante due au raidissement des attitudes en ce qui concerne les armements. Pendant longtemps, le monde a espere de nous des resultats
pratiques et reels. Jusqu'ici, le monde n'a recu de
nous que des paroles, pas meme de bonnes paroles,

but not well enough. We can see, not only from the first
or other pages of the newspapers but from the faces of
the people in the street, how worried they are. We can
see this, we can hear it, everywhere we go. Recently, it
has been very difficult to go anywhere, to attend any
meeting, without feeling very clearly and very distinctly
this growing anxiety of the world. When someone
among us, therefore, steps forward now and says, "We
should do something about it; we should start to do
something about it again; we should resume our efforts," we must give him our full support. If we cannot
immediately accomplish results, we must at least begin
to do something in that direction. That is the least we
should do, and it is exactly what the representative of
France is asking us to do. I shall unhesitatingly support
his proposal.

simplement des paroles. Nous avons essaye de fai.e
quelque chose mais pas assez energiquement. Nous
pouvons voir, non seulement en lisant la premiere ou
les autres pages des journaux, mais aussi en regardant les visages des gens dans la rue, combien les
hommes sont inquiets. Nous pouvons constater cette
inquietude, nous pouvons Tentendre s'exprimer oil
que nous allions. Recemment, il est devenu bien difficile d'aller quelque part, d'assister a des reunions
sans avoir le sentiment tres net et clair de cette
inquietude mondiale croissante; aussi, lorsque Tun
de nous vient nous dire: "II faut faire quelque chose
pour remedier a cette situation, il faut tenter a. nouveau de faire quelque chose; il faut renouveler nos
efforts", nous devons lui donner tout notre appui. Si
nous ne pouvons arriver a des resultats, nous devons,
tout au moins, nous mettre a travailler dans ce sens.
C'est le moins que nous puissions faire, et c'est
exactement ce que le representant de la France nous
demande de faire. J'appuierai sans hesitation sa
proposition.

After the interpretation into French of the above
remarks, Mahmoud Fawzi Bey, representative of
Egypt, continued as follows:

Apres interpretation en frangais des remarques cidessus, Mahmoud Fawzi Bey, representant de l'Egypte,
continue en ces termes:

With the permission of the President and the Council
I should like to add one further point which is clear, but
which I consider essential to put on record.

Avec la permission du President et du Conseil, je
voudrais exposer ensuite un autre point, qui est
bien connu, mais que je considere essentiel de faire
consigner.

The preliminary stage of the question of the reduction of armaments, as has been stated, is set forth in
the resolutions of the General Assembly, and more particularly, in resolution 192 (III) of 19 November 1948
and resolution 300 (IV) of 5 December 1949. The preliminary stage of the reduction of armaments is the
submission by Member States of complete information
on their conventional armaments and armed forces, and
its verification. As Members of the United Nations
and of the family of nations, they are to provide information, as I understand it, on all kinds of armaments
of mass destruction. At the same time, I well understand—and I take it that this is the understanding of
all the Members of the United Nations—that each
Member of the United Nations is to supply, in due
course, full information as required by the United
Nations, and that the submission of full information
is to be multilateral and not from one side. It cannot
be imagined that one or several parties would agree to
submit information if others would not agree. If one
party wishes to volunteer information, that is up to him
to do so, but it is only fair to admit that if some parties
refuse to submit information they have no right whatsoever to ask other parties to submit it.

La premiere question a resoudre, quand il s'agit
de reduction des armements, se trouve exposee dans
les resolutions de l'Assemblee generale et, tout particulierement, dans la resolution 192 (III) du 19
novembre 1948 et dans la resolution 300 (IV) du 5
decembre 1949. A ce stade preliminaire de la reduction des armements, la mesure initiate que les Etats
Membres ont a prendre est de fournir des renseignements complets et verifiables sur leurs armements
de type classique et leurs forces armees. En tant que
Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et
membres de la famille des nations, ces Etats devront,
si je comprends bien, fournir des renseignements sur
tous les types d'armements de destruction massives.
Je congois, d'autre part — comme le concpivent sans
doute tous les Membres de l'Organisation — que
chaque Etat Membre des Nations Unies devra fournir, en temps voulu, les renseignements complets
demandes par l'Organisation et que cette communication de renseignements complets aura un caractere
multilateral, et non pas unilateral. II serait, en effet,
difficile d'imaginer qu'une ou plusieurs parties accepteraient de fournir des renseignements au cas ou
les autres refuseraient de le faire. Si une des parties
offrait volontairement de fournir des informations,
libre a elle, mais, en toute justice, il faut reconnaitre
que celles des parties qui refuseraient de communiquer des renseignements n'auraient pas le droit de
demander aux autres d'en fournir.

We hope and trust that every Member of the United
Nations will come to this civilized conclusion of agreeing to submit information regarding its armaments, no
matter what kind of armaments they may be, regarding
its weapons of mass destruction, no matter what kind
of weapons they may be.

Nous esperons fermement que tous les Membres
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies arriveront a une
decision digne des nations civilisees et accepteront
de fournir des renseignements concernant leurs armements et leurs armes de destruction massive, quel que
soit le type d'armements et d'armes qu'ils possedent.

We must have no hesitancy on this matter. I can see
no justifiable reason for any hesitancy if we have a
well-balanced system of exchanging full information on
armaments. This is not a matter of luxury. This is a
matter which strikes at the very essence of the survival
of the human race. We have to accept it seriously. We
must go ahead immediately with our work and accomplish results.

Mr. BEBLER (Yugoslavia) (translated from French):
I merely wish to explain my vote.
In discussing this question and deciding to vote on
the draft resolution before us, we have touched upon a
matter which—as certain speakers have just said—has
been the cause of grave concern, but which has also
given rise to bitter discussion, and in which the serious
conflict between the great Powers has been most clearly
shown in the United Nations.
During the past several years we have witnessed,
both in the General Assembly and in the Security Council, profound and constant disagreement over that very
matter between two of the great Powers—the United
States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
That disagreement was demonstrated at the fourth session of the General Assembly, and also on various other
occasions, by the simultaneous presentation of two opposing draft resolutions each expressing the point of
view of one or the other group of States; and usually
expressing, more or less clearly, the position of one or
the other of the two major Powers mentioned.

Our delegation considered, and continues to consider, that in the light of these circumstances—of these
two opposing and hitherto irreconcilable points of
view—the method of settling questions by majority
vote, by outvoting the other party, is not a good way to
reach a solution. The only way is for everyone, the two
major Powers in particular, to make greater efforts
with a view to reaching agreement. We found such
effort lacking on both sides during die discussions at the
fourth session of the General Assembly. The Yugoslav
delegation therefore reached the conclusion that it could
not vote for either of the two draft resolutions expressing the two opposing tendencies, and abstained from
voting.

I had intended to do the same here if I found myself
faced with two opposing draft resolutions on this particular question. Today, however, I notice that there is
only one draft resolution before us, and not two; and
that furthermore, the Council, which is called upon to
take a decision, finds itself in a peculiar position. As I
have already emphasized, we are under the presidency
of a representative whose credentials have been subject to question; the delegation which is presiding over
us no longer represents a country which, according to

Nous ne devons montrer aucune hesitation en la
matiere. Je ne vois pas ce qui pourrait nous autoriser
a hesiter si nous instaurons un systeme bien equilibre qui permette d'echanger des renseignements
complets sur les armements. II ne s'agit pas la d'une
question qu'on puisse regarder comme superfetatoire;
elle menace dans ses fondements memes Texistence
de la race humaine. Nous devons done la prendre tres
au serieux et nous mettre immediatement a. l'ceuvre
avec la ferme intention d'obtenir des resultats.
M. BEBLER (Yougoslavie) : Je desire simplement
fournir une explication de mon vote.
Nous avons aborde, en discutant cette question et
en decidant de voter sur le projet de resolution qui
nous est soumis, un sujet qui donne lieu a de grandes
inquietudes —• comme certains orateurs viennent de
le dire — mais qui est, en meme temps, une question
aprement discutee, une de celles dans lesquelles le
grand conflit entre grandes Puissances a ete le plus
clairement exprime au sein de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies.
Depuis plusieurs annees, nous avons vu, tant a.
l'Assemblee generate qu'au Conseil de securite, deux
des principales grandes Puissances, les Etats-Unis et
l'Union sovietique, en opposition profonde et irreductible, precisement sur cette question. Cette opposition s'est exprimee, au cours de la derniere session de
l'Assemblee generale et en plusieurs autres occasions
deja, pendant ces dernieres annees, a telle enseigne
que nous avons ete saisis, en meme temps, de deux
projets de resolution opposes qui exprimaient chacun
la tendance de Fun ou de Tautre groupe d'Etats et,
le plus souvent, plus ou moins clairement, l'attitude
de Tune ou de Tautre des deux pricipales Puissances
que je viens de mentionner.
Notre delegation a considere — et elle continue de
considerer — que, etant donne cette situation, cette
opposition entre deux points de vue jusqu'ici inconciliables, la methode qui consiste a trancher. les questions a la majorite, par ce que la langue anglaise
exprime si bien par le mot "outvoting", n'etait pas
la bonne voie pour arriver a une solution quelconque.
La seule voix residerait dans un effort plus tenace de
part et d'autre — du cote, surtout, des deux principales Puissances — en vue de trouver un accord.
Nous avons constate, au cours des debats de la
quatrieme session de l'Assemblee generale, qu'un tel
effort, des deux cotes, faisait jusqu'a present defaut. La delegation yougoslave en a tire la conclusion
devant l'Assemblee generale, qu'elle ne pourrait voter
ni pour Tun, ni pour Tautre des deux projets de
resolution exprimant les deux tendances en opposition.
Elle s'est abstenue.
J'avais Tintention de faire de meme ici, lorsque je
me trouverais en face des deux projets de resolution
opposes, sur cette matiere precise. Mais je me trouve
aujourd'hui en presence, tout d'abord d'un seul projet de resolution et non pas de deux, ensuite d'une
situation particuliere au sein du Conseil appele a.
prendre une decision. Comme je Tai souligne, nous
sommes presides par un representant dont le mandat
est discute; la delegation qui assure la presidence ne
represente plus le pays le plus grand du monde pai*

the number of its inhabitants, is the largest in the world
and which at the same time is a permanent member of
the Security Council. A third factor is the absence of
the delegation of another permanent member; namely,
the Soviet Union.

le nombre des habitants et qui est, en meme temps,
membre permanent du Conseil de securite. U n e troisieme circonstance tient a l'absence de la delegation
d'un autre membre permanent, l'Union sovietique.

I do not wish to raise the question at this time whether
the five members supporting the former Chinese delegation are right or wrong in insisting on the presence
of a Chinese representative who no longer represents
his country. N o r do I wish to raise the question whether
the representative of the Soviet Union was right or
wrong in absenting himself. T h e fact remains that two
permanent members are not represented here, and that
we have before us one draft resolution expressing the
point of view of one group of great Powers.

Sans poser, a cette occasion, la question de savoir
si les cinq membres qui soutiennent Tancienne delegation chinoise ont tort ou raison d'insister sur la
presence d'un representant chinois qui ne represente
plus son pays, sans poser, d'autre part, la question
de savoir si le representant de l'Union sovietique a
tort ou raison d'etre absent, le fait demeure que deux
onembres permanents ne sont pas representes ici et
que nous nous trouvons en face d'un seul projet de
resolution, exprimant la tendance d'un groupe de
grandes Puissances.

In these circumstances, I feel that we should not have
continued our discussion, and that we should not vote
on a question pertaining to disarmament. T h e adoption
of a decision on any aspect of the problem of disarmament in the present circumstances will contribute nothing to mutual understanding, or to the creation of an
atmosphere in which the parties primarily concerned
might wish to come to an understanding.

J e considere, en une telle conjoncture, que nous
n'aurions pas du discuter et que nous ne devrions
pas voter sur une question touchant au desarmement.
E n prenant, dans cette situation, une decision sur un
aspect quelconque du probleme du desarmement, nous
ne contribuerons pas a. la bonne entente, nous ne contribuerons pas a creer le climat favorable pour que
les deux parties principalement en cause soient inciters a rechercher le chemin d'une entente.

In view of these considerations, I have come to the
conclusion that I cannot take part in the vote on this
question.

De toutes ces observations, je tire, pour ma part,
la conclusion que je ne puis participer au vote sur
cette question.

The PRESIDENT: I should like to say a few words as

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais) : J e voudrais
dire quelques mots en qualite de representant de la

the representative of C H I N A .

CHINE.

The work which led to the adoption of resolution
300 ( I V ) the General Assembly was done in the Commission for Conventional Armaments. That work took
a long time. My delegation participated in that work
and supported the final plan that was agreed upon. I n
our opinion the question of the regulation and reduction of conventional armaments is one of the most important questions before the United Nations.

Les travaux qui ont sbouti a Tadoption de la
resolution 300 ( I V ) de l'Assemblee generale ont ete
effectues au sein de la Commission des armements de
type classique. Ils ont exige beaucoup de temps. Ma
delegation y a participe, elle a appuye le plan final
sur lequel Taccord s'est realise. A notre avis, la
question de la reglementation et de la reduction des
armements de type classique constitue Tun des probtemes les plus importants dont l'Organisation des
Nations Unies ait a s'occuper.

W e are also of the opinion that the plan recommended by the Commission is a scientific plan. Indeed
it is only logical that we should begin such important
work by securing accurate information on the armaments and armed forces of the world. Without accurate
information we could not produce a plan which would
suit the needs and meet with common agreement. If we
passed the draft resolution submitted by the representative of France we should have taken another important
step in bringing about that final objective which we all
have in mind. It is, therefore, for these reasons that my
delegation will vote for this draft resolution.

Nous pensons egalement que le plan recommande
par la Commission est scientifiquement concju. II est
evident que, dans une entreprise aussi importante, il
faut commencer logiquement par recueillir les renseignements exacts sur les armements et les forces
armees de tous les pays du monde. Sans ces renseignements precis et exacts, il n'est pas possible de
mettre au point un plan repondant a u x necessites et
qui soit de nature a rallier Taccord general. Si nous
adoptions le projet de resolution soumis par le representant de la France, nous ferions un pas nouveau et
important vers la realisation de la fin ultime que
nous nous proposons tous. C'est pour ces raisons que
ma delegation votera pour ce projet de resolution.

T h e draft resolution submitted by the representative
of France is set forth in document S/1445. I think it is
unnecessary to read the document.

Le projet de resolution soumis par le representant
de la France figure dans le document S/1445. Je ne
pense pas qu'il soit necessaire d'en donner lecture.

A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

// est procede au vote a main

In favour:

Votent

China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, France,

pour:

Chine,

Cuba,

levee.
Equateur,

Egypte,

India, Norway, Unied Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Not voting:
Absent:

Yugoslavia.

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

France, Inde, Norvege, Royaume-Uni de GrandeBretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
Ne prend pas part au vote: la Yougoslavie.
Est absente:
sovietiques.

l'Union

des Republiques

socialistes

The resolution was adopted by 9 votes in favour, one
member not voting and one member of the Council
being absent.

Par 9 voix contre zero, un membre n'ayant pas pris
part au vote et un membre etant absent, la resolution
est adoptee.

Mr. GROSS (United States of America) : The comments of the representative of Yugoslavia impel me to
intervene for the purpose of making a brief explanation
of the vote of the United States delegation.

M. GROSS (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de
Vanglais): A la suite des observations faites par le
representant de la Yougoslavie, je me vois oblige
d'intervenir pour expliquer brievement le vote de la
delegation des Etats-Unis.

It seems to us—and I say this with great respect for
the remarks of the representative of Yugoslavia—that
he has laid a smokescreen across a trail here which may
in the future, and particularly in the future discussions
of this problem in the Commission for Conventional
Armaments, be followed perhaps by some other member of the Commission in a way which may be both
unfair to the problem and misleading to the public.

Le representant de la Yougoslavie — et je le dis
avec le plus grand respect pour ses remarques — a,
me semble-t-il, rendu la question plus obscure: on
pourrait craindre qu'a l'avenir, et particulierement au
cours des discussions qui auront lieu sur ce probleme
a. la Commission des armements de type classique, un
autre membre de la Commission n'invoque les memes
arguments, au risque de denaturer les donnees du
probleme et d'induire le public en erreur.

In the first place, the representative of Yugoslavia
has, in our judgment, quite inaccurately described the
problem as a difference of opinion between the United
States and the Soviet Union. This, we submit most respectfully, is a false equivalence. I should like to remind
the representatives, and in particular the representative
of Yugoslavia, that on 18 October 1949 it was the Soviet
Union in the Security Council [452nd meeting] that
vetoed a draft resolution which was introduced by the
representative of France [S11408/Rev.
1] and which
was designed to cure deficiencies of an obvious sort
which were implicit in the draft resolution introduced
by the Soviet Union [S11405/Rev.
1] shortly before.
This French draft resolution received a substantial
majority of the votes in the Security Council but was,
as I say, vetoed by the Soviet Union.

En premier lieu, le representant de la Yougoslavie a ramene le probleme — fort inexactement, a
notre avis — a une divergence de vues entre les
Etats-Unis et l'Union sovietique. C'est la, nous le
declarons tres respectueusement, une presentation du
probleme qui ne correspond pas a la realite. J e voudrais rappeler aux membres du Conseil, et particulierement au representant de la Yougoslavie, que c'est
l'Union sovietique qui, le 18 octobre 1949, au Conseil
de securite [452eme seance], a oppose son veto au
projet de resolution [S/1408/Rev.
2] que le representant de la France avait presente dans Tintention
de parer aux inconvenients manifestes qui decoulaient du projet de resolution [S/1405/Rev.
1] soumis
quelque temps auparavant par l'Union sovietique. Le
projet de resolution de la France a obtenu une importante majorite des voix au Conseil de securite,
mais, comme je Tai dit, il a fait Tobjet du veto de
l'Union sovietique.

Again, the General Assembly, in adopting the resolution which is before us and which the Council has just
referred to the proper body, the Commission for Conventional Armaments, did so by an overwhelming majority of the General Assembly, the precise vote being
44 in favour, 5 against and 5 abstentions. Here again,
one finds convincing and conclusive evidence that the
issue which, as the representative of Egypt has so properly and eloquently pointed out, is of such tremendous
importance to the world, is not one between two Powers.

De meme, l'Assemblee generale, lorsqu'elle a
adopte la resolution dont nous sommes saisis et que
le Conseil vient de renvoyer a Torgane competent,
la Commission des armements de type classique Ta
fait a la majorite ecrasante de ses membres, le resultat precis du vote ayant ete: 44 voix pour, 5
contre et 5 abstentions. C'est la une nouvelle preuve,
convaincante et decisive, du fait que, ainsi que le
representant de l'Egypte Ta indique si justement et
si eloquemment, cette question, qui presente tant
d'importance pour le monde, n'est pas un litige entre
deux Puissances.

In the reference of the representative of Yugoslavia
to the situation in which the Council finds itself, again
one may perceive the danger that, when the Commission
comes to consider this question, similar arguments may
be brought by other members of the Commission tending to obscure the true merits of the problem. T h e
Council has expressed itself on the validity of the

L'allusion du representant de la Yougoslavie a la
situation dans laquelle se trouve le Conseil donne
une nouvelle indication du risque que Ton court de
voir d'autres membres de la commission, lorsque
celle-ci examinera la question, soulever des arguments
analogues, afin de detourner l'attention du fond
meme du probleme. Le Conseil s'est prononce sur la

credentials of the representative of China in the Chair
today. His presence here, therefore, can cast no doubt
or cloud upon the action we take.

validite des pouvoirs du representant de la Chine qui
assure la presidence aujourd'hui. La presence de ce
dernier parmi nous ne peut, par consequent, permettre
de mettre en doute la legalite des decisions que nous
prenons.

Finally, the representative of Yugoslavia has referred
to the absence of a permanent member from the table,
which clearly is an absence volunteered by the representative himself and which, I think, the Council has
clearly indicated it will not take as a deterrent to its
proceeding in an orderly manner with its business.
Therefore, my delegation would feel very strongly that,
if the same type of argument which has now been introduced by the representative of Yugoslavia were to be
introduced when this matter comes up for discussion
in the Commission on Conventional Armaments, a great
disservice would be done to the very important issues
which are in fact involved in this matter. And it is for
that reason that I am moved, on behalf of my delegation, to make this intervention to explain now, as we
will be prepared to explain in the future, that we consider such arguments to be wholly irrelevant; if they
are introduced, it will simply be as cloaks to avoid a
real attempt to deal with the merits of the important
issues involved.

Enfin, le representant de la Yougoslavie a mentionne l'absence d'un membre permanent du Conseil,
absence volontaire qui est le fait du representant dont
il s'agit et qui, je le pense, n'empechera pas le Conseil, ainsi qu'il Ta nettement indique, de poursuivre
ses travaux de fa^on reguliere et ordonnee.^ C'est
pourquoi ma delegation aurait le sentiment tres net,
au cas ou Ton souleverait lors des discussions au
sein de la Commission des armements de type classique des arguments analogues a ceux que vient d'invoquer le representant de la Yougoslavie, d'un effort
systematiquement tente pour eluder la discussion des
tres importantes questions qui sont en jeu. Et c'est
pour cette raison que j'ai ete amene, au nom de ma
delegation, a intervenir dans le debat et a declarer,
des maintenant, comme nous serons prets a le declarer a l'avenir, que de tels arguments nous paraissent entierement hors de propos et que, si on les
invoque, ce sera afin de masquer une tentative faite
pour eviter qu'on aborde le fond des importants
problemes qu'il s'agit de traiter.

Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated from
French) : I should also like to make a few remarks with
regard to the position taken in the vote by the representative of Yugoslavia. He has reminded us, and with
good reason, of the conflicts which have arisen between
the two blocs in the United Nations, but he was clearly
wrong in trying to affix a label to the French draft resolution which is designed to give effect to the resolution
submitted by the Norwegian and French delegations
and adopted by the General Assembly.

M. DE LA TOURNELLE (France): Je demande, Tautorisation de presenter egalement quelques remarques
relativement a l'attitude prise dans le vote par le
representant de la Yougoslavie. Celui-ci, et avec
raison, nous a rappele les luttes qui se poursuivent
entre deux blocs au sein de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, mais il a eu manifestement tort de
vouloir apposer une etiquette au projet de resolution
presente par la delegation frainqaise, lequel a pour
but de donner effet a la resolution presentee par les
delegations de la Norvege et de la France et adoptee
par l'Assemblee generale.

I can assure the Yugoslav delegation that, in submitting their draft resolution to the General Assembly,
the Norwegian and French delegations had no intention
of engaging in polemics with the other camp, nor of
embarrassing the Soviet delegation. That, moreover,
was the reason why the aim we had set ourselves was
modest, namely the collection of information as a step
toward disarmament. We had hoped and expected that
on such limited grounds co-operation with the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics would be possible, and both
the Norwegian and my delegation were prepared to
accept any amendments which the USSR delegation
might have submitted. That, however, did not happen.
As the United States representative has recalled, there
was even a veto in the Security Council.

Je puis assurer la delegation yougoslave que les
delegations norvegienne et franchise, en deposant
leur projet de resolution a l'Assemblee generale,
n'avaient nullement pour but d'engager une polemique avec Tautre camp, ni de vouloir embarrasser
la delegation de l'Union sovietique. C'est d'ailleurs
la raison pour laquelle nous nous etions propose un
but aussi modeste: reunir des renseignements afin de
preparer une etape vers le desarmement. Nous esperions, et nous envisagions, que, sur ce terrain tres
limite, la collaboration de l'URSS aurait ete possible,
et nous etions prets, la delegation norvegienne comme
la mienne, a. accepter les amendements que la delegation de l'Union sovietique aurait pu presenter.
Mais tel n'a pas ete le cas. II y a meme eu un veto,
comme le representant des Etats-Unis Ta rappele, au
sein du Conseil de securite.

4. Draft amendment to the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council
(S/1447)

4. Projet d'amendement au reglement interieur provisoire du Conseil de securite
(S/1447)

The PRESIDENT: Without touching upon the substance
of the proposal now before the Council, may I suggest

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais) : Sans vouloir
aborder le fond de la proposition dont le Conseil est
10

that representatives bear in mind the possibility of referring this matter to our Committee of Experts ?

saisi, puis-je suggerer aux representants d'envisager
la possibilite de renvoyer la question au Comite
d'experts du Conseil?

Sir Benegal N. RAU (India): In the letter [S/1447]
which I have addressed to the President, and which has
been circulated to members of the Security Council, I
have already explained my object in submitting these
proposed amendments to our rules of procedure. The
difficulties which might arise from the absence of a uniform rule on questions involving recognition of new
Governments have been noticed by Mr. Jessup in his
book A Modern Law of Nations written in March 1947.
I quote:

Sir Benegal N. RAU (Inde) (traduit de Vanglais) :
Dans la lettre [S/1447] que j'ai adressee au President et dont le texte a ete communique aux membres
du Conseil de securite, j'explique les raisons pour
lesquelles je soumets ces propositions d'amendement
a notre reglement interieur. Dans son livre intitule
A Modern Law of Nations, publie en mars 1947, M.
Jessup signale les difficultes qui peuvent naitre de
l'absence d'une regie uniforme lorsqu'il s'agit de
questions qui touchent a la reconnaissance de gouvernements nouveaux. Je cite:

"Since the issue of approving the credentials of one
or the other of two rival governmental groups may arise
not only in the General Assembly but also in other organs of the United Nations and in specialized agencies,
it would seem to be necessary to establish a general
procedure for determining such questions."

"La question de Tapprobation des pouvoirs des
representants de Tun ou Tautre de deux groupes
gouvernementaux rivaux peut se poser, non seulement a l'Assemblee generale, mais egalement a d'autres organes des Nations Unies et aux institutions
specialises; il semble done necessaire d'adopter une
procedure generale pour le reglement des problemes
de cette nature."

One solution propounded by Mr. Jessup is to formulate an objective test for recognition of a new government and leave the question of representation, whenever
it is raised, to be decided on the basis of that test by the
International Court of Justice. Action on the seating of
any representative from the State affected, or negotiations with the government of that State, might, he suggests, in that event be deferred until a decision was
reached. That is a possible solution which we and the
other organs of the United Nations could adopt if we
chose. The drawback to that solution would be the delay
involved in a reference to the International Court of
Justice, and perhaps, too, the difficulty of formulating
any objective tests on the question of recognition satisfactory to all States.

Une des solutions preconisees par M. Jessup est
de formuler des regies objectives pour la reconnaissance d'un gouvernement nouveau et de laisser a la
Cour internationale de Justice le soin de trancher,
conformement a ces regies, la question de la representation, lorsque cette question est soulevee. Dans
ce cas, toute mesure concernant la participation aux
debats d'un representant quelconque de l'Etat interesse, ou toutes negations avec le gouvernement de cet
Etat, pourraient, de l'avis de M. Jessup, etre differees,
jusqu'a ce qu'une decision ait ete prise. C'est la. une
solution que le Conseil et les autres organes des
Nations Unies pourraient adopter, s'ils le desirent.
L'inconvenient de cette solution est le retard cause
par le recours a la Cour internationale de Justice et
peut-etre aussi la difficulte de formuler, en ce qui
concerne la reconnaissance d'un gouvernement nouveau, des regies objectives qui satisfassent tous les
Etats.

The solution which I have indicated, rather than propounded, in my proposed amendments, is slightly different. I have suggested that the decision, instead of being
based on the views of the majority of the judges of the
International Court of Justice, which is what is implicit
in referring the question to that Court, might be based
on the views of the majority of the governments of the
States Members of the United Nations. Accordingly,
the new rule which I have proposed runs thus :

La solution que j'ai indiquee, plutot que preconisee, dans mes propositions d'amendement, est
quelque peu differente. Je suggere que la decision,
au lieu d'etre fondee sur Topinion de la majorite des
juges de la Cour internationale de Justice — ce qui
resulte implicitement d'un recours a la Cour — soit
fondee sur Topinion de la majorite des gouvernements des Etats Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. En consequence, le nouvel article que
je propose est ainsi concu:

"Where the right of any person to represent, or to
continue to represent, a State on the Security Council,
or at a meeting of the Security Council, is called in
question on the ground that he does not represent, or
has ceased to represent, the recognized government of
that State, the President of the Council shall, before
submitting the question to the decision of the Council,
ascertain (by telegraph if necessary) and place before
the Council, so far as available, the views of the Governments of all the other States Members of the United
Nations on the matter."

"Quand le droit de toute personne a representer
ou a continuer de representer un Etat au Conseil de
securite ou a une seance du Conseil de securite, est
conteste pour le motif qu'elle ne represente pas, ou a
cesse de representer, le gouvernement reconnu dudit
Etat, le President du Conseil, avant de soumettre la
question a la decision du Conseil, s'assure, dans la
mesure du possible, (le cas echeant par voie telegraphique) des opinions des Gouvernements de tous les
autres Etats Membres des Nations Unies a ce sujet,
et en soumet Texpose au Conseil."
11

By way of facilitating the application of this rule we
might, perhaps, provide that the Secretary-General
should take advance action and write to each of the
governments of Member States as soon as it recognized
the new government, asking it to communicate the fact
to him so that he might keep the information ready.

Pour faciliter l'application de cette regie, nous pourrions peut-etre prevoir que le Secretaire general
aurait a prendre l'initiative d'ecrire aux Gouvernements des Etats Membres, aussitot qu'ils auraient
reconnu un nouveau gouvernement, pour leur demander de Taviser officiellement de cette reconnaissance, afin qu'il puisse disposer a tout moment de renseignements exacts.

There may be other solutions. All I desire is that we
should have some definite rule of procedure. Many conflicts can, I feel sure, be avoided by suitable rules of
procedure. I am not wedded to the particular solution I
have indicated. I have merely tried to set the ball rolling, and I would propose, as the President has already
suggested, that the draft amendment be referred to the
Committee of Experts with instructions to make an
interim or a final report by a specified date.

D'autres solutions existent peut-etre. Tout ce a quoi
je vise est Tadoption d'une procedure precise. Je suis
certain que Texistence de regies adequates permettrait
d'eviter plus d'un differend. J e n'insiste pas sur la
solution particuliere que j ' a i indiquee. J'ai voulu
seulement donner la premiere impulsion, et je serais
enclin a proposer, ainsi que le President Ta deja
suggere, de renvoyer le projet d'amendement au
Comite d'experts, qui aurait pour instructions de soumettre, a une date determinee, un rapport preliminaire ou definitif sur le sujet.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United K i n g d o m ) : I think
the members of the Security Council will be grateful to
the representative of India for having drawn their attention to these important and difficult questions; they are
questions which, it seems to me, are worthy of study
and, in fact, need to be studied.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni) (traduit
de Vanglais): J e pense que les membres du Conseil
de securite sont reconnaissants envers le representant de l'lnde d'avoir attire leur attention sur ces
questions importantes et dedicates qui me paraissent
dignes d'etude et qui me semblent, en fait, devoir
etre etudiees.

I think that the suggestion made by the President that
the Committee of Experts be asked to make a preliminary study is a wise one. As the representative of India
has said, one might imagine a number of different solutions, many of them perhaps raising considerations
which would require very careful examination. F o r my
part, I should not feel able to enter into a discussion of
these possible solutions until the ground had been properly surveyed and until we had before us all the various
considerations which we shall have to take into account. I
therefore hope that the Council will agree to refer the
matter now to the Committee of Experts, so that within
the shortest possible period we may have all the various
considerations and suggestions put before us, and shall
then be able to engage in a detailed discussion of them.

La suggestion faite par le President de demander
au Comite d'experts de proceder a une etude preliminaire me parait des plus sages. Ainsi que Ta dit le
representant de l'lnde, Ton peut envisager un grand
nombre de solutions differentes, dont plusieurs souleveraient peut-etre des questions qu'il faudrait examiner avec grand soin. E n ce qui me concerne, je
ne me jugerai pas en mesure de participer a. une discussion des solutions possibles tant que Ton n'aura pas
precede a une etude preliminaire approfondie et que
nous ne serons pas en possession des divers elements
dont il nous faudra tenir compte. J'espere done que
le Conseil decidera de renvoyer des maintenant Taffaire au Comite d'experts, afin que nous recevions
communication, dans le plus bref delai possible, de
toutes les donnees du probleme et de toutes les
suggestions faites, et que nous puissions alors nous
engager dans une discussion detaillee.

Mr. VITERI LAFRONTE (Ecuador) (translated
from
Spanish): I believe that the proposal of the representative of India may well provide us with the means of
solving a problem which, we have seen, is difficult to
solve without the adoption of some permanent rule for
the settlement of questions raised as the result of the
absence of definite provisions in our rules of procedure.

M. V I T E R I LAFRONTE (Equateur) (traduit de I'espagnol) : A mon avis, la proposition du representant
de l'lnde contient tous les elements necessaires pour
denouer la situation dans laquelle se trouve le Conseil. E n effet, il est difficile de trouver une solution
sans avoir etabli des regies de caractere permanent,
permettant de resoudre les problemes que pose l'absence de dispositions precises dans notre reglement
interieur.

It is obvious that the rules of procedure of the Security Council are incomplete; that is why for four years
they have been called "provisional rules". Possibly some
of the gaps or omissions which we find in the rules of
procedure did not go unnoticed by the authors of the
rules. It may be that some of the rules were left vague
intentionally so that, in time and in the light of experience, rules might be adopted to regulate the working of
the Council. In any event, at our meetings we have seen

II est evident que le reglement interieur du Conseil
de securite est incomplet, et c'est pourquoi, depuis
quatre ans, il est qualifie de provisoire. Certaines de
ses lacunes et de ses omissions ne sont probablement
pas passees inaperc.ues de ceux qui ont redige ce
texte. 11 se peut, en effet, que certaines de ces "imprecisions" aient ete maintenues intentionnellement,
afin qu'avec le temps et T experience on puisse adopter des dispositions permettant de soumettre a certaines
12

regles les decisions du Conseil. Quoi qu'il en soit, au
cours des seances du Conseil de securite, nous avons
pu nous rendre compte de la necessite d'etablir des
regies permettant de combler des lacunes qui se sont
revelees au cours de nos travaux.
II se pourrait que, outre la methode que vient de
suggerer, fort sagement, le representant de l'lnde, il
existe d'autres moyens de regler cette situation. La
delegation de l'Equateur approuve cette proposition,
parce que celle-ci prevoit des echanges de vues entre
les Etats Membres des Nations Unies. Or, cette
methode a ete employee frequemment dans le systeme interamericain, c'est-a-dire qu'elle a ete suivie
par les Republiques americaines. Elle consiste a
echanger des vues et a proceder a des consultations
au sujet de la reconnaissance d'un gouvernement
lorsqu'il s'agit d'un cas particulier qui ne correspond
pas a des changements d'ordre constitutional ou
d'un cas qui, pour une raison quelconque, peut
paraitre douteux.
Je Tai deja dit: c'est precisement pour cette raison
que ma delegation approuve la proposition soumise
par le representant de TInde. Cependant, nous estimons que, outre cette suggestion, il pourrait y avoir
d'autres possibilites encore. C'est pourquoi il nous
semble que, si nous decidons de renvoyer cette question au Comite d'experts, nous pourrions, non seulement lui demander de nous fournir des eclaircissements a ce sujet, mais encore Tautoriser a nous
soumettre d'autres solutions possibles, solutions qui,
a son avis, pourraient, soit remplacer la proposition
fort opportune du representant de TInde, soit la
completer.

the practical necessity of establishing rules to fill in
those gaps which have already been definitely shown
to exist.

It may be that there are also other means of achieving that end besides the very intelligent suggestion of
the representative of India. The delegation of Ecuador
is in sympathy with the proposal which has been made
because it provides for an exchange of views among the
Member States of the United Nations, a practice very
frequently used in inter-State relations by the American
Republics, which exchange views and consult with one
another regarding the recognition of governments in
special cases which do not conform to constitutional developments or in cases where there is an element of
doubt.

For that reason, my delegation is, as I have said, in
sympathy with the proposal made by the representative
of India, but we consider that there may also be other
possibilities. It, therefore, seems advisable to us, if the
matter is to be submitted to the Committee of Experts
for consideration, that, in addition to being requested to
report on the proposal which has already been made,
the Committee of Experts should be authorized to report
to us on any other suggestion which it considers might
be adopted either as a substitute for the valuable proposal made by the representative of India or as a complement to that proposal.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais) : Dans sa declaration, le representant de TInde a suggere que le
Conseil fixe un delai dans lequel le Comite d'experts
devrait terminer son travail. Je desirerais savoir quel
devrait etre, a son avis, ce delai.
Sir Benegal N. RAU (Inde) (traduit de Vanglais) :
Je n'ai pas reflechi a ce point particulier, mais, puisque le President a souleve cette question, je pense
que nous pourrions, pour commencer, fixer un delai
d'un mois. En effet, ainsi que je Tai propose, le
Comite peut etablir, soit un rapport interimaire, soit
un rapport definitif. Si ce delai d'un mois n'etait
pas sufnsant, le Comite d'experts pourrait toujours
presenter un rapport interimaire et demander un
nouveau delai.

The PRESIDENT: In his statement, the representative
of India suggested that a time-limit be set for the work
of the Committee of Experts. I wonder whether he has
any particular one in mind.
Sir Benegal N. RAU (India): I have not applied my
mind to this particular point but, since the President has
mentioned it, I think we might allow the Committee of
Experts a month's time in the first instance, because,
as I have suggested, the Committee might make either
an interim or a final report. If a month is not enough
for the purpose, it can always submit an interim report
and ask for further time.
The PRESIDENT : As I hear no objection, I shall refer
the proposal of the delegation of India to the Committee
of Experts for study and report. That Committee is
authorized to suggest to the Council alternative plans.
The Committee is asked to render at least an interim
report, if not a final report, within one month's time.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais) : Aucune objection n'ayant ete faite, je renverrai la proposition
du representant de TInde au Comite d'experts aux
fins d'etudes et de rapport. Ce Comite est autorise a
proposer au Conseil une autre solution. Le Conseil
demande au Comite de presenter tout au moins un
rapport interimaire, sinon un rapport definitif, dans
le delai d'un mois.

5. Draft resolution submitted by the representative of Yugoslavia at the 461st meeting of the Security Council on 13 January
1950 ( S / 1 4 4 8 / R e v . 1)

5. Projet de resolution soumis par le representant de la Yougoslavie a la 461eme
seance du Conseil de securite, le 13 Janvier
1950 ( S / 1 4 4 8 )

Mr. BEBLER (Yugoslavia) (translated from French):
There seems hardly any need for me to repeat the argu-

M. BEBLER (Yougoslavie): II est a peine besoin,
me semble-t-il, de repeter les arguments que j'ai
13

recemment fait valoir en faveur d'une mesure a
prendre en ce qui concerne la presidence de notre
Conseil.
Le fauteuil presidentiel est actuellement occupe
par le chef d'une delegation dont le gouvernement
n'est reconnu que par cinq membres du Conseil de
securite et qui n'a fait Tobjet, pour son maintien ici,
que de cinq votes favorables. J'ai deja tire la conclusion de ce fait: l'autorite du Conseil de securite
est atteinte parce que le fauteuil presidentiel est occupe par le chef d'une delegation dont les pouvoirs
sont discutes.
Le projet de resolution [S/1448] que vous a
soumis ma delegation est, en consequence, quant a
son esprit, divise en deux parties. Les deux premiers
paragraphes forment la premiere. Les deux autres, la
seconde. Seule la premiere partie est vraiment importante, a savoir la decision a prendre de ne pas
appliquer, a partir d'aujourd'hui, l'article 18, c'est-adire que la presidence ne serait pas assuree par la
delegation actuelle de la Chine.

ments which I recently put forward in support of the
measure to be taken with regard to the presidency of
the Security Council.
The Chair is now occupied by the head of a delegation whose Government is recognized by only five members of the Security Council and whose presence here
has been supported by only five votes. I have already
drawn from that fact the conclusion that the exercise
of presidential powers by the head of a delegation whose
credentials have been questioned will impair the authority of the Security Council.
The draft resolution [S/1448/Rev. 1], which my
delegation has submitted to the Council, is therefore
divided into two parts. The first two paragraphs constitute the first part; the last two paragraphs make up the
second part. Only the first part is of real importance,
involving the decision to forego, as from today, the
application of rule 18 in the sense that the present Chinese delegation shall no longer preside.
The second part, namely the third and fourth paragraphs, provides merely one of the possible solutions
of the problem of replacing the present Chinese delegation in the presidency.

La deuxieme partie, soit les troisieme et quatrieme
paragraphes, ne represente qu'une des solutions possibles pour remplacer la delegation actuelle chinoise
a la presidence.

I therefore request the members of the Council, and
the President, to consider first the first two paragraphs,
and then the other two, both in any discussion and in
the vote.

Je demande done aux membres du Conseil, et au
President lui-meme, de prendre tout d'abord en consideration les deux premiers paragraphes et, ensuite,
les deux autres, tant en ce qui concerne la discussion
possible que le vote.

Let me say in advance that I shall not insist upon the
third and fourth paragraphs, since I shall accept any
solution other than that of maintaining the present
Chinese delegation in the presidential chair.

Je n'insisterai pas, je le dis par avance, sur le
troisieme et le quatrieme paragraphe, puisque j'accepterai n'importe quelle solution autre que celle
qui consiste a maintenir au fauteuil presidentiel la
delegation chinoise actuelle.

Mr. BLANCO (Cuba) (translated from Spanish) : I
wish, on behalf of my delegation, to make the following
comments in connexion with the draft resolution presented by the representative of Yugoslavia.

M. BLANCO (Cuba) (traduit de I'espagnol): Je
tiens a declarer ce qui suit a propos du projet de
resolution soumis par le representant de la Yougoslavie:

During the 460th and 461st meetings of the Security
Council, the representative of China, using the discretionary powers conferred on the President of the Security Council by rule 20 of the provisional rules of procedure, felt that he should refrain from presiding over
the debates in the Council during the consideration of a
question which concerned the Member State which he
represents. When that question had been considered and
a decision taken on it by the Council, the representative
of China again took the Chair in this Council in accordance widi rule 18 of the rules of procedure.

Aux 460eme et 461eme seances du Conseil, le representant de la Chine, exerc,ant les pouvoirs discretionnaires que l'article 20 du reglement interieur confere
au President du Conseil de securite, a decide de
s'abstenir de presider les debats du Conseil, au cours
desquels celui-ci devait examiner une question qui interessait directement l'Etat Membre que M. Tsiang est
charge de representer. Apres que le Conseil eut examine
et regie cette question, le representant de la Chine a
assume, de nouveau, en conformite de Farticle 18
dudit reglement, la presidence de cet organe.

In proposing the suspension of rule 18 of the provisional rules of procedure until 16 February 1950, the
Yugoslav draft resolution is based only on "the serious
objections which have risen against the validity of the
credentials of the present Chinese representative to the
Security Council."

Le projet de resolution soumis par la delegation
yougoslave, qui propose de suspendre Tapplication de
l'article 18 du reglement interieur jusqu'au 16 fevrier
1950, n'est fonde que sur "les . . . objections soulevees contre la validite des pouvoirs du representant
actuel de la Chine au Conseil de securite".

The proposal made by the representative of Yugoslavia involves a question definitely foreseen and provided for in our provisional rules of procedure, so that
in order to accept his proposal, we should have to sus-

La proposition du representant de la Yougoslavie
souleve une question qui a ete expressement prevue
et resolue par le reglement interieur provisoire.
Aussi, en Tacceptant nous devrions suspendre Tappli14

pend not only the application of rule 18 but also that of
another rule of those same rules of procedure. That
rule is rule 17 which states that "Any representative on
the Security Council, to whose credentials objections
have been made within the Security Council, shall continue to sit with the same rights as other representatives
until the Securitv Council has decided the matter."

cation, non seulement de l'article 18, mais aussi d'une
autre disposition dudit reglement. En effet, l'article
17 prevoit que "tout representant au Conseil de securite dont les pouvoirs soulevent des objections au
sein du Conseil de securite continue a sieger avec les
memes droits que les autres representants jusqu'a ce
que le Conseil de securite ait pris une decision a ce
sujet".

It is obvious that the Yugoslav proposal now before
us raises once again, although with another aim and for
more limited purposes, the question of the rights of the
representative of China, the validity of whose powers
has been questioned in the Council.

La proposition yougoslave dont le Conseil est saisi,
a, certes, un but different et une portee plus reduite,
mais il est evident qu'elle souleve a nouveau la question des droits du representant de la Chine, dont la
validite des pouvoirs a ete mise en doute par certains
membres du Conseil.

In rejecting the USSR draft resolution [S/1443] at
its 461st meeting, the Security Council settled the question and consequently the credentials of the said representative of China continue to be valid in this Council.

Or, a sa 461eme seance, le Conseil de securite a
regie cette question en rejetant le projet de resolution de l'URSS [S/1443]. II continue done a considerer comme valables les lettres de creance du
representant de la Chine.

For these reasons, the Cuban delegation considers
that in the present circumstances any proposal intended
to repudiate or limit the rights of the representative
whose credentials have been questioned in certain quarters is out of order.

C'est pourquoi la delegation cubaine estime que,
dans les circonstances actuelles, toute proposition
tendant a nier ou a restreindre les droits d'un representant dont les pouvoirs ont souleve des objections
de la part de quelques-uns de ses collegues, doit etre
considere comme irrecevable.

Mr. VITERI LAFRONTE (Ecuador) (translated from
Spanish): Members of the Council will recall that at our
[459th] meeting on 10 January I was the first representative to draw attention, with all possible discretion,
to the provisions of rule 20 of the rules of procedure
and to the possibility that our President might wish to
avail himself of that rule. At the time, I said I was convinced that the representative of China was merely
awaiting an opportune moment to do so.

M. VITERI LAFRONTE (Equateur) (traduit de I'espagnol) : Les membres du Conseil de securite se
rappellent sans doute que, au cours de la seance du
10 Janvier [459erne seance], je fus le premier a
invoquer, de la fagon la plus discrete, les dispositions
de Tarticle 20 du reglement interieur ainsi que la
possibilite pour notre President de faire usage de
ces dispositions. J'etais convaincu, en effet, que le
representant de la Chine n'attendait que le moment
opportun pour appliquer l'article precite.

After calling attention to rule 20, at a time when I
believed that it might help us to find some solution which
would enable the Council to continue to meet with its
membership of eleven, I took a special step and suggested something very similar to the proposal now
brought before us by the representative of Yugoslavia.
I then hoped that before the USSR delegation adopted
any definite attitude, such possibilities for settling the
matter might well be considered. Now, however, that
certain developments have taken place and a certain
attitude has been adopted which the Yugoslav proposal
is not going to alter, I feel that the situation has changed.
It will, therefore, be quite understandable that I cannot
vote in favour of the draft submitted by the representative of Yugoslavia.

J'ai cru que cet article pourrait nous aider a
trouver une solution permettant au Conseil de securite de continuer a sieger en presence de ses onze
membres. Depuis, j'ai fait une autre suggestion qui
ressemblait beaucoup a celle que vient de soumettre
le representant de la Yougoslavie. Tant que la delegation de l'URSS n'avait pas encore defini sa position, je pensais que le Conseil de securite etait
parfaitement fonde a envisager une solution de ce
genre. Cependant, depuis que certains evenements se
sont produits, depuis que certains representants ont
adopte une attitude que la proposition de la Yougoslavie ne modifiera en rien, la situation me parait
avoir change. C'est pour cette raison que je ne
pourrai pas voter en faveur du projet de resolution
soumis par le representant de la Yougoslavie.

The PRESIDENT: The representative of Yugoslavia
has asked me to divide his draft resolution into two
parts, the first and second paragraphs to form the first
part and the third and fourth paragraphs to form the
second part. I shall therefore now put to the vote the
first part, consisting of the first and second paragraphs.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais) : Le representant de la Yougoslavie m'a demande de diviser son
projet de resolution en deux parties, la premiere
partie comportant les premier et deuxieme paragraphes, et la seconde les troisieme et quatrieme
paragraphes. Je vais done mettre au voix la premiere
partie, comportant les premier et deuxieme paragraphes.

A vote was taken by show of hands as follows:

77 est procede au vote a main levee.

In favour: Yugoslavia.

Vote pour: la Yougoslavie.
IS

Against:
China, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt,
United States of America.

France,

Abstaining:
India, Norway, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Absent:

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Votent contre: Chine, Cuba,
France, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Equateur,

Egypte,

S'abstiennent:
Inde, Norvege, Royaume-Uni
Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande du Nord.
Est absente:
sovietiques.

l'Union

des Republiques

de

socialistes

The paragraphs were rejected by 6 votes to one
with 3 abstentions, one member of the Council being
absent.

Par 6 voix contre une, avec 3 abstentions,
un
membre du Conseil etant absent, les deux premiers
paragraphes du projet de resolution sont rejetes.

Mr. BEBLER (Yugoslavia) (translated from French) :
It seems to me that a vote on the second part of the
draft resolution is no longer necessary.

M. BEBLER (Yougoslavie): Je crois que tout vote
sur la deuxieme partie du projet de resolution est
devenu inutile.

T h e PRESIDENT: I understand that to mean that the
third and fourth paragraphs are withdrawn. That concludes our agenda for today.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Vanglais) : J'interprete
cette declaration comme equivalent au retrait des
troisieme et quatrieme paragraphes du projet de resolution. L'ordre du jour de la seance se trouve done
ainsi epuise.

Before we adjourn I wish to consult the members of
the Council in regard to another matter. Some time
during the course of next week I shall call the Council
together to consider the question of Kashmir. Representatives will remember that during the month of
December we asked the President for the month to take
charge of consultations with the two parties to the dispute and to report to the Council [457th meeting]. H e
did so report on 29 December [458th meeting], but we
again requested him, and he undertook, to continue the
consultations with the two parties.

Avant de lever la seance, je desirerais consulter les
membres du Conseil au sujet d'une autre question. J'ai
Tintention, au cours de la semaine prochaine, de convoquer le Conseil pour examiner la question du
Cachemire. Les membres du Conseil se souviennent
que, au cours du mois de decembre, le Conseil a
demande au President en exercice pour le mois d'entrer en consultation avec les deux parties au differend et de faire rapport en seance du Conseil
[457erne seance]. Le general McNaughton a fait son
rapport le 29 decembre [458eme seance], mais le
Conseil lui a demande de poursuivre les consultations
avec les deux parties, ce qu'il a fait.

I think that our meeting on the subject of Kashmir
it would be wiser for us to avail ourselves of the information and advice which General McNaughton will be
in a position to give us, and so this afternoon I ask the
authorization of the Security Council to invite General
McNaughton to take a seat at the Council table at the
meeting which I shall call on the subject of Kashmir.

J e crois que, a la seance que nous consacrerons a
la question du Cachemire, nous aurions interet a
entendre, de la bouche du general McNaughton luimeme, les renseignements et l'avis qu'il sera en mesure de nous donner. C'est pourquoi je demande
aujourd'hui Tautorisation au Conseil de securite d'inviter le general McNaughton a prendre place a la
table du Conseil lors de la seance qui sera consacree
a la question du Cachemire.

As there is no objection, I shall consider that I am
authorized to issue that invitation.

Cette proposition ne soulevant pas d'objection, je
me considere comme autorise a inviter le general
McNaughton.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

La seance est levee a 17 h. 15.

Printed in the U. S. A.

Price in the United States: 20 cents

3358—May 1950—2,770
