85

Reeolutlons adopted on the reports of the Third ColJllllittee

Reaffirming the importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination, to
national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples as imperatives for the enjoyment of human
rights,
Welcoming whole-heartedly the independence of Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe, Cape Verde and
Papua New Guinea,
·'
Concerned about the current conflict in Angola,
Equally concerned a'.,out the maintenance of the
independence and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Confident in the hope that the nationalist movements will co-operate with the Fact-Finding Commission of Inquiry and Conciliation of the Organization
of African Unity,
Indignant at the continued violations of the human
rights of the peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, the continuation of
the illegal occupation of Namibia and the persistence
of the racist minority regimes in Zimbabwe and South
Africa,
1. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the peoples' struggle
for independence, territorial integrity and liberation
from colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation by all available means, including armed
struggle;
2. Welcomes the efforts by the Fact-Finding Commission of Inquiry and Conciliation of the Organization of African Unity to resolve amicably the current
conflict in Angola;
3. Rejects any foreign interference in the internal
affairs of Angola and of the Comoros;
4. Condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and those countries
whose military, economic, sporting or political relations with the racist regimes of southern Africa and
elsewhere encourage these regimes to persist in their
suppression of the aspirations of peoples for self-determination and independence;
5. Strongly condemns all Governments which do not
recognize the right to self-determination and independence of peoples under colonial and. foreign domination and alien subjugation, notably the peoples of Africa
and the Palestinian people;
6. Demands full respect for the basic human rights
of all individuals detained or imprisoned as a result of
their struggle for self-determination and independence,
and strict respect for article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights under which no one shall
be subje.cted to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and their immediate release;
7 ._ Keenly awaits the conclusion of the following
studies by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities:
(a) Adverse consequences for the enjoyment of
human rights of political, military, economic and other
forms of assistance given to colonial and racist regimes
in southern Africa;
( b) Historical and current development of the right

to self-determination on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations and other instruments adopted by
United Nations organs, with particular reference to the

promotion and protection of human· rights and fundamental freedoms;
(c) Implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and alien
domination to self-determination;
8. Notes with appreciation the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial and
alien regimes continue to receive from Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and calls for a maximization of this assistance;

9. Decides to remain seized of this item at its thirtyfirst session on the basis of reports that Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations are requested to submit concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial Territories and peoples under alien domination
and foreign subjugation.

2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
3383 (XXX). Adverse consequences for the enjoyment of human rights of political, military, economic and other forms of assistance
given to colonial and racist regimes in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Adverse conseq~~nces for the e_njoyment of human rights of political,
mihtary, economic and other forms of assistance given
to colonial and racist regimes in southern Africa",
Mindful of its responsibility to offer the oppressed
peoples under the colonial and racist regimes in southern Af?ca. every assistance i~ their struggle for selfdetermmation and for the enJoyment of their fundamental human rights,
Aware that, in pursuance of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1864 (LVI) of 17 May 1974 the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination' and
Protection of Minorities appointed a Special Rapporteur
to evaluate urgently the importance and the sources of
political,_ military, economic_ and other assistance given
by certam St.ates to the racist and colonial regimes of
southern Afnca, as well as the direct or indirect effects
of such assistance on the perpetuation of colonialism
racial discrimination and apartheid,
'
1. Considers that organizations and States which
give assistan~e to the racist _and colonial regimes in
southern Afn~a . are accomp~1~es of those regimes in
r~spect of their inhuman pohc1es of racial discriminat10n, apartheid and colonialism;
. 2. Requests the Secretary-General to give the Spec~al Ra~porteur, Mr. Ahmed M. Khalifa, every possible ass1s~an~ he may nee_d for the completion of his
report, which 1s to be submitted to the Sub-Commission
on_ Pr~yenti~n of Disc~mination and Protection of
Mmonties at its twenty-mnth session;
3: Decides to consi~er th~s _item at its thirty-first
session as a matter of high pnonty and, in this regard,
requests the Secretary-General to submit the final report of. the Special Rapporteur, along with the recommendations of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of

86

General Asaembl,--Thirtieth Seuion

Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, to the
General Assembly at that session.
2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
3384 (XXX), Declaration on the Use of Scientific
and Technological Progress in the Interests
of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Noting that scientific and technological progress has
become one of the most important factors in the development of human society,
Taking into consideration that, while scientific and
technological developments provide ever increasing opportunities to better the conditions of life of peoples
and nations, in a number of instances they can give rise
to social problems, as well as threaten the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of the individual,
Noting with concern that scientific and technological
achievements can be used to intensify the arms race,
suppress national liberation movements and deprive
individuals and peoples of their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Also noting with concern that scientific and technological achievements can entail dangers for the civil
and political rights of the individual or of the group
and for human dignity,
Noting the urgent need to make full use of scientific
and technological developments for the welfare of man
and to neutralize the present and possible future harmful consequences of certain scientific and technological
achievements,
Recognizing that scientific and technological progress
is of great importance in accelerating the social and
economic development of developing countries,
Aware that the transfer of science and technology is
one of the principal ways of accelerating the economic
development of developing countries,
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination
and the need to respect human rights and freedoms and
the dignity of the human person in the conditions of
scientific and technological progress,
Desiring to promote the realization of the principles
which fonn the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the International Covenants on Human Rights, the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, and the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Solemnly proclaims that:
1. All States shall promote international co-operation to ensure that the results of scientific and
technological developments are used in the intere~ts
of strengthening international peace and sec-urity,
freedom and independence, and also for the purpose
of the economic and social development of peoples
and the realization of human rights lllld freedoms in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
2. All States shall take appropriate measures to
prevent the use of scientific and technological devel-

opments, particularly by the State organs, to limit or
interfere with the enjoyment of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the individual as enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
International Covenants on Human Rights and other
relevant international instruments.
3. All States shall take measures to ensure that
scientific and technological achievements satisfy the
material and spiritual needs of all sectors of the
population.
4. All States shall refrain from any acts involving the use of scientific and technological achievements for the purposes of violating the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of other Stares, interfering
in their internal affairs, waging aggressive wars, suppressing national liberation movements or pursuing a
policy of racial discrimination. Such acts are not
only a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and principles of international law, but constitute an inadmissible distortion of the purposes
that should guide scientific and technological developments for the benefit of mankind.
5. All States shall co-operate in the establishment, strengthening and development of the scientific and technological capacity of developing countries with a view to accelerating the realization of the
social and economic rights of the peoples of those
countries.
6. All States shall take measures to extend the
benefits of science and technology to all strata of the
population and to protect them, both socially and
materially, from possible harmful effects of the misuse of scientific and technological developments, including their misuse to infringe upon the rights of
the individual or of the group, particularly with regard to respect for privacy and the protection of the
human personality and its physical and intellectual
integrity.
7. All States shall take the necessary measures,
including legislative measures, to ensure that the
utilization of scientific and technological achievements promotes the fullest realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination. ~hatsoever on grounds of raoe, sex, language or rehg1ous beliefs.
8. All States shall take effective measures includin~ _Ieg!slative m~asu!es, to pre~nt and preciude the
utilizatton of sc1~ntific and technological achievements to the detnment of human rights and fundamental freedoms and the dignity of the human person.
. 9. AH States sh~I, whenever necessary, take ac!1on to ensu~e comphance with legislation guaranteem~ h1;1man nghts and freedoms in the conditions of
sc1ent1fic and technological developments.
2400th plenary meetinK
10 November 1975
344._1 (XXX).

1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3147 (XXVIII) of 14 De~ember _1973, in which it stressed the importance to
n~rernational di:ug control of universal accession to the
Smg]e Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,D the 1971
9

United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 520, No. 7515, p. 151.
