S/2017/294

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 April 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict in the Philippines
Summary
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions, is the fourth on children and armed conflict in the
Philippines submitted by the Secretary-General. It contains information on the six
grave violations against children and, more broadly, on the situation of children
affected by armed conflict during the period from 1 December 2012 to 31 December
2016.
The report highlights trends and patterns of grave violations committed against
children by all parties to the conflict and illustrates that conflict continues to
negatively affect children, in particular in indigenous communities. The report also
sets out progress made in addressing the protection o f children affected by conflict,
including through the establishment of government mechanisms and the
implementation of an action plan with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front.
Lastly, the report contains a series of recommendations to end and prevent
grave violations against children in the Philippines and to improve their protection.

17-05551 (E)

200417

*1705551*

S/2017/294

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, prepared pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, is the fourth
report on the Philippines submitted to the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. It covers the period from 1 December 2012 to 31 December 2016 and
describes trends and patterns of grave violations against children that have occurred
since my previous report (S/2013/419). Where possible, the report identifies the
parties responsible for grave violations against children and highlight s areas for
advocacy and response to enhance the protection of children. The report also
describes progress made in ending and preventing grave violations against children.
Finally, the report provides a list of recommendations to all parties and actors
concerned to improve the protection of children in conflict -affected areas and end
and prevent grave violations.
2.
Since insecurity and access restrictions to remote areas complicated
monitoring and reporting activities, the figures detailed in the report d o not reflect
the full scope of violations against children. Nonetheless, available data illustrate
that children continue to be negatively affected by the conflict, in particular in
indigenous communities.
3.
In the annexes to my most recent annual report on children and armed conflict,
dated 20 April 2016 (A/70/836-S/2016/360), the Abu Sayyaf Group, the
Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the
New People’s Army are listed in the annexes for the recruitment and use of children.

II. Overview of political and security developments
A.

Political developments
4.
The administration of President Benigno Aquino III continued to pursue
negotiations with a number of armed groups in an effort to address long -running
conflicts on Mindanao island. After a seven-year impasse, formal talks between the
Government and the National Democratic Front of the Philippines, a coalition of
left-leaning groups that includes the Communist Party of the Philippines and the
New People’s Army, resumed in 2011. However, no formal peace agreement was
reached and those discussions remained at an impasse on the eve of the presidential
election in May 2016.
5.
Previously, in October 2012, the Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front had signed the Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro, which culminated
in the signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on Bangsamoro in March 2014,
which officially concluded 17 years of peace negotiations. The Bangsamoro Basic
Law, which would have established the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, was
submitted to Congress by President Aquino on 10 September 2014. However,
following the so-called Mamasapano incident, a clash between the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front, the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters and government forces
in January 2015 in Maguindanao Province, Congress was unable to agree on the
passage of the law before going into recess in February 2016. Despite that setback,
both the Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front declared their
continued commitment to pursue a peace agenda.
6.
Presidential elections were held in the Philippines in May 20 16 and President
Rodrigo Duterte was inaugurated on 30 June 2016. The new administration has
since set out its peace and development framework aimed at ending the long standing conflicts with the communist insurgency and Moro secessionist groups.

2/17

17-05551

S/2017/294

7.
In June 2016, President Duterte met with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
and the Moro National Liberation Front to discuss the next steps in the peace
process. The two Moro groups agreed to collectively undertake an intra -Moro
dialogue with the objective of arriving at an inclusive solution for the Bangsamoro.
On 7 November, the President signed an executive order creating a new
Bangsamoro Transition Commission, tasked with drafting a new version of the
Bangsamoro Basic Law. The President also initiated explor atory talks with
representatives of the National Democratic Front of the Philippines in Oslo in
preparation for the planned resumption of the peace negotiations. Following an
agreement to resume formal peace negotiations in July, the two parties met for tw o
rounds of formal talks in August and October, but at the time of writing no
permanent ceasefire had been reached.

B.

Security developments
8.
During the reporting period, there was a general decrease in large -scale armed
engagements. However sporadic, low-intensity clashes and a number of critical
incidents continued to affect the overall security situation. Government security
forces, including the Armed Forces and the Philippine National Police and alleged
pro-government armed groups, engaged in clashes with a number of armed groups,
including the New People’s Army, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the Moro
National Liberation Front, the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fi ghters and the Abu
Sayyaf Group, the majority of which took place on Mindanao.
9.
Major armed incidents included the 9 September 2013 attack on Zamboanga
city by the Misuari faction of the Moro National Liberation Front following the
initiation of peace talks between the Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front. According to the Armed Forces, the ensuing armed engagement with
government security forces lasted 20 days, killing 7 civilians, wounding 48 others
and forcibly displacing more than 118,000.
10. In January 2014, government security forces launched Operation Darkhorse, a
major offensive against the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, which lasted
five days and resulted in the destruction of a number of the group’s camps. On
25 January 2015, a special action force of the National Police conducted a law
enforcement operation in the Mamasapano municipality of Maguindanao Province
to arrest two high-profile militants who had been under the protection of the
Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front was not
informed that the operation would take place and engaged the special action force in
a firefight, which resulted in the death of 6 civilians, 44 members of the special
action force and 18 Moro Islamic Liberation Front fighters.
11. Following the Mamasapano incident, which led to a large military offensive in
February 2015, clashes between the Armed Forces and the Bangsamoro Islamic
Freedom Fighters increased significantly in the first half of 2015, with military
operations subsequently conducted by the Armed Forces throughout 2016.
12. With regard to the conflict with the New People’s Army, 2015 saw a
pronounced deterioration of the security situation on Mindanao, with reports
indicating an increase in clashes. Indigenous communities were particularly
impacted by the complex security situation involving the Armed Forces, the New
People’s Army and pro-government armed groups.

17-05551

3/17

S/2017/294

C.

Parties to the conflict in the Philippines
Moro Islamic Liberation Front
13. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front was first listed in the annexes of the annual
report on children and armed conflict for the recruitment and use of children in
2003. In August 2009, the group signed an action plan with the United Nations to
end and prevent child recruitment and use that entailed concrete and time -bound
activities involving the unimpeded access of monitoring teams, the prevention of
recruitment, the release and reintegration of all children under 18 years of age and
awareness-raising and capacity-building activities with respect to child rights and
child protection mechanisms. The armed group is active in large parts of Mindanao.
Clashes between the military arm of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, which
includes the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces and the Bangsamoro Islamic
Women’s Auxiliary Brigade, and the Armed Forces largely ceased since signing of
the Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro. The armed group coordinates its
troop movements and operations with the Armed Forces through the Coordinating
Committee on the Cessation of Hostilities, which has helped defuse tensions.
Moro National Liberation Force
14. The Moro National Liberation Front, present on Mindanao, signed a peace
agreement with the Government in 1996 after more than 20 years of fighting for
Bangsamoro independence. In early 2000, however, tensions with th e Government
resurged as some members of the group began to view the implementation of the
peace agreement as flawed. That resulted in the fractionalization of the group as
well as sporadic clashes with the Government. In 2013, the Misuari faction of the
group launched an attack in Zamboanga city to express their opposition to the
Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro between the Government and the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front.
Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters
15. The Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters splintered from the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front in 2010 in order to continue the armed struggle for full
independence from the Philippines, following the initiation of peace negotiations
between the Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. The Bangsamoro
Islamic Freedom Fighters has been listed for the recruitment and use of children
since 2014. Since the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the Moro National
Liberation Front have increasingly resorted to political avenues to further their
causes, the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters has taken on a more prominent
role in the armed Muslim separatist movement in the Philippines. As a result, the
group, which is mainly active in Maguindanao Province, has engaged in armed
clashes both with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the Armed Forces.
Following the death in April 2015 of Ameril Umbra Kato, the founder and leader of
the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, there were unverified reports of a split
within the group in 2016.
New People’s Army
16. The New People’s Army, the armed wing of the Communist Party of the
Philippines and part of the National Democratic Front of the Philippines coalition,
has been listed since 2003 owing to its recruitment and use of children. Although it
is present across the Philippines, New People’s Army has focused its operations
mainly on Mindanao. It has been engaged in armed conflict with the Government

4/17

17-05551

S/2017/294

for over four decades, with the stated objective of establishing a new democratic
Government with socialist goals.
Abu Sayyaf Group
17. The Abu Sayyaf Group has been listed since 2003 owing to its recruitment and
use of children. The group remains active in Basilan and Sulu Provinces and in the
Zamboanga Peninsula and continues to carry out bombings, extortions, kidnappings
for ransom and assassinations. In 2014, Abu Sayyaf leader Isnilon Totoni Hapilon
declared an oath of allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, but the
link between the two groups remains unclear. Unverified reports fro m 2016 suggest
that the Abu Sayyaf Group has merged with three other armed groups in the
Philippines under Hapilon’s leadership. Following the beheading of two foreign
hostages in April and June 2016, the Government deployed 10 battalions of army
and marine soldiers in Sulu and Basilan Provinces to combat the Abu Sayyaf Group.
Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police
18. The Armed Forces of the Philippines is composed of the Philippine Army, the
Philippine Navy (which includes the Philippine Marine Corps) and the Philippine
Air Force. Although the Philippine National Police is a civilian force, its special
action force, pursuant to Executive Order 546, can be called upon to support the
combat operations of the Armed Forces that involve the suppression of insurgency
and other serious threats to national security. The same policy authorizes local chief
executives to deputize community police officers as force multipliers for the
National Police. Under the Aquino Administration, the Armed Forces and the
National Police sought to preserve security, peace and order through the Bayanihan
internal peace and security plan. The plan sets forth a whole-nation approach in
which the Government, local communities and non-governmental organizations
work together with the Armed Forces and National Police to counter the threat
posed by armed groups.
19. The Citizen’s Armed Forces Geographical Unit, an auxiliary force under the
control of the Armed Forces that is composed of army reservists and civ ilians,
functions as a force multiplier to regular government forces. In addition, armed
groups with alleged links to the Armed Forces are among the other actors involved
the conflict between the Armed Forces and the New People’s Army. The
Government has denied any association with those groups. In September 2015, the
Commission on Human Rights of the Philippines raised concerns over the use of
auxiliary forces owing to their lack of proper training and sufficient orientation in
the conduct of military functions.

III. Grave violations committed against children
20. Armed clashes in the Philippines continue to affect children, predominantly on
Mindanao. Access restrictions and security constraints pose challenges for the
monitoring and verification of violations by the country task force in remote areas.
Violations are thus likely to be underreported and the figures provided do not
represent the actual scope of grave violations.
21. During the reporting period, the United Nations verified a total of 129 g rave
violations, affecting 192 children. Since 2014, the annual number of verified
incidents has remained stable. The increase in incidents in 2013 was primarily the
result of a rise in killings and maimings as part of attacks on schools and hospitals
in the context of intensified military operations.

17-05551

5/17

S/2017/294

22. Grave child rights violations were perpetrated by all parties to the conflict. Of
the 129 incidents verified by the country task force during the reporting period, 29
were attributed to the Armed Forces, including the Citizen Armed Forces
Geographical Unit, 10 to alleged pro-government armed groups (including the
Magahat and Alamara groups) and 2 to the National Police. Two additional incidents
involved joint operations between the Armed Forces and the Nat ional Police (one)
and the Armed Forces and the Alamara group (one), respectively. In addition,
13 incidents were attributed to the Abu Sayyaf Group, 11 to the New People’s Army,
9 to the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters and 7 to the Moro National
Liberation Front. Of the 129 verified violations, 46 could not be attributed to any
party to the conflict and mainly included the killing and maiming of children as part
of attacks on schools and hospitals, during crossfire incidents and contact with
unexploded ordnance. The denial of humanitarian access was the only grave
violation that was not reported during the period under review.
23. Most verified violations against children occurred on Mindanao (93 per cent),
which was also the most conflict-affected area of the Philippines, with the other
violations taking place in the Visayas islands and on Luzon island (2 and 5 per cent,
respectively). On Mindanao, most of the verified violations took place in the
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao and in the Soccsksargen region (46 and
19 per cent, respectively). However, since 2015, an increasing number of violations
were verified in the regions of Davao, Northern Mindanao and Caraga, affecting
predominantly children in indigenous communities. The increase is linked to
intensified counter-insurgency operations by the Armed Forces, involving alleged
pro-government armed groups, against the New People’s Army.
24. Apart from conflict-related violations against children, the participation of
individual members of the armed groups in armed clashes between rival clans, also
known as rido, was a trend throughout the reporting period. With regard to the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front, from January 2013 to June 2016, the United Nations
received information on more than 31 incidents of rido involving commanders or
members of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed
Forces that resulted in 8 children killed, 13 others injured and an unknown number
of schools damaged. The individuals involved, while associated with the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front, were acting in their personal capacity.

A.

Recruitment and use
25. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 17 incidents of
recruitment and use that affected 71 children. The total number of verified cases
increased by 20 per cent in comparison with the period covered by the previous
country report, which covered a time span of almost identical length. The majority
of the children were used as human shields in two separate incidents; Fifteen
children were used by the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters in one incident,
and 32 were used by the Moro National Liberation Front in the other.
26. Aside from those two incidents, verified incidents of child recruitment
significantly decreased during the reporting period. The drop was mainly a
reflection of fewer verified incidents being attributed to the Moro I slamic Liberation
Front and the Armed Forces. However, the country task force continued to verify
incidents of child recruitment by the Abu Sayyaf Group, the Bangsamoro Islamic
Freedom Fighters, the Moro National Liberation Front and New People’s Army. It
verified one incident in which a child was used by the Armed Forces.
27. During the reporting period, the country task force verified the recruitment and
use of six children (one girl and five boys) by the New People’s Army and received

6/17

17-05551

S/2017/294

additional unverified reports of the alleged recruitment and use of children, both in
front-line operations and in support functions. The children, between 15 and
17 years of age, indicated that they had joined the armed group voluntarily. Two of
them had participated in combat operations, while the others had assumed support
roles and had been armed. Of the six children, two had escaped, one had been
authorized to leave, one was killed and the whereabouts of the two remaining
children were unknown. In addition, according to government reports, the Armed
Forces had encountered and handed over children believed to be associated with the
New People’s Army to social welfare offices on several occasions. The New
People’s Army continues to affirm that it does not recruit children f or direct
participation in hostilities, and the group’s 2012 declaration and programme of
action for the rights, protection and welfare of children states that recruits must be
18 years of age at a minimum. However, it is worrying that, according to the
declaration, children as young as 15 years of age may be admitted as trainees or
apprentices and may be assigned to self-defence and other non-combat units and
tasks.
28. The country task force verified three incidents of recruitment and use
(affecting five boys) by the Abu Sayyaf Group. In the first incident, a 9 -year-old
boy was used for running errands and transporting weapons for approximately
18 months. After eventually fleeing from the Abu Sayyaf Group camp, he was killed
by the group in March 2014, reportedly for providing intelligence to the Armed
Forces. The second incident involved a 14-year-old boy who was recruited in a
school in 2013. In the third incident, three other boys (14 to 15 years of age) were
recruited from the same school in 2014. The director of the school was threatened
by the Abu Sayyaf Group after advising his students not to join the group. In
addition to the verified violations, the country task force received a number of
unverified reports of children being recruited by the Abu S ayyaf Group, including in
combat roles. According to credible sources, the Abu Sayyaf Group recruited around
30 children in Basilan Province in April 2015. The children, 15 to 17 years of age,
reportedly received payment and M-16 assault rifles after joining the group. Owing
to the difficulty in verifying reports in areas of Abu Sayyaf Group presence, no
accurate estimate of child recruits is available.
29. The United Nations also verified the recruitment and use of 10 boys by the
Moro National Liberation Front, 5 of whom were used in support roles during the
Zamboanga siege in September 2013, leading to the death of 2 of them. In 2016, the
country task force verified the recruitment and use of 5 boys between 13 and
17 years of age, who were seen wearing military uniforms and carrying firearms in a
Moro National Liberation Front military camp. In addition to those cases, the
United Nations verified the use of 32 children as human shields in one incident.
30. In December 2015, in North Cotabato Province, the country task force verified
an incident in which the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters used 15 children as
human shields during a tactical retreat from the Armed Forces. In addition to that
verified incident, credible reports indicate a broader use of ch ildren in support and
combat roles.
31. One incident of the use of children by the Armed Forces was verified,
involving a 13-year-old boy in a military camp in Negros Oriental Province. This
represents a large decrease compared with the 21 cases that had been attributed to
the Armed Forces and the Citizen Armed Forces Geographical Unit during the
period covered by my previous report. However, the country task force continued to
receive unverified reports of children being used as informants or guides by th e
Armed Forces.

17-05551

7/17

S/2017/294

32. In an encouraging development, the United Nations received no reports of
recruitment of children by the Moro Islamic Liberation Front during the reporting
period. The group’s general order No. 2 (2006), the code of conduct of the
Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces and the supplemental general order (2010)
prohibit the recruitment of children into the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces and
outline sanctions for non-compliance. The fact that the group remains primarily a
community-based organization and its members live with their families complicates
the identification of children associated with the group.
Deprivation of liberty of children for alleged association with armed groups
33. The country task force documented the detention or dep rivation of liberty of
26 children by the Armed Forces for their alleged association with armed groups.
The children had been arrested by the Armed Forces, the National Police or in joint
operations and frequently detained for information gathering purpose s, sometimes
with their parents or other adults suspected of supporting armed groups. Five of the
children were ill-treated while in custody.
34. In June 2013, in Maguindanao Province, three boys (16 to 17 years of age)
were arrested, detained and publicly accused of being members of the Bangsamoro
Islamic Freedom Fighters. They were hogtied and physically abused during their
interrogation and subsequently charged with illegal possession of explosives and
turned over to the National Police. With the assistance of United Nations partners,
the three children were referred to the municipal social welfare office. In 2014, in
Maguindanao Province, soldiers at a checkpoint of the Armed Forces stopped and
requested a 14-year-old boy and his father to step into their camp on suspicion of
being members of the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters. They have not been
seen since. A petition was filed at the regional trial court and the case is currently
being heard. In November 2015, a 14-year-old boy was arrested and detained. He
was allegedly mistaken for his deceased adult brother, who had been suspected of
being a member of the Abu Sayyaf Group. Despite his status as a minor having been
established and continued advocacy on the part of the United Nations, the boy
remains in detention and has been classified as a high-risk detainee. On 12 April
2016, in Basilan Province, a 15-year-old boy was detained with two adults and
tortured by Armed Forces soldiers for their alleged association with the Abu Sayyaf
Group. One of the adults died from his injuries. The child, who had been charged
with the illegal possession of explosives, sustained severe injuries and suffers from
ongoing psychological trauma. He was discharged from the hospital on 20 April and
provisionally released and returned to his family. He is receiving psychosocial
support from a local civil society organization. The Regional Human Rights
Commission of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao is investigating the
case.

B.

Killing and maiming
35. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 74 incidents of
killing and maiming involving 116 children; 40 children were killed (28 boys,
11 girls and 1 of unknown gender) and 76 were injured (40 boys, 34 girls and 2 of
unknown gender). The incidents involved targeted shootings, crossfire, airstrikes,
shelling, indiscriminate attacks, summary executions, unexploded ordnance and/or
the mistreatment of children during detention. While all armed groups and forces
were involved in incidents leading to the killing and maiming of children, almost
half of all child casualties were attributed to either the Armed Forces (30 child
casualties) or the Abu Sayyaf Group (24 child casualties). The perpetrator remained
unidentified in 35 per cent of the incidents, (a total of 29 incidents, in which

8/17

17-05551

S/2017/294

10 children were killed and 25 injured). Most of those cases were crossfire incidents
between the Armed Forces and armed groups.
36. The country task force verified the killing of 10 children and the injuring of 20
others by the Armed Forces in 20 incidents. The majority of those incidents took
place during military operations against the Abu Sayyaf Group and to a lesser scale
in operations against the New People’s Army in indigenous communities. They
involved targeted and indiscriminate attacks, crossfire and explosive remnants of
war. On 18 August 2015, in Bukidnon Province, the Armed Forces summarily
executed five members of a family, including two boys, 14 and 17 years of age, in
front of the family home, claiming that they had been members of the New People’s
Army. While the Armed Forces provided financial compensation to the families of
the deceased and for the burial ceremony, there have been no convictions in
connection with the incident. In another incident, in April 2014 in Basilan Province,
an Armed Forces air strike hit a madrassah, killing a 15 -year-old boy and injuring
three boys between 14 and 16 years of age.
37. Seven verified incidents, in which 9 children were killed and 15 injured, were
attributed to the Abu Sayyaf Group. Although most of the children were victims of
indiscriminate attacks and ambushes, 2 boys were the victims of targeted killings.
One of the targeted killings occurred in May 2015 in Basilan Province, when the
Abu Sayyaf Group kidnapped two boys and took them to a nearby Abu Sayyaf
Group camp. One boy (13 years of age) was released while the other boy (age
unknown) was beheaded for allegedly passing on information to the Armed Forces.
In another incident, in July 2014 in Sulu Province, the Ab u Sayyaf Group ambushed
a number of vehicles transporting eight members of the Barangay Peacekeeping
Action Team and a group of civilians on its way to celebrate Eid al -Fitr. Seven
children were killed and six injured during the attack. In July 2015, also in Sulu
Province, an alleged member of the Abu Sayyaf Group threw a hand grenade at a
military convoy, injuring 14 civilians, including 5 children who had been standing
along the roadside.
38. The country task force verified the killing of four children in three incidents
by the New People’s Army. All of the incidents took place in the context of the
conflict between the Armed Forces and the New People’s Army and resulted from
the group’s continued use of ambush tactics. For example, in January 2013, in
Negros Occidental Province, a 14-year-old boy was killed alongside several adult
civilians in an ambush by the New People’s Army. A number of civilians had
solicited a ride with police officers and the associated Barangay Peacekeeping
Action Team when the latter were waylaid by the rebels. The New People’s Army
claimed responsibility for the attack and issued a public apology for the civilian
casualties. On 31 March 2016, in North Cotabato Province, members of the Yumil
group, an armed militia allegedly linked to the New People’s Army, attacked a
detachment of the Citizen Armed Forces Geographical Unit. At the time of the
attack, members of the detachment were being visited by their families. A boy and a
girl, both 1-year-old, were killed and one detachment member and a woman were
injured.
39. Three incidents of killing and maiming, in which two children were killed and
seven were injured, were attributed to armed groups allegedly supporting the efforts
of the Armed Forces in fighting the New People’s Army in indigenous areas. For
example, in October 2015 in Bukidnon Province, members of the Dela Mance group
opened fire on a group of indigenous people from a community suspected of
supporting the New People’s Army. An elderly man was killed and two children, 10
and 11 years of age, sustained gunshot wounds. The community reported long standing harassment by members of the group owing to community’s alleged
support for the New People’s Army. In another incident, which took place in
17-05551

9/17

S/2017/294

January 2016, in Davao del Norte Province, a 17-year-old boy was shot and killed
by a member of the Alamara group, reportedly because he and his family had been
considered to be supporters of the New People’s Army. The boy had been studying
in an indigenous school run by a non-governmental organization that alleged had
links to the New People’s Army.

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence
40. During the reporting period, the country task force verified the rape of a
14-year-old girl from an indigenous community by three soldiers o f the Armed
Forces in three separate incidents between May and July 2015. The soldiers were
court-martialled and their superior was recommended for administrative sanctions.
The alleged perpetrators reached an out-of-court settlement with the girl’s family.
Subsequently, the civilian criminal proceedings for rape were dismissed following
an affidavit of desistance submitted by the victim’s mother, in which she claims she
was forced to file a complaint by members of the New People’s Army. In addition to
that incident, the country task force received a number of reports of conflict -related
rape and sexual violence that could not be verified.
41. Available information suggests that rape and other forms of sexual violence
are not systematic in their use by combatants. However, incidents of rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children are seldom reported, as victims and their
families fear stigmatization in their communities or reprisals from the perpetrators.
In addition, cases of rape are often settled outside of the formal judicial system
through financial payments, in particular in indigenous communities. It is therefore
likely that the number of cases of conflict-related rape and other forms of sexual
violence are underreported. Those suspected of perpetrating such violence must be
held accountable in civilian courts. When members of the Armed Forces are
suspected in such cases, the Armed Forces must apply existing accountability
mechanisms whenever appropriate.

D.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
42. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 32 incidents of
attacks on schools and hospitals and related personnel. As a result, 24 schools were
damaged, 12 school workers and 1 hospital worker were attacked (1 was killed, 1
was injured, 1 was detained and 9 were abducted) and 41 teachers were threatened
with physical violence. Six incidents were attributed to the Armed Forces, five to
the Magahat group, four to the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters and two each
to the Alamara group, the New People’s Army and the Abu Sayyaf Group. Twelve
incidents could not be attributed to a specific entity. In addition, the country task
force verified, but could not attribute, attacks on 11 schools in Maguindanao and
Lanao Del Sur Provinces that were being used as polling stations during the national
election in May 2016.
43. The United Nations notes with great concern the high number of attacks on
schools and teachers committed in indigenous communities since 2015 in the
context of the counter-insurgency operations of the Armed Forces against the New
People’s Army, with increased involvement of allegedly pro -government armed
groups. In particular, many teachers and students working for private schools run by
non-governmental organizations operating in indigenous communities have been
publicly accused of being supporters or members of the New People’s Army and
subsequently harassed, threatened, physically attacked or killed. In 2015 alone, the

10/17

17-05551

S/2017/294

country task force verified the killing of 1 school director, the maiming of 1 teacher,
threats of attack against 40 teachers and the burning of one school.
44. The six incidents attributed to the Armed Forces included attacks on four
schools and one teacher and threats against seven teachers. Although most i ncidents
of threats against teachers were related to the conflict with the New People’s Army,
the Armed Forces also conducted an aerial strike in an Abu Sayyaf Group -held area,
causing physical damage to the structure of a madrassah and an elementary schoo l.
In addition, the Magahat and Alamara groups repeatedly targeted teachers and
schools run by non-governmental organizations operating in remote indigenous
communities in the context of counter-insurgency operations against the New
People’s Army. During the reporting period, the Magahat group committed five
violations, resulting in the killing of 1 school director, the injury of 1 teacher, the
burning of one school and the threatening of 28 teachers. The Alamara group
perpetrated three violations involving threats against eight teachers.
45. In the areas where the above-mentioned violations took place, the Armed
Forces were reportedly often encamped there at the same time and were involved in
threats made against faculty members and in the temporary occupa tion of schools
with alleged links to the New People’s Army. For example, in September 2015, in
Surigao Del Sur Province, a school director was killed by members of the Magahat
group. He was found dead in a classroom, hogtied and with his throat slit. The day
before, members of the group had threatened to kill 25 teachers from the same
school should they refuse to leave the area. The Armed Forces had visited the same
village two days prior to the incident and was encamped in close proximity when
the incident took place. Five warrants of arrest had been issued against the alleged
perpetrators, but as at the time of writing, no arrests had been made. In another
incident in February 2015 in Davao del Norte Province, four teachers who were on
their way to work were stopped by the Alamara group and threatened with death if
they were to proceed to their school. A month later, the same teachers were
interrogated regarding their alleged links with the New People’s Army and
threatened by members of the Alamara group and the Armed Forces. Following the
incident, three of the teachers asked to be reassigned to other areas.
46. Access to education for over 17,000 children was affected during the reporting
period, either temporarily or for extended periods of time, owing to attacks on
schools and related personnel and the use of schools for military purposes.
47. Regarding attacks on health-care establishments, the country task force was
able to verify one incident, which was attributed to the Abu Sayyaf Group. On
18 May 2013, the group looted medical supplies in a provincial health office on Jolo
island, then abducted and later killed a female health-care worker.
48. In addition to attacks on schools and hospitals, 31 schools and four hospitals
were used for military purposes. The majority of incidents (at 23 schools and
4 hospitals) were attributed to the Armed Forces. Three of the schools in question
had been used in conjunction with alleged pro-government armed groups, with two
others being used jointly with the National Police. Three incidents of military use of
schools were attributed to the National Police. The Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom
Fighters, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the Maute group each used two
schools for military purposes. One incident could not be attributed.

E.

Abductions
49. The country task force continued receiving sporadic reports of abductions of
children and verified two incidents that involved the abduction of three children. One
incident was attributed to the Abu Sayyaf Group, while the other was attributed to the

17-05551

11/17

S/2017/294

Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters. In Basilan Province, two boys were abducted
by the Abu Sayyaf Group; one of the boys was later released while the other was
beheaded on 1 May 2015 after having been accused of spying on the armed group.
The Abu Sayyaf Group continued to engage in kidnap-for-ransom activities
throughout the reporting period, but it is unclear whether children were affected.

IV. Follow-up to the conclusions of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
50. In follow-up to the conclusions on children and armed conflict in the
Philippines (S/AC.51/2014/1), the country task force improved its geographic
coverage of monitoring and verification activities and increased awar eness among
humanitarian organizations and parties to the conflict regarding violations
committed against children. Country task force technical working groups in Manila
and on Mindanao continue to strengthen partnerships and advance the reach of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism nationwide.
51. In line with the conclusions, the task force also continued to engage closely
with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, with a view to supporting the full
implementation of the United Nations-Moro Islamic Liberation Front action plan,
and initiated technical-level discussions with the New People’s Army on the issue of
child protection.

V. Progress in ending and preventing grave violations by
armed forces and groups in the Philippines
52. Executive Order No. 138 (August 2013) established the Government’s
Inter-Agency Committee on Children in Armed Conflict, charging it with ensuring
that international instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, are
respected in the course of all government activities. In particular, the Committee has
been overseeing the development of guidelines for the Armed Forces with respect to
the protection of children affected by armed conflict. To address specific concerns
with the situations of children in situations of armed conflict, three additional
government agencies were given seats on the Committee, including the Department
of Labor and Employment, the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos and the
National Commission on Indigenous Peoples.
53. The executive order also created a monitoring, reporting and response system
on children affected by armed conflict and expanded the comprehensive programme
framework for children in armed conflict to ensure the efficient monitoring of cases
and the provision of timely multisectoral responses under the auspices of the
Council for the Welfare of Children. Government agencies signed and executed a
memorandum of agreement on 25 July 2014, which further defined the roles and
responsibilities of each agency in enhancing its capacities on monitoring, reporting
and responding to grave violations.
54. In response to the Secretary-General’s recommendation for the Government to
strengthen its capacity to protect children in conflict-affected areas (see S/2010/36),
the Government undertook a nationwide initiative to train service providers in local
government units and front-line workers in non-governmental organizations to
monitor, report and facilitate responses for victims of grave violations as part of the
monitoring, reporting and response system. The orientation activities that took place
between 2013 and 2015 were attended by a total of 579 front -line service providers
12/17

17-05551

S/2017/294

from 117 cities and municipalities in 33 conflict-affected provinces nationwide.
Three additional orientation workshops were held in 2016.
55. Recognizing the significance of local government support to the monitoring,
reporting and response system, the Department of the Interior and Local
Government issued memorandum circular No. 2016-67, requiring local chief
executives to adopt the protocol of the monitoring, reporting and response system
and to share information on grave violations with the Inter-Agency Committee for
follow-up.
Armed Forces of the Philippines
56. The Armed Forces, through its human rights office, began to implement its
draft strategic plan, developed in 2012, on preventing and responding to grave
violations against children in conflict. In July 2013, the office issued letter directive
No. 25 to address concerns raised by the United Nations regarding guidelines on the
conduct of activities in schools and hospitals. The directive clarifies the definition
of a minor, expands the guidelines to include a protocol for the monitoring,
reporting and response system and clarifies the process for the handover of children
separated from armed forces or groups to child protection actors. Subsequently, the
Department of Education issued memorandum No. 221, currently under revision,
which guides schools personnel in regulating the access of the Armed Forces to
educational facilities. While the adoption of the letter directive represents an
important step forward, it must be noted that schools continue to be used for civilmilitary activities, in particular in remote areas. When Armed Forces personnel are
present in schools, even in the context of providing services or organizing sporting
or cultural activities, they put children at risk and potentially turn them into military
targets.
57. To ensure broader prevention of grave child rights violations, the Department
of National Defence issued circular No. 1, dated 4 February 2016, on child
protection in armed conflict situations. This policy document increases the
minimum safe distance required between military patrols/detachments and
schools/hospitals from 50 metres to 460 metres, which is the effective range of the
Armed Forces standard-issue long firearms. However, the circular also contains a
number of concerning aspects, including its definition of schools, provisions on the
direct delivery of social welfare services to child victims by the Armed Forces and
references to the conduct of civil-military activities in schools.
58. In partnership with the Commission on Human Rights of the Philippines, in
December 2015 the human rights office of Armed Forces reviewed and updated the
graduated curricula on human rights and international humanitarian law for military
personnel, which includes specific child-protection aspects.
Moro Islamic Liberation Front
59. On 29 April 2013, the leadership of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front agreed
to an open-ended extension of the 2009 United Nations-Moro Islamic Liberation
Front action plan. Although attempts had been made to reinvigorate engagement
with the group following the extension, the political and security situation was not
conducive, resulting in limited progress in its implementation. The signing of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Bangsamoro in March 2014 renewed the opportunity
to engage with the group, and it reaffirmed its commitment to fully implement the
action plan. In June 2014, the group reconstituted a five -member panel, consisting
of military and civilian representatives from the c entral committee, to engage with
the United Nations and appointed a focal point on children and armed conflict in the
office of the general staff to mobilize its base commanders.
17-05551

13/17

S/2017/294

60. In support of the base commanders, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
appointed focal points in each of the 31 base commands and 7 front commands of
the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces to ensure the timely implementation of
action plan activities. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front also publicly displayed its
command orders on the non-recruitment or use of minors and its sanctions for
non-compliance, to educate both the armed wing of the group and civilians
regarding the group’s code of conduct and the accountability framework for those
who recruit and use children.
61. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front continues to guarantee that it will facilitate
unhindered access to territory under its control for action plan -related activities and
that its base commanders will be present during those activities. Base command
progress reports are submitted to the United Nations and the group’s action plan
panel on a quarterly basis and serve as a tool to monitor compliance and assess
progress on implementation.
62. Orientation sessions for officers and troops, including all front and base
commanders of the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces and the Bangsamoro Islamic
Women’s Auxiliary Brigade, were completed in early 2015. Apart from emphasizing
roles and responsibilities with regard to action plan implementation, the orientation
sessions were critical in addressing the concerns of the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front with respect to social and cultural values and the religious principles ascribed
to the involvement of children in combat or support roles, including the definition
of a child as being someone who is under 18 years of age. A total of 9,435 elements
from the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces and the Bangsamoro Islamic Women’s
Auxiliary Brigade elements received the orientation. Since then, the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front has continued to hold similar sessions to systematically reinforce
those messages, conducting over 100 sessions that have reached more than 9,600
individuals. Orientation sessions also have been held for parents and children,
reaching at least 4,600 individuals as of November 2016.
63. On 18 May 2015, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, with support from the
United Nations and partners, launched a local version of the “Children, Not Soldiers”
campaign. The campaign aims at affecting a positive change in community practices
to ensure that children do not become associated with the armed wing of the group
(i.e., the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces and Bangsamoro Islamic Women’s
Auxiliary Brigade). The first phase of the campaign comprised community
awareness-raising sessions, discussion groups with children and youth, radio
programmes and advocacy initiatives by a former child soldier, directly reaching over
15,000 people, including 2,457 children, 3,201 members of the Bangsamoro Islamic
Armed Forces and 3,256 members of the Bangsamoro Islamic Women’s Auxiliary
Brigade in 61 municipalities and 8 provinces across Mindanao. The second phase was
launched in July 2016 and aimed at reinforcing messages on preventing the
association or re-association of children with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and
other armed groups, targeting parents, teachers and community and religious leaders.
64. At the heart of the campaign was a series of public events organized and led
by the base commanders of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front in their re spective
base commands. This was an important component of the action plan as it allowed
the group’s armed wing and communities to directly hear the base commanders’
commitment to zero child association and to the non -involvement of children in any
armed or support activities, including rido. All base commanders present signed a
public declaration at the end of the event signalling their commitment. Over 10,000
people living in Moro Islamic Liberation Front communities attended those events
across all base commands.

14/17

17-05551

S/2017/294

65. With a view to the fulfilment of the final benchmark of the action plan, the
chief of staff of the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces issued a command order to
all front and base commands on 12 December 2015, ordering commanders to
comply with the guidelines on the identification and disengagement of children who
were formally and informally associated with the armed group. That was followed
by the appointment of a task force in all base commands assigned to facilitate and
support the identification and disengagement process. A country task force working
group on the identification and disengagement of children associated with the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front and the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces was formed to
monitor compliance with that final benchmark. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front
identified a total of 1,869 children, the majority of whom had been associated with
the group in support roles. Since April 2016, all of those children identified have
undergone a formal disassociation process. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front
issued certificates of disengagement to those children, publicly announcing the
disassociation of the children from the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces. The last
disengagement ceremony took place on 19 March 2017.
66. The progress achieved has been the result of the commitment and action by the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front at the highest levels and that of front and base
commanders. The systematic sensitization, awareness-raising and training initiatives
for the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces and communities living in core Moro
Islamic Liberation Front base command areas were essential prerequisites for
achieving a level of understanding and acceptance on the issue of recruitment and
use of children among those stakeholders. The Bangsamoro Islamic Women’s
Auxiliary Brigade, a force that supplements the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces
and is present in all base commands, was also strategically placed and was a key
contributor to action plan implementation.
67. In addition to a joint technical mission in November 2015 between the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the United Nations has
supported the Moro Islamic Liberation Front action plan panel in developing
safeguards linked to existing accountability measures to prevent the future
recruitment and association of minors. In addition to its existing code of conduct, the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front issued a directive on 25 March 2017 requiring regular
monitoring and screening of armed elements and age-assessment guidelines to
establish internal safeguards to prevent the association and re-association of children.
68. The provision of services, including the development of life skills and
vocational opportunities, will also be important to minimize children’s risk of
re-association. A programme focusing on the prevention of association and
re-association is currently being designed by UNICEF. Concerted efforts by the
Government, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the United Nations and the
international community will be needed to bring it to fruition.
69. In November 2016, my Special Representative for children and armed conflict
met with representatives of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front in Geneva and
commended their commitment to and progress made in the implementation of the
action plan. She noted that the positive engagement of the group set an important
precedent for other armed groups in the country and in the region.
70. With respect to other child protection issues, incidents of rido involving
elements of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front remain a concern that has been raised
with the group’s leadership. In response, the group formed a task force in March 2015
that was mandated to monitor, investigate and recommend appropriate measures to
avoid rido incidents between members of the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces. The
country task force also urged the Moro Islamic Liberation Front to strengthen efforts
17-05551

15/17

S/2017/294

to ensure that children were not involved in or affected by such incidents and to take
steps to sanction members who were responsible for incidents that caused death or
grave injury to children. In parallel, UNICEF and its partners continued to raise
awareness on the impact of rido on children as part of the local “Children, Not
Soldiers” campaign, which focused on a broad set of child protection concerns.
New People’s Army
71. In July 2012, the National Democratic Front of the Philippines formalized its
declaration and programme of action for the rights, protection and welfare of
children as an expression of its commitment to defend the rights of Filipino
children. Although the declaration sets the minimum age for recruitment for combat
by the New People’s Army at 18 years of age, it permits the recruitment of children
15 years of age and older for self-defence and non-combat tasks.
72. In 2015 and 2016, several technical meetings were held between UNICEF and
the National Democratic Front of the Philippines within the framework of the
declaration. The group has reiterated its willingness to cooperate with UNICEF,
which was welcomed by the country task force.

VI. Observations and recommendations
73. I condemn the continuing grave violations committed against children in
armed conflict, including the recruitment and use and killing and maiming of
children, as well as attacks on schools and hospitals. I call upon all parties to
conflict in the Philippines to respect their obligations under international law and
put in place measures to end and prevent further violations.
74. I am encouraged by the resumption of peace negotiations between the
Government and Communist and Moro groups and urge the parties to include child
protection issues on the agendas of the respective peace tables, in consultation with
the United Nations.
75. I call upon all parties to conflict in the Philippines to respect the civilian
character of schools and cease attacks against education facilities, education
personnel and students and further urge parties to end the military use of schools,
which can put children and their access to education at risk.
76. I encourage the international donor community to pro vide financial resources
to support the work of the United Nations in monitoring and reporting, in supporting
the full implementation of the United Nations-Moro Islamic Liberation Front action
plan and in engaging with other armed groups on the issue of children and armed
conflict. International financial support will also be crucial to ensure that children
disassociated from armed groups receive appropriate socioeconomic services,
thereby minimizing the risk of re-association.
Recommendations to the Government of the Philippines
77. I welcome the support of the Government in relation to the implementation of
the United Nations-Moro Islamic Liberation Front action plan. I urge the Government
to continue to support and facilitate dialogue between the Unit ed Nations and armed
groups in order to end and prevent grave violations against children.
78. I am encouraged by steps taken by the Government to better protect children
in armed conflict, including through the creation of the Inter -Agency Committee on
Children in Armed Conflict and the monitoring, reporting and response system on
children affected by armed conflict. I encourage the Government to actively use

16/17

17-05551

S/2017/294

these mechanisms to provide appropriate assistance and services for all child
victims and to ensure independent, prompt and thorough investigations into alleged
violations against children so that perpetrators are held to account.
79. I welcome the ongoing reinforcement of policies, directives and training
regarding children affected by armed conflict and encourage the Government to
continue its dialogue and cooperation with the United Nations to further strengthen
the capacity of its armed forces to protect children and prevent violations in
conflict-affected areas. I recall the responsibility of the G overnment to ensure
adherence to the principles of international humanitarian and human rights law by
all forces under its command, including the military, police and auxiliary forces.
80. I urge the Government to continue to strengthen the national legal framework
to protect children affected by armed conflict in accordance with international
standards, including through the prompt passage of the law on children in situations
of armed conflict, and to ensure that the law will not provide for the arrest, d etention
and/or prosecution of children solely for their association with armed groups.
81. I urge the Government to guarantee due process for all children detained for
their association with armed groups and recall that children should be treated
primarily as victims and that the deprivation of liberty of children should be used as
a last resort and for the shortest time possible.
Recommendations to the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
82. I welcome the continued engagement of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children, and I am very encouraged by
the strong commitment of the leadership and regional commanders, which has led to
significant progress towards the full implementation of the United Nations -Moro
Islamic Liberation Front action plan.
83. I urge the Moro Islamic Liberation Front to continue the process of identifying
and disengaging children who are formally or informally associated with the
Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces in all base commands, with a v iew to the
completion of the final benchmark of the action plan, and call upon the armed group
to put in place the necessary safeguards, linked to the implementation of existing
accountability mechanisms, to prevent the recruitment and association of child ren.
84. I encourage the Moro Islamic Liberation Front to engage the support of the
United Nations in implementing the priorities identified in the Comprehensive
Agreement on Bangsamoro, in particular with respect to programmes aimed at
improving the welfare and rights of children in conflict-affected areas.
Recommendations to other armed groups
85. I welcome the preliminary engagement between the United Nations and the
National Democratic Front of the Philippines, and I am encouraged by the group’s
willingness to cooperate on issues relating to child protection. I urge the National
Democratic Front of the Philippines and the New People’s Army to continue this
cooperation and to immediately desist from the recruitment and use of children in
any military or support functions.
86. I urge other listed armed groups that have not done so to enter into dialogue
with the United Nations for the purpose of preparing and implementing an action
plan to end the recruitment and use of children that includes provisions on United
Nations access for the purposes of raising awareness, response and monitoring
compliance.

17-05551

17/17
