A/61/PV.103

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

103rd plenary meeting
Friday, 15 June 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Mladineo
(Croatia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of Kurt Waldheim, fourth
Secretary-General of the United Nations
The Acting President: This morning, before we
take up the item on our agenda, it is our sad duty to pay
tribute to the memory of Kurt Waldheim, fourth
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who passed
away on 14 June 2007. Kurt Waldheim was SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations from 1972 to 1981.
On behalf of the General Assembly and its
President, and on my own behalf, I request the
representative of Austria to convey our condolences to
the Government and the people of Austria and to the
bereaved family of Kurt Waldheim.
I now invite members to stand and observe a
minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Kurt
Waldheim.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I join the General
Assembly in solemn remembrance of the fourth
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

When Kurt Waldheim took office, on 1 January
1972, the world looked very different from the way it
does today. The cold war was still in its icy stages. The
People’s Republic of China had just taken its seat in
the Assembly. The Middle East was to undergo
upheavals that reverberate to this day. Cyprus was to
become a divided island, and more than 40 years later
that division has yet to heal. The Viet Nam war had yet
to reach its end.
Kurt Waldheim’s 10 years at the helm covered a
deeply challenging time in the world and in the life of
our Organization. He needed to deploy every
diplomatic and political skill acquired over a long
career,
including
as
Austria’s
Permanent
Representative to the United Nations and Federal
Minister for Foreign Affairs. He led the Organization
with prudence, perseverance and precision.
Kurt Waldheim’s initiatives as Secretary-General
ranged from pursuing good offices in Cyprus and
visiting Tehran to seek the release of hostages at the
United States embassy there, to appointing an envoy
for the crisis ravaging Afghanistan and a mediator for
the protracted Iran-Iraq war. When he left office, in
1981, the world had undergone profound changes that
could hardly have been imagined 10 years before.
Almost two decades later, when I served as my
country’s ambassador to Vienna, I came to know Kurt
Waldheim personally after his retirement from public
life. He was a man who had lived history. The world
had changed still more, in even more unimaginable
ways.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-38411 (E)

*0738411*

A/61/PV.103

As I express my condolences today to
Mr. Waldheim’s family and to the people and the
Government of Austria, I pay tribute to him and to all
my predecessors, who have served in what has been
called the most impossible job on Earth.
The Acting President: I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Tunisia, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in French): The
African Group learned with great sadness of the
passing of Kurt Waldheim, former Secretary-General
of the United Nations and former President of Austria.
On this occasion, we should like to express our most
heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and to the
Government and the people of Austria.
Mr. Waldheim took up the destiny of our
Organization at a crucial time for the world.
Throughout his two mandates, he demonstrated a great
determination to advance the principles and purposes
of the Organization.
Mr. Waldheim will remain in the collective
memory of our Organization as an experienced
statesman and diplomat who was sensitive to the
concerns of our peoples, in particular in Africa.
The Acting President: I call next on the
representative of Singapore, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): On behalf of the Group
of Asian States, allow me to offer some words of
condolence on the demise of Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who
passed away yesterday at the age of 88. Mr. Waldheim
was the fourth Secretary-General of the United
Nations, succeeding U Thant. Mr. Waldheim served
two terms — from 1972 to 1981 — a challenging
period that reflected cold war realities. As noted by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in a statement issued
yesterday, Mr. Waldheim served the United Nations in
a crucial period in the history of the Organization.
Shortly after coming into office, Mr. Waldheim
was confronted by a number of humanitarian disasters.
In response, he created the post of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Coordinator, which led to the creation
of the United Nations Disaster Relief Office, which

2

was a precursor of today’s Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.
Mr. Waldheim also came to the United Nations at
a time of financial crisis. Nevertheless, he managed to
improve the financial status of the Organization by
various methods, including streamlining operations and
reducing costs. Mr. Waldheim also took a keen interest
in management issues, and it was during his tenure that
the International Civil Service Commission was
created.
On this solemn occasion, I would like to extend,
on behalf of the Asian Group, my sympathies to the
Government and people of Austria. The Asian Group
also extends its condolences to the family of
Mr. Waldheim.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Eastern European States.
Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): On behalf of the
countries of the Group of Eastern European States, I
wish to say that it was with sadness that we heard of
the passing away of Mr. Kurt Waldheim, former
Secretary-General of the United Nations, a
distinguished Austrian diplomat and statesman.
As Secretary-General at the helm of the United
Nations throughout the turbulent 1970s, Mr. Waldheim
is remembered for his personal engagement in the
search for solutions in Namibia, Cyprus, the Middle
East and the Indian subcontinent. He also marshalled
the largest relief operations undertaken under United
Nations auspices at the time, in Bangladesh and in the
Sudano-Sahelian region of Africa.
I would like to use this opportunity to extend our
heartfelt condolences to Mr. Waldheim’s family and to
the Government and the people of Austria.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, I would like to pay tribute to the memory of
Kurt Waldheim and to convey our condolences to the
Austrian Government and people as well as to
Mr. Waldheim’s family on the sad passing away of the
fourth Secretary-General of the United Nations.

07-38411

A/61/PV.103

With his exceptional career as a diplomat,
ambassador, Minister for Foreign Affairs and President
of Austria, Kurt Waldheim belonged to a generation
that lived through a painful and turbulent phase in the
history of his country and of Europe. His biography as
well as that of his contemporaries remains
controversial even today.

Secretary-General Waldheim’s contribution will be
remembered as a meaningful chapter in the historical
evolution of this Organization. May he rest in peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Western European and other
States.

At the helm of the United Nations, Kurt
Waldheim directed the Organization at a crucial period
for international relations. At critical times, he played
an active part, seeking solutions to conflicts that took
up a very important place at that time on the
international agenda.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the members of the Group of
Western European and other States and to make a
statement on the passing of Kurt Waldheim, the fourth
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

His performance, however, was affected by the
limits of the cold war. South Africa, Namibia, the
question of Cyprus, the Middle East conflict in its
many facets, the dramatic circumstances surrounding
the birth of Bangladesh as an independent State and the
situation of Africa, among other topics, were the focus
of his greatest efforts and personal involvement. The
oil crisis in 1973 and the North-South divide furthered
the debate on building a new international economic
order; hence the importance that economic and social
topics started to take on our Organization’s agenda.

As Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim was
dedicated to serving the United Nations during a
critical period in its history. He made a point of visiting
areas of specific concern to the United Nations. He
also tried to involve the United Nations in the major
world crises of his term in office. Mr. Waldheim also
played a leading role in a number of major
international conferences convened under United
Nations auspices. These included the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, which led
to the conclusion of the landmark 1982 Convention on
the Law of the Sea.

At the same time, Secretary-General Waldheim
gave impetus to United Nations action in humanitarian
assistance by appointing a Disaster Relief Coordinator
and creating the United Nations Disaster Relief Office
as the relevant agency within the system.
Under his leadership, a series of innovative
international conferences were held, convened under
the auspices of the United Nations: on trade and
development, in Santiago de Chile in 1972; on the
environment, in Stockholm in 1972; on the law of the
sea, in Caracas in 1974; on population, in Bucharest in
1974; on world food issues, in Rome also in 1974; and
on women, in Mexico in 1975.

The members of the Group of Western European
and other States would like to express their deepest
sympathies and condolences to Ambassador Pfanzelter
and the Austrian mission, to the Austrian Government
and people and to Mr. Waldheim’s family.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States, the host country.
Mr. Miller (United States of America): On behalf
of the United States as host country of the United
Nations, I join others this morning in expressing our
sympathy and condolences to the family of Kurt
Waldheim, the fourth Secretary-General of the United
Nations, and also to the people and Government of
Austria. The United States notes that Secretary-General
Waldheim served this Organization for a decade and at
a crucial point in its history.

We should also recall his participation in the
meetings of the Security Council that were held away
from Headquarters — in Addis Ababa in January 1972
and in Panama in March 1973 — and his participation
in meetings of the Organization of African Unity and
the Organization of American States.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.

The international community also has him to
thank for having made his own country, Austria, and
the city of Vienna, one of the main headquarters of the
United Nations and of multilateralism. We hope that

Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): On behalf of the
Austrian Government and the Austrian people, I should
like to convey to you, Madam President, the expression
of our profound gratitude for your most thoughtful

07-38411

3

A/61/PV.103

gesture to pay tribute to the memory of the late
Secretary-General of the United Nations and former
President of the Republic of Austria, Mr. Kurt
Waldheim.
Today we mourn the loss of an outstanding and
distinguished diplomat and statesman. Kurt Waldheim
dedicated his life to the service of international peace,
development and freedom. He saw in the United
Nations an indispensable forum for advancing the
common goals of humankind. He believed in the power
of multilateral diplomacy. During his 10 years at the
helm of our Organization, from 1972 to 1981,
Secretary-General Waldheim not only tackled
numerous international crises vigorously and
courageously, but also addressed tirelessly global
injustice in the economic and social fields and the
challenges of the developing world.
Mr. Waldheim remained committed to the cause
of the United Nations throughout his life — until the
very end of his life — and followed with keen interest
all major developments in the world Organization. He
rejoiced in the fact that the United Nations has
assumed a growing importance in our globalized
world.
In a final letter that was published this morning,
Kurt Waldheim stated that he considered his service to
the United Nations as the most challenging and
rewarding period of his life. He called for
reconciliation as a precondition for internal and
external peace.
Austrians, of course, also remember Kurt
Waldheim as a former President and Foreign Minister
who served twice as our Permanent Representative to
the United Nations. He served our country with
extraordinary devotion.
I would like to express my sincere thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General and to the
representatives of the regional groups and of the host
country, who have thoughtfully paid tribute to the late
Secretary-General in highlighting his achievements.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/61/709/Add.7
and 8)
The Acting President: I should like to invite the
attention of the General Assembly to documents

4

A/61/709/Add.7 and 8, in which the Secretary-General
informs the President of the General Assembly that,
since the issuance of his communications contained in
documents A/61/709 and addenda 1 to 6, the Niger and
Côte d’Ivoire have made the necessary payments to
reduce their arrears below the amount specified in
Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in these
documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 44 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolutions (A/61/L.61 and A/61/L.62)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on this agenda item at its
47th and 48th plenary meetings, on 3 November 2006.
Members will also recall that under this item, the
Assembly adopted resolutions 61/45, 61/221, 61/255
and 61/269 on 4 and 20 December 2006, on 26 January
2007 and on 25 May 2007, respectively.
I give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia
to introduce draft resolution A/61/L.61.
Mr. Botora (Ethiopia): Let me at the outset
express the deepest condolences of the Government
and of the people of Ethiopia to the Austrian
Government and people as well as to the family of
Mr. Kurt Waldheim on the passing of the former
Secretary-General.
Mr. Waldheim was not only one of the
outstanding Secretaries-General of our Organization
but also an experienced statesman with a great vision
for his country, Austria, and the world.
I have the honour and great pleasure to introduce,
on behalf of all sponsors, the draft resolution on the
Ethiopian Millennium contained in document
A/61/L.61, under Assembly agenda item 44, entitled
“Culture of peace”.
I should like also to inform the Assembly that the
Central African Republic, Chile, China, the Czech
Republic, Honduras, Italy, Kazakhstan, Myanmar,
Mauritius, Oman and the Republic of Korea have
joined us as sponsors of the draft resolution.

07-38411

A/61/PV.103

In that regard, I wish to draw the attention of the
Assembly to a technical error in the third line of
paragraph 2. The word “including” should be replaced
by the word “for”.
The draft resolution calls on the Assembly to
show its solidarity with the peoples of Ethiopia in the
celebration of the Ethiopian Millennium. It also
welcomes the decision taken by my Government to
commemorate the event as the contribution of Ethiopia
to the promotion of a culture of peace at the national,
regional and international levels.
This draft resolution further strengthens the
eighth African Union summit Declaration, which
considers the Ethiopian Millennium as part of the
African heritage by showing the Millennium’s
universal aspect and its significance to the world’s
cultural diversity.
Ethiopia, as is well known, has unique cultural
traditions whose origins date back to ancient times.
The Ethiopian Millennium is one of those traditions
that has been passed down to us from generation to
generation without interruption. That heritage is a
source of pride and joy for all Ethiopians. However, it
is also our responsibility to use that heritage to
extricate ourselves from poverty and create the
necessary conditions for the overall development of
our country.
It is in that context that we have been preparing
ourselves over the last few years to celebrate the event
by promoting awareness and mobilization within our
society and the diaspora for the attainment of the goals
we have set for sustainable development, building
democratic governance and forging stronger unity and
political consensus to join hands to work towards a
prosperous Ethiopia in the new millennium. The event,
therefore, will be not only a way of celebrating the
unique and distinct nature of our calendar system but
also an opportunity for overcoming the diverse
socioeconomic difficulties that Ethiopia is currently
facing.
My delegation is confident that the draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus, since not only
is the event non-controversial, but it will also help to
promote and further strengthen cultural understanding
among the peoples of the world. The promotion of such
heritage, handed on to us by past generations, is a key
to enriching and preserving our diverse history and our
multicultural world.

07-38411

In conclusion, I wish to express our deep
appreciation to the President of the General Assembly,
Her Excellency Sheikha Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa, for
her unreserved support, as well as to all the countries
that have co-sponsored the draft resolution and that
provided valuable support during the drafting stage.
Our appreciation goes also to the Secretariat for the
technical assistance and cooperation that it provided
for the successful completion of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency The Honourable Anand Sharma, Minister of
State for External Affairs of India, to introduce draft
resolution A/61/L.62.
Mr. Sharma (India): I have the honour to
introduce, under agenda item 44, draft resolution
A/61/L.62, entitled “International Day of NonViolence”. In addition to the 114 sponsors named in the
document, I have the pleasure to inform the Assembly
that a further 26 member States have also become
sponsors, bringing the number of sponsors to 140.
The idea of promoting such a resolution
originated in the declaration adopted at the
international conference entitled “Peace, Non-Violence
and Empowerment: Gandhian Philosophy in the
Twenty-first Century”, convened in New Delhi in
January this year to commemorate the centenary of the
Satyagraha movement, launched by Mahatma Gandhi
in South Africa. The conference was attended by
leadership delegations of 91 countries and 122
organizations, in addition to many eminent
personalities, including philosophers and Nobel
laureates. The participants solemnly vowed to nurture
the values espoused by Mahatma Gandhi. They
articulated the collective yearning for a new way
forward to address the problems of hunger and
dehumanizing poverty, which continue to plague
humanity, and to build a just and equitable world in
which people live with dignity and in peace and
harmony with each other in diverse and pluralistic
societies.
The wide and diverse sponsorship of the draft
resolution reflects the universal respect that Mahatma
Gandhi commands and the enduring relevance of his
humane philosophy. In his own words,
“Non-violence is the greatest force at the disposal
of mankind. It is mightier than the mightiest
weapon of destruction devised by the ingenuity of
man”.

5

A/61/PV.103

His novel mode of mass mobilization and nonviolent action brought down colonialism, strengthened
the roots of popular sovereignty and civil, political and
economic rights, greatly influenced many freedom
struggles and inspired leaders like Badshah Khan,
Nelson Mandela, Martin Luther King and many others.
The draft resolution would declare Mahatma
Gandhi’s birth anniversary — 2 October — an
International Day of Non-Violence. By doing so, we
would be highlighting the holistic nature and the
continued relevance of Mahatma’s message for our
times — indeed, for all time to come. It encompasses
the rejection of violence against oneself, against others,
against other groups, against other societies and against
nature. Non-violence, in Mahatma’s own words, has no
room for cowardice or even weakness. It also
necessitates complete abstention from exploitation in
any form.
The draft resolution before the General Assembly
is simple but significant. Presented under the agenda
item “Culture of Peace”, it reaffirms, in its preambular
paragraphs, the universal relevance of the principle of
non-violence and seeks to secure a culture of peace,
tolerance, understanding and non-violence.
By its operative paragraph 1 the draft resolution
would decide to observe and celebrate 2 October every
year as the International Day of Non-Violence.
Operative paragraph 2 invites all Member States, the
United Nations system and regional and nongovernmental organizations to commemorate the Day
in an appropriate manner and to disseminate the
message of non-violence, including through education
and public awareness. The draft resolution also
requests the Secretary-General to recommend ways to
assist Member States in organizing activities to
commemorate the Day, to take necessary measures for
the observance of the Day by the United Nations
system and to keep the General Assembly informed at
its sixty-third session on implementation within the
United Nations system of the resolution as regards the
observance of the International Day of Non-Violence.
Promoting the principle of non-violence in such a
focused manner would, it is hoped, significantly
contribute to the realization of the goals set out in the
1999 United Nations Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace (resolution 53/243). The
designation of 2 October as the International Day of
Non-Violence would also advance the implementation

6

of the goals of the International Decade for a Culture
of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the
World.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly and each and every one of the
sponsors and supporters for helping us to pilot the draft
resolution in the Assembly. It is also the hope of the
sponsors that the draft resolution will be adopted
without a vote.
The Acting President: The Assembly will first
take action on draft resolution A/61/L.61, entitled “The
Ethiopian Millennium”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.61?
Draft resolution A/61/L.61
(resolution 61/270).

was

adopted

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/61/L.62.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley (Director, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs Division,
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management): In connection with draft resolution
A/61/L.62, entitled “International Day of Nonviolence”, I wish to put on record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
“Under the terms of operative paragraphs 2,
3 and 4 of the draft resolution, the Secretariat
envisaged that the following activities would be
undertaken from within existing resources by the
Department of Public Information: first, a web
site for the International Day of Non-violence;
secondly, a United Nations Radio story; thirdly, a
United Nations News Centre story; fourthly, a
backgrounder; fifthly, guidance to United Nations
Information Centres on the Day; and, sixthly,
non-governmental organization briefings on the
Day.
“With regard to paragraph 5, those efforts
will be reported to the General Assembly at the
sixty-third session.

07-38411

A/61/PV.103

“Accordingly, the adoption of draft
resolution A/61/L.62 would not give rise to
additional requirements under the programme
budget for the biennium 2006-2007.”
The Acting President: I thank the representative
of the Secretariat.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/61/L.62, entitled “International Day of
Non-Violence”.
The following countries have become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Andorra, Azerbaijan, Belize,
Brunei Darussalam, Canada, the Central African
Republic, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Greece, Hungary,
Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Liechtenstein,
Moldova, Panama, Peru, Suriname, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey and Uruguay.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.62?
Draft resolution A/61/L.62 was adopted (resolution
61/271).

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted. May I remind delegations that such
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Miller (United States of America): I have
asked for the floor in connection with the adoption of
draft resolution A/61/L.61, entitled “The Ethiopian
Millennium”.
The United States did not participate in the
adoption of the Universal Declaration on Cultural
Diversity and is therefore not in a position to affirm or
reaffirm that document in its entirety. However, we are
in a position to affirm, as stated in the resolution, “its
appeal for greater solidarity on the basis of recognition
of cultural diversity, awareness of the unity of
humankind and the development of intercultural
exchanges”.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 44.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

07-38411

7
