S/PRST/2005/50

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 October 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5285th meeting of the Security Council, held on 18 October 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The question
concerning Haiti: Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2005/631)”, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its full support for the work of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdés.
“The Security Council stresses the primary importance of ensuring that
Haiti benefits from transparent, inclusive, free and fair elections, in accordance
with international democratic standards and open to all political candidates
that have renounced violence, thereby enabling legitimate leadership at the
national and local levels. The Council conveys its concern regarding the risk
of delays in the electoral process, and underlines international expectations
that the first round of national elections should take place in 2005, and all
efforts should be undertaken so that the democratically elected authorities take
office on 7 February 2006 in accordance with the Haitian Constitution. The
Council notes, with appreciation, that, so far, more than three million people
have been registered. The Council praises the Organization of American States
(OAS) and other relevant international stakeholders for their contribution to
that process. The Council welcomes the representation of a broad range of
Haitian political opinion in the electoral process and underlines the importance
of a collaborative approach by political leaders. National reconciliation and
political dialogue should continue to be promoted as a means to ensure longterm stability and good governance.
“The Security Council notes with concern that important challenges to
the preparations of the elections remain yet to be overcome. While welcoming
the recent steps taken by the Transitional Government and the ‘Conseil
Electoral Provisoire’ (CEP), the Council urges them to perform the ten urgent
tasks required to ensure that elections will take place this year, which were
endorsed by the Transitional Government on 17 September 2005 and reiterated
by the ‘Core Group’ on 18 October 2005. The Council calls for effective and
prompt decision-making in key areas by the relevant Haitian authorities, and
urges the Haitian authorities to make full use of MINUSTAH’s advice and
assistance in the organization of elections. The Council calls upon them to

05-55883 (E) 181005

*0555883*

S/PRST/2005/50

work with MINUSTAH to develop a phased electoral plan as a matter of
priority, with a view to finalizing a feasible electoral calendar. The Council
also urges the Haitian authorities to publish swiftly the final list of candidates
for the elections, and to agree in consultation with MINUSTAH upon a list of
voting centres that ensures voter access and takes into account budgetary,
security and logistical implications.
“The Security Council strongly supports the mission’s endeavours to
ensure a secure and stable environment in Haiti, which is crucial for the
country’s progress, and to enable the electoral process to take place. The
Council recognizes MINUSTAH’s contribution to the restoration and
maintenance of the rule of law in the country, and underlines the need for
strong and coordinated assistance to enable the reform and restructuring of
Haiti’s rule of law institutions. To this end, the Council urges the Transitional
Government, working with MINUSTAH, to put into effect the initiatives called
for in Resolution 1608 (2005) concerning the Haitian National Police (HNP)
reform and restructuring plan as well as the reform of the Judicial System, in
order to end impunity and ensure the due process. The Council welcomes the
improvements in the security situation, due to the resolve of MINUSTAH to
act in support of the Transitional Government. The Council expresses concern
regarding reports of involvement of some officers of the HNP in serious
crimes and human rights violations and stresses the need to investigate fully
any allegations of serious crimes and human rights violations. The Council
welcomes the deployment of MINUSTAH’s additional military and police
personnel, in accordance with Resolution 1608 (2005), and expresses gratitude
to troop- and police-contributing countries.
“The Security Council reiterates the need for the Transitional
Government and MINUSTAH to begin immediately effective implementation
of a DDR programme. The Council stresses the need to implement high
visibility quick-impact projects that create jobs. The Council also recognizes
the need of maintaining stability in the period immediately following the
elections, including through continued international presence, and to ensure
that key Haitian institutions can function adequately, especially those
institutions addressing rule of law and development. The Council recognizes
the importance of the upcoming Donor Conference to be held in Brussels on
20 and 21 October, and calls upon donors to continue to disburse the pledged
funds. The Council recognizes further that this Conference constitutes an
important opportunity to further elaborate on short, medium and long term
strategies, within a unified framework, to ensure coordination and continuity
in a coherent and well prioritized response to Haitian problems. Haiti is at a
critical juncture. While ultimately the responsibility for Haiti’s future lies with
its Government and people, the international community must continue to
provide support.”

2
