4. Expresses the conviction that all other pending questions arising
from the conflict and not directly addressed in the "Adjusted timetable"
should be settled expeditiously through peaceful negotiations in the
context of the Minsk process;

"Letter dated 27 October 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/26650); 12
"Letter dated 28 October 1993 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/26662)". 12

5. Calls for the immediate implementation of the reciprocal and
urgent steps provided for in the Minsk Group's "Adjusted timetable",
including the withdrawal of forces from recently occupied territories
and the removal of all obstacles to communications and transportation;

Resolution 884 (1993)

6. Ca/Isa/so for an early convening of the Minsk Conference for the
puq,ose of arriving at a negotiated settlement to the conflict as provided
for in the "Adjusted timetable", in conformity with the 24 March 1992
mandate of the Council ofMinisters of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe;

ofll November 1993

The Security Cou11cil,
Reaffim,ingits resolutions 822 (1993) of30 April 1993, 853 (1993)
of29 July 1993 and 874(1993)ofl4 October 1993,

7. Requests the Secretary-General to respond favourably to an
invitation to send a representative to attend the Minsk Conference and
to provide all possible assistance for the substantive negotiations that
will follow the opening of the Conference;
8. Supports the monitoring mission ~veloped by the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe;

Reaffirming its full support for the peace process being pursued
within the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe, and for the tireless efforts of the Minsk Group of the
Conference,

9. Calls on all parties to refrain from all violations of international
humanitarian law, and renews its call in resolutions 822 (1993) and
853 (1993) for unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief
efforts in all areas affected by the conflict;

Taking note of the letter dated 9 November 1993 from the
Chainnan-in-Office of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe Minsk Conference on Nagorny Karabakh addressed to the
President of the Security Council and its enclosures, 13
Expressing its serious concem that a continuation of the conflict in

10.
Urges all States in the region to refrain from any hostile acts
and from any interference or intervention which would lead to the
widening of the conflict and undermine peace and security in the
region;

and around the Nagorny Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic,
and of the tensions between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic, would endanger peace and security in the region,

l 1.
Requests the Secretary-General and relevant international
agencies to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected
civilian population and to assist refugees and displaced persons to return
to their homes in security and dignity;

Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities in consequence
of the violations of the cease-fire and excesses in the use of force in
response to those violations, in particular the occupation of the
Zangelan district and the city of Goradiz in Azerbaijan,

12.
Requests the Secretary-General, the Chairman-in-Office of
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
Chairman of the Minsk Conference to continue to report to the Council
on the progress of the Minsk process and on all aspects of the situation
on the ground, and on present and future cooperation between the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations in this regard;

Reaffirming the sovereignty and tenitorial integrity of Azerbaijan and
of all other States in the region,

13.

Reaffirmi11g also the inviolability of international borders and the
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory,
Expressing grave concem at the latest displacement of a large number
of civilians and the humanitarian emergency in the Zangelan district
and the city ofGoradiz and on Azerbaijan's southern frontier,

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
1. Condem11s the recent violations of the cease-fire established
between the parties, which resulted in a resumption of hostilities, and
particularly condemns the occupation of the Zangelan district and the
cityofGoradiz, attacks on civilians and bombardments of the territory
of the Azerbaijani Republic;

Adopted una11imous~v at the 3292nd meeting.
Decision

2. Calls upo11 the Government of Armenia to use its influence to
achieve compliance by the Armenians of the Nagomy Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan with resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (I 993) and 874 (1993)
and to ensure that the forces involved are not provided with the means
to extend their military campaign further;

At its 3313th meeting, on 12 November 1993, the Council decided
to discuss the item entitled:
"The situation relating to Nagorny Karabakh:

3. Welcomes the declaration of 4 November 1993 of the nine
members of the Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe13 and commends the proposals contained therein
for unilateral cease-fire declarations;

"Letter dated 26 October 1993 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of
the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/26647); 12

12

Ibid., Supplement for October, November a11d December

1993.

13

73

Ibid., document S/26718.

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier among
members of the Council, the President made the following statement
on behalfofthe Council: 3

4. Dema11ds from the parties concerned the immediate cessation of
anned hostilities and hostile acts, the unilateral withdrawal of occupying forces from the Zangelan district and the city of Goradiz, and the
withdrawal of occupying forces from other recently occupied areas of
Azerbaijan in accordance with the "Adjusted timetable of urgent steps
to implement Security Council resolutions 822 (1993) and 853
( 1993 )"11 as amended by the Minsk Group meeting held at Vienna
from 2 to 8 November 1993;

"The Security Council welcomes with satisfaction the important
progress made thus far towards the full implementation of the peace
accords for El Salvador and the cooperation shown by the parties to
this end. The Council takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral of23 December 1992,4 in which he indicates that the armed
conflict between the Government of El Salvador and the Frente
Farabundo Marti para la Liberaci6n Nacional (FMLN) was formally
brought to an end on 15 December 1992. The Council emphasizes
this event, which puts an end to more than 10 years of armed
conflict.

5. Strongly urges the parties concerned to resume promptly and to
make effective and permanent the cease-fire established as a result of
the direct contacts undertaken with the assistance of the Government
of the Russian Federation in suppo~ of the Minsk Group, and to
continue to seek a negotiated settlement of the conflict within the
context of the Minsk process and the "Adjusted timetable" as amended
by the Minsk Group meeting of2 to 8 November 1993;

"However, the Council expresses concern at the observations
made by the Secretary-General in his letter dated 7 January 1993 to
the President of the Security Council,5 by which he reported on the
situation with regard to the implementation of the recommendations
of the Ad Hoe Commission concerning the purification of the armed
forces ofEI Salvador and, basically, at the fact that those recommendations have yet to be fully complied with despite prior assurances by
the Government of El Salvador. The Council also expresses concern
at the indication in the letter dated 29 January 1993 from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council6 that the
FMLN, despite prior assurances, did not complete the destruction of
its weapons by the agreed deadline and that it is therefore not yet in
full compliance with its undertakings under the peace accords.

6. Urges again all States in the region to refrain from any hostile acts
and from any interference or intervention, which would lead to the
widening of the conflict and undermine peace and security in the
region;

1. Req.,eststhe Secretary-General and relevant international agencies
to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian
population, including that in the Zangelan district and the city of
Goradiz and on Azerbaijan's southern frontier, and to assist refugees
and displaced persons to return to their homes in security and dignity;
8. Reiterates its requesl that the Secretary-General, the Chainnan-inOffice of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the Chairman of the Minsk Conference continue to report to the
Council on the progress of the Minsk process and on all aspects of the
situation on the ground, in particular on the implementation of its
relevant resolutions, and on present and future cooperation between the
Conference on Security and Cooperation and the United Nations in this
regard;

"In this connection, the Council emphasizes the solemn nature of
the undertakings made by each of the parties when they signed the
peace accords and reaffirms the obligation of the parties to comply
fully and in a timely fashion with those undertakings.
"The Council welcomes with satisfaction the decision of the
Government of El Salvador to request the United Nations to verify
the forthcoming general elections and the intention of the SecretaryGeneral, communicated in his letter dated 26 January 1993 to the
President of the Security Council, 7 to recommend to the Council that
it accede to this request

9. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the 3313th meeting.

"The Council strongly urges the parties to persist in their determination to complete the process of bringing peace and national
reconciliation to El Salvador and to continue cooperating with the
Secretary-General in the efforts that he is making to ensure that the
peace accords are implemented fully. To that end, the Council will
follow closely the progress and results of those efforts."
CENTRAL AMERICA: EFFORTS TOWARDS PEACE 1

At its 3185th meeting, on 18 March 1993, the Council decided to
discuss the item entitled "Central America: efforts towards peace".

Decisions

At its 3172nd meeting, on 9 February 1993, the Council decided to
discuss the item entitled "Central America: efforts towards peace report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer
Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) (S/25006)". 2
S/25257.
4

Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-seventh
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1992,
document S/25006.
1

5
Ibid., Forty-eighth Year, Supplemelll for January,
Febniary and March 1993, document S/25078.

Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted
by the Council in 1989, 1990, 1991 and 1992.
2

See Official Records of the Security Council, Fortyseventh Year, Supplement for October, November and December
1992.

Ibid., document S/25200.
Ibid., document S/25241.

74
