S/2003/970

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 October 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 7 October 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communications, dated 2 and 6
October 2003, from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) (see annexes I and II).
I should be grateful if the above communications could be brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-54744 (E)

081003

*
0
3
5
4
7
4
4
*

S/2003/970

Annex I
Letter dated 2 October 2003 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
As you are aware, on 11 August 2003, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) assumed strategic command, control and coordination of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). On 1 October, the North Atlantic Council agreed
upon a longer-term strategy for NATO in its ISAF role in Afghanistan. In a spirit of
transparency and coordination, I would like to share with you this strategy (see
enclosure).
NATO is committed to the success of its mission in Afghanistan and is
convinced that the Afghan authorities, with the assistance of the international
community, will be able to bring about a self-sustaining, stable and democratic
Afghanistan.
I will keep you informed about further developments in the North Atlantic
Council’s deliberations.
(Signed) Lord Robertson of Port Ellen

2

S/2003/970

Enclosure
Longer-term strategy for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
in its International Security Assistance Force role in Afghanistan
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is in Afghanistan in its
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) role in order to support the
international community’s efforts towards implementation of the Bonn Agreement,
as mandated by United Nations Security Council resolution 1386 (2001). The aim is
to assist in the emergence of a united and sovereign Afghanistan, with, inter alia, a
broad-based, multi-ethnic representative government, integrated into the
international community and cooperating with its neighbours. NATO’s long-term
strategy in this context includes the following elements:
Alliance Political Objective. Support for implementation of the Bonn process,
as mandated by Security Council resolution 1386 (2001), in cooperation and
coordination with key international organizations, in particular the United Nations
and the European Union, by assisting the Afghan Transitional Authority (ATA) to
meet its responsibility to provide security and order. Additional factors to consider
in developing further the Alliance’s over-arching political objective include:
1.

An expanded ISAF mandate will require a specific United Nations
Security Council resolution; other critical factors include resolution of
the existing shortfalls in the Combined Joint Statement of Requirement
(CJSOR) and a willingness to deploy additional resources;

2.

The need for enhanced coordination and cooperation between ISAF, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Afghan
authorities, Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs);

3.

The need for a coherent public diplomacy and information campaign;

4.

Continued analysis of the political dynamics that would affect the
activities of foreign peace support forces in Afghanistan.

Desired ISAF end-state. A self-sustaining, moderate and democratic Afghan
government, in line with the relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions,
able to exercise its authority and to operate throughout Afghanistan, without the
need for ISAF to help provide security. Key components of this end-state would
include:
1.

Satisfactory progress towards completion of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme, under United
Nations auspices;

2.

Satisfactory progress, supported by bilateral training, towards the buildup of the Afghan National Army (ANA) as an operationally effective,
multi-ethnic military force able to provide security for the Afghan
population, United Nations agencies, other international organizations
and NGOs;

3.

Satisfactory progress towards strengthening the central government and
internal security related institutions, in particular the establishment of a
functioning Afghan national police force and judiciary;

3

S/2003/970

4.

Satisfactory progress in the development and implementation of effective
counter-narcotics activities;

5.

The successful implementation of the constitutional Loya Jirga and
approval of a new constitution endorsed and widely accepted by
Afghanistan’s various ethnic groups, in accordance with the Bonn
Agreement;

6.

Election of a representative government to succeed the Afghan
Transitional Authority (ATA) through free and fair elections, in
accordance with the Bonn Agreement;

7.

Removal or modification of the behaviour of the warlords, bringing them
into broad-based and ethnically balanced central government institutions
and bringing relations between the central government and provincial
governments into conformity with constitutional provisions;

8.

The satisfactory evolution of Afghanistan’s relations with neighbouring
countries in a peaceful manner;

9.

Progress towards the resolution of the terrorist threat from the Taliban,
al-Qa`ida and other extremist groups.

Benchmarks for an Alliance Hand-Over Strategy. Progress in achieving the
components listed above should be measured in periodic reviews of ISAF.

4

S/2003/970

Annex II
Letter dated 6 October 2003 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
Following my letter to you last week regarding the North Atlantic Council’s
agreement on a longer-term strategy for NATO in its International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) role in Afghanistan, I am writing with respect to the
Council’s approval today of a set of preliminary decisions related to a possible
expansion of NATO’s ISAF mission. In a spirit of transparency and coordination, I
would like to inform you on the status of the NATO Council’s deliberations with
respect to this matter.
Key issues agreed by the North Atlantic Council include the following:
• The expansion of the ISAF mission would strengthen the ability of the Afghan
Transitional Authority (ATA) to provide a secure environment for its people.
Such expansion would be subject to the adoption of a United Nations Security
Council resolution providing appropriate authority and the identification and
provision of appropriate assets
• The Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Konduz, which Germany has
offered to mount, would operate as a pilot project under an expanded ISAF’s
new Security Council mandate
• In principle, ISAF could expand in a progressive, flexible manner, taking into
account the political context, to include other provisional reconstruction teams
under an expanded ISAF’s new Security Council mandate, subject to
consultations with and contributions from framework nations and the
availability of additional resources
• In principle, ISAF could also undertake temporary deployments outside Kabul,
in coordination and cooperation with the Afghan Authorities, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and Operation Enduring
Freedom (OEF), in support of specific events or processes (such as electoral or
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)-related events), taking
into account the political context and on the basis of an evaluation by the
commander of the available resources
• It is imperative that there be clear command and control arrangements between
ISAF, OEF and PRTs
Work continues within NATO regarding a possible expansion of its ISAF
mission. In particular, the North Atlantic Council has requested additional military
advice on the possible implications and modalities of such an expansion. This advice
is expected later this month.
I will keep you informed about further developments.
(Signed) Lord Robertson of Port Ellen

5
