THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2516’”

MEETING:

23 FEBRUARY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (SIAgendaI2516) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Adoptionoftheagenda.................................................

1

The’ situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16339). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...........

1

SlPV.2516

,

.

_

NOTE
;.‘i

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letteis combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
‘ ‘**.‘A
Nations document.
: Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in :which
information about it is given.
. ‘I-.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance With a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resofutioizs‘and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully oberative
on that date.
.‘,il .
I’
*‘, i ‘I
‘,‘:

.;

.’
‘:

,;
,.
*

,‘_
:.
I
‘,‘_

.

.‘a

.
:.
1 .,
‘. %,
.f.
L,i ,

‘_
‘_I
1

;t,1!
:.rp/.
,-.

2516th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 23 February 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. S. Shah NAWAZ

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sarre’ (Senegal) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

(Pakistan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
.‘: ,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2516)

3. The PRESIDENT:
sentative of Lebanon,

4. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon) [interpretation from
Arabic]: Allow me at the outset, Sir, to present to you
our best wishes and congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month of
February. I am convinced that your wide experience,
and wisdom and the confidence you enjoy will be the
best guarantee for successfully guiding consultations
and discussions and for presiding over the meetings of
the Council.

1. Adoption

of the agenda
~.
2. The situation in &e Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Se-.
curity Council (S/16339)
1..
The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption

The first speaker is the repreon whom I now call.

5. I should also like to thank the President of the
Council for last month, the representative
of Nicaragua, for the excellent efforts he exerted to ensure
success for the Council’s work.

of the agenda
6. On behalf of the Lebanese delegation, I extend our
sincere condolences to the delegation of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics on the death of President
Yuri Andropov.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16339)

7. Allow me also to thank France, through its representative, Mr. Luc de La Barre de Nanteuil, for its
concern for my country, Lebanon, its security, the
safety of its citizens, its territorial integrity and the
preservation of its independence.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2514th meeting, I invite the representative
of Lebanon to take a place at the Council table and the
representative of Italy to take the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council chamber.

8. Lebanon has always been and continues to be a
supporter of peace and peace-keeping forces. I cannot recall one occasion when Lebanon refrained from
taking a positive stand with regard to peace-keeping
operations and participation in the financing of United
Nations forces, wherever they may have been dispatched.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon) took a place at the Council table and
Mr. Jannuzzi (Italy) took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.

9. Today there is an international
force in southern
Lebanon in accordance with the request of Lebanon,
which ever since the inception of that force has continued to request that it may be allowed to undertake the task entrusted to it in accordance with Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
The presence of that force represents one of the major
achievements attained by the Council in the field of
peace-keeping. In Beirut itself there is still a group of
international
observers working in accordance with
Council resolutions 516 (1982) and 521 (1982).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Senegal in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
I

10. In September of last year, Lebanon requested the
Council to dispatch international
observers to those
areas from which the Israeli army had withdrawn. For
reasons members here all know, the Council was unable to adopt a resolution on this request. Lebanon recorded its request by drawing up a draft resolution
[S/15990 of 19 September 19831 stating what it had
always hoped, and still hopes, to obtain from the Council, including the dispatch of international forces. That
draft resolution remains before the Council until events
make its adoption and implementation
possible.

up and in implementing
any draft resolution that might
be adopted if the aim of the text is to make a real and
effective contribution
in order to put a halt to a crisis
that is now more than nine years old.
15. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
16. Mr. SARRE
(Senegal) [interpretation
from
French]: Mr. President, first of all allow me to join
previous speakers in congratulating you very sincerely
and presenting to you our best wishes for success on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
February. During the past three weeks, we have all
admired your talent and skill in carrying out your delicate task.

11. I have mentioned the foregoing to stress that
Lebanon approves in principle the dispatching
of
United Nations forces or observers to assist in restoring
security and stability in Lebanon and in making it possible for the legitimate authorities to exercise control
over all Lebanese territory. Lebanon believes that the
proposal to send international
forces to the Beirut region alone represents a positive move. However, at the
present time and under present conditions, this positive
move remains partial and limited for the following reasons; First, the creation of favourable political conditions to ensure stability is the basis for the consolidation
of security. Secondly, large parts of Lebanon continue
to languish under the yoke of occupation. Thirdly, any
international
force which may be dispatched to Lebanon must have the means and effectiveness fully to
undertake its tasks in all Lebanese regions. Fourthly,
this effectiveness alone is capable of enabling the
United Nations forces successfully to undertake their
tasks, particularly in helping achieve security and stability and participating
in efforts to bring about Lebanese sovereignty over all Lebanese territory inside its
internationally
recognized borders.

17. Your predecessor, Mr. Chamorro Mora, the representative of Nicaragua, also deserves a tribute for the
competent and authoritative manner in which he conducted the Council’s proceedings in January.
‘>
18. My delegation would like to express once again its
condolences to the representative of the Soviet Union
on the death of Mr. Yuri Andropov, the President of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet
/
Socialist Republics.
19. Finally, I should like to thank all the members of
the Council for allowing me to participate in this debate
which we regard as most important. On 2 February, the
head of State of Senegal, Mr. Abdou Diouf, told the
Secretary-General,
who was visiting our country, of the
concern of the Senegalese people and Government over
the escalation of tension in Lebanon. Hence weask that
everything be done to restore peace in that country,
especially since the Geneva conference on Lebanon
gave rise to great hopes in that context. On 21 February, the President of the Republic of Senegal renewed
that concern and issued a fresh appeal to the United
Nations to get down to the task of helping the Lebanese
bring about reconciliation in their mutual interest and in
the interest of international
peace and security with
equal consideration
being given to all political and
ideological tendencies. For all these reasons, we welcomed the French initiative to convene the Council and
its accompanying proposal.

12. It is obvious that if the Council takes the relevant
decision, then the question of the setting-up and dispatching of an international force, as well as the timing
and duration of its deployment and the expiration of its
mandate must be decided in consultation and co-ordination with the Lebanese Government.
13. Lebanon’s keenness to see the international force
succeed stems from the current situation. More than
anyone else, the Lebanese wish to have peace and
security. They have been experiencing repeated tragedies for the past nine years. Those who only hear of
those tragedies cannot perceive them in the same way
as those who actually see them, and those who only
read about them cannot really feel them in the same way
as those who live through them. If the Council and the
international
community
it represents wish to assist
Lebanon, then let that assistance be proportionate
to
the tragedy.

20. The Council is meeting once again to consider the
tragic situation prevailing in Lebanon, more specifically in the Beirut area, where the tragedy of Lebanon
is particularly acute.
21. My country, Senegal, whose commitment
to the
peace and sovereignty of Lebanon accounts for its
participation
in the contingent of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, would like right away to take
this opportunity
to reaffirm that commitment.
Likewise, we shall support any initiative that could restore
peace and harmony to that strife-tom land.

14. Lebanon stresses once again that it welcomes any
action undertaken by the Council that is proportionate
to the dimensions of the crisis and in line with the
realistic Lebanese viewpoint which I have expressed in
this statement. Lebanon stresses its full readiness to cooperate with the Council and the Secretariat in drawing
2

22. As I said just now, a few weeks ago we hopefully
welcomed the Geneva conference on national reconciliation and the cease-fire that seemed to have been the
result. Today, alas, our hopes have once again been
dashed and the situation has considerably worsened
following the recent events that have again completely
changed the situation. The matter now before the Council today has two aspects, humanitarian
and political.
The most urgent aspect is of a humanitarian nature. It
concerns the cessation of hostilities and the protection
of the civilian population,
including Palestinian refugees, who are innocent victims of the indescribable
sufferings that continue to afflict the Lebanese people.
But beyond the urgency of that matter we must safeguard the Lebanese State in all its component parts, a
State whose unity and territorial integrity are today
threatened as never before. My country believes that
the importance of what is at stake requires all Member
States to be serious about allowing the Council to discharge its responsibilities
and fulfil its essential task,
namely, the promotion of peace and stability in a Lebanon which, through our common efforts, must be restored to its former self.
23. Now more than‘ever, the Council must take the
opportunity to.consider, in the light of General Assembly resolution 38/X, of 13 December 1983, the question
of Palestine as a whole, and in particular the measures for the convening of the International
Peace Conference on the Middle East. That Conference, in my
delegation’s opinion,. could be of benefit to Lebanon
-indeed,
to the entire region. The demonstrations
of
violence that we have been constantly witnessing are
often the result, it must be said, of the failure to solve
the question of the Middle East and the Palestinian
cause. Today, violence seems to have become the order
of the day; innocent people continue to be victims of it.
In view of all that, the Council must without any further
delay promote a climate of mutual confidence that will
enable all the parties concerned to set aside their passions and commit themselves resolutely to the peace
process, as defined by the International
Conference on

the Question of Palestine and approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 38/58 C.
24. It is clear from various statements made over the
past few days in the Council that a just and lasting
solution to the situation now before us must not be
delayed any longer. At the present stage of the development of that situation, my country fully supports the
French proposal for the use of an international force to
replace the multinational
force deployed in Beirut. We
are all the more in favour of this initiative because it
seems to us indispensable that everything be done to
avoid creating a vacuum, which could be dangerous, in
the wake of the withdrawal of the multinational
force,
which is already well under way. We must make sure
that there are no further Sabras and Shatilas. Moreover, the fact that the Lebanese parties to the conflict
have on many occasions expressed a position in favour
of United Nations intervention seems to demonstrate
that such an undertaking would be appropriate. Indeed,
this is borne out by the statement just made by the
representative of Lebanon.
25. Of course, the mission of a United Nations force
and the terms and conditions for its establishment will
have to be carefully evaluated, in close consultation
with all the parties concerned. Already, however, some
urgent proposals have been made to the Council to deal
with the most pressing issues. In our opinion, they are
of very definite importance, because it is essential that
the United Nations be enabled to contribute positively
and in the most appropriate manner to an improvement
of the situation in that troubled area.
26. The discussion taking place today is of particular
importance for the very future of Lebanon. We trust
that the Council will take, with all the urgency demanded by the situation, the measures indispensable
for the gradual restoration of peace and security to that
beleaguered country.
The meeting

rose at 4.35 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoms
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-61313~Janoary1993-2.050
