General Assembly-Thirtieth Se11ion

64

to enter into such agreement, subject to the approval
of the General Assembly, and to arrange with the Preparatory Commission for the provisional application of
that agreement as appropriate.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

General Assembly, at its thirty-first session, proposals
?n the_ organizational arrangements of the special fund,
mcludmg draft statutes, in order to enable the fund
to become operational not later than 1977.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3504 (XXX). Special fund for the land-locked
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Rec{llling its re<;olution 3311 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, by which it requested the Secretary-General
to submit to it, at its special session devoted to <level- opment and international economic co-operation, a
comprehensive study on the transit problems of the
land-locked developing countries and a complete study
on the establishment of a fund in favour of those
countries,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1755 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, by which the
Council defined the scope of a complete &tudy on the
establishment of the fund,
A ware of the recognized problems and •particular
needs of the land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind the various resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly and its related organs and by
the specialized agencies emphasizing special and urgent
measures in favour of the land-locked developing
countries,
Aware also of the need to implement immediately
the resolutions adopted by the United Nations, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and other related organs of the United Nations calling
for special measures in favour of those countries,
Reaffirming that the land-locked developing countries, as a result of their geographical limitation, are
doubly disadvantaged, especially with regard to their
additional transport, transit and transshipment costs,
Expressing its conviction that this adverse situation
has severely limited and hindered the development efforts of those countries, and noting with concern that,
up to this date, not enough concrete and effective operational measures have been taken,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development for the preparation of the comprehensive report on this subjeot, 70
Having c'?nsidered the report of the Secretary-General on special measures related to the particular needs
of the· land-locked developing countries70 with a view
to the establishment of a special fund,
Recalling its decision at its seventh special session
regarding the immediate establishment of a special fund
in favour of the land-locked developing oountries, 71
Reaffirming further the need to assist the land-locked
developing countries in accelerating and intensifying the
development of th~ir transport infrastructure,
l. Decides to establish immediately a special fund
for the land-locked developing countries to compen.xite
for their additional transport and transit costs;
2. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in consultation with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to submit to the

3505 (XXX). Integration of women in the
development process

10 A/10203.

Official Records of the General /-,ssembly, Seventh
Special Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/10301), p. 10, item 7.
71 See

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3010 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 in which it proclaimed the year 1975
International Women's Year,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order,
Recalling also its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States,
Recalling further its i:_esolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 Sept~mber 1975_ on development and international
economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3276 (XXIX) of
10 December 1974 on the World Conference of the
International Women's Year and 3342 (XXIX) of
17 December. 197 4 on "'.omen and development, and
also Economic and Social Council resolution 1959
(LIX) of 28 July 1975 on the World Conference of
the International Women's Year,
Taking note of the principles of the Declaration of
~exico on the Equality of Women and their Contribut10n to Development and Peace, 1975,72 and ,the World
~lan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year, 73 adopted by
the World Conference of the International Women's
Year, held at Mexico C:ity from 19 June to 2 July
1975, and ~lso the _resolutions of the Conference relating
to the full mtegration of women in development, 74
Recognizing that the results of the World Conference of the International Women's Year, in particular
the Wo~ld Plan of Action, indicate that the role of
~omen m the development process must be made an
mtegral part of the establishment of the new international economic order,
·
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
185~ (LVI)_ of 16 May 1974 on the significance of the
full mtegration of women in development,
A ~are_ that the economic value of the substantial
contnbution of women to over-all development has not
been widely recognized,
Recognizing that women, owing to the unequal treatment _they have endured, constitute a vast potential
force m. the process of economic and social change, as
well as m th~ struggle against all forms of exploitation
and oppression,
Emphasizing that accelerated development requires
~he real and effective participation of men and women
m all areas of national activity and the creation of the
nec~~sary condition~ . ~or equality of rights, opportumties and respons1bihties for men and women

'

72

Re[;ort of the JJ;orld Co'.'ference of the International
Women s Year (Uruted Nations publication Sales No
E.76.IV.1), chap. I.
'
.
78 Ibid., chap. IJ, sect. A.
74 Ibid., chap. III.
