UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

/

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

16 JUNE

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/20

Adoption

of the agenda

13) . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1
1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,.......,..,..........

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/12342 and Add.1)
.. . .. , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . , . . , .. , . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.2013

1

----

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents we composed
of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference
;O a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records Of the Sf~urity
Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears Of in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security council,
numbered
in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes
of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secun’ty Council. The new system, wlGcl1 has been
applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date,

2013TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday,
Besidenf: Mr. William H. BARTON (Canada).

the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts to promote a
just solution of the problem of Cyprus in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and his
mandate. We wish also to commend the significant contributions in this respect of the Under-Secretaries-General
Roberto Guyer and Brian Urquhart and of their able
collaborators in the Secretariat. I should also like to say
how grateful we are to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Pe’rez de CuBllar, for pursuing his difficult and delicate task in Cyprus with such
distinct devotion.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/201 3)
1. Adoption of the agenda

5. I wish, further, to express our appreciation of the
efforts of Major-General Quinn, Commander of UNFICYP,
and the officers and men serving under his command and of
the exemplary manner in which they carry out their duties.

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12342 and Add.])
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p. m.

6. Finally, we are deeply indebted to the Governments
which, through voluntary contributions of personnel and
funds, enable the Force to continue carrying out its
important mission,

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

7. We are here once more for the renewal of the mandate
of the Force and, on this occasion, it would perllaps be
pertinent to make a brief analysis of the situation on the
island as it has tragically evolved following the aggression
and invasion of Cyprus in July 1974.

The situation in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/l 2342 and Add. 1)

8. Almost three years after that invasion, the territory
involved is ‘still under the foreign occupation forces and,
what is worse, is experiencing all the attendant suffering
from gross violations of the human rights of the Greek
Cypriot majority, who have been ruthlessly uprooted from
their homes and properties and rendered, almost overnight,
destitute refugees numbering some 200,000, namely, one
third of the entire population of Cyprus. Their houses have
been usurped in an attempt to change the demographic
character of the island, and Turks from Turkey have been
settled in the occupied area in violation of existing
international law.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2012th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Turkey and Greece to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
At the imitation of the President, Mr. Z. Rossides
(Qprus), Mr. I. Tiirkmen (Turkal) and Mr. G. PapouliPs
(Greece) took places ar the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
Cyprus.

I call on the representative

16 June 1977, at 3.30 p.m.

of

3. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, 1 should like,
first of all, warmly to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. We are confident
that, under your experienced leadership, the Council will
conduct useful deliberations. We are happy that the
representative of Canada, a country with which Cyprus
maintains excellent relations and which for many years has
made a significant contribution by providing a contingent
to the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP), is presiding over this debate.

9. This is certainly a situation of the gravest concern to
the Security Council. In its wider implications and repercussions, it is a matter involving basic principles and, as such, it
should be of vital concern to all nations and, more
particularly, the small and non-aligned countries.
10. Before us is the report of the Secretary-General for the
six-month period ending June 1977. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report. Couched in diplomatic
language, it presents as smooth, neutral and ,unobjectionable a picture as possible, yet, in the final analysis, the
tragic realities do leak out.

4. I should like to take this opportunity to express, on
behalf of my Government, warm feelings of appreciation to
1

view of their having refused to give UNFICYP copies of the
alleged lists when requested.

11. As shown in the report, the Secretary-General,
“Having considered carefully all aspects of the situation
concerning Cyprus,” concluded that in existing circumstances the Force “is an indispensable factor in keeping the
potentially explosive situation in the island under control”
[S/12342, para. 601. That is the gist of the report that is
intended to guide the Council regarding the existing
circumstances and situation in Cyprus and it is on this that
the decision of the Council should be based in extending
the mandate of the Force. In fact, in looking at the press
release issued on the report, one sees that the experienced
press, as usual, has hit upon the important part and put it
first in the release, stating what I have just read out to be
the essence of the report.

16. The burning humanitarian problem of the more than
2,000 missing persons who were taken prisoner at the time
of the invasion speaks for itseif. Ankara still refuses to
account for them. Its reply to all agonized inquiries is a flat
denial. Yet there is concrete and conclusive evidence that
many of these persons were last seen alive in the hands of
the Turkish army. This is supported also by photographs
taken by foreign and Turkish journalists in prisoner-of-war
camps or on ships transporting the prisoners to Turkey,
photographs which appear also in the Turkish press, and by
the visits of the Ir! temational Red Cross to places of their
detention. Yet Ankara, in a stereotyped way, still refuses
any independent inquiry to trace the missing persons.

12. As shown in paragraph 28 of the report, the freedom
of movement of UNFICYP continues to be restricted. So is
its access to the Greek Cypriot habitations. As a result,
UNFICYP continues to be prevented by the Turkish
occupation forces from carrying out its functions in the
occupied territory and particularly from extending humanitarian protection to the remaining Greek Cypriot inhabitants of the area. They are thus left to the tender mercies
of the Turkish forces and settlers from Turkey who are
bent on forcing their exodus through all kinds of illegal
acts, harassments and pressures. As stated once more by the
Secretary-General in his report:

17. As the Secretary-General states in his report:
“It is also a matter of concern that the establishment of
the investigatory machinery for tracing missing persons of
the two communities, as agreed upon at the high-level
meeting held at Nicosia on 12 February”-that
is the
meeting referred to in the resolution-,
“has yet to
materialize. I very much hope that this machinery can be
set up and commence its humanitarian task without
further delay, in the spirit of the agreement of 12
February.” (S/12342, para. 55.1

‘&The situation of the Greek Cypriots in the north
remains a matter of concern, having in mind that free and
normal access by UNFICYP to their habitations is still
not possible.” [Ibid, para. 54.1

We have had no indication so far that Ankara or, for that
matter, anyone on the Turkish side will pay any heed to
that call or to the agreement reached at the high-level
meeting, which is emphasized in the preamble of the
resolution /410 (1977)].

13. It is further to be noted that all this is taking place
despite the fact that the Turkish side solemnly agreed and
expressly undertook in the Vienna talks, in the presence of
the Secretary-General and as recorded by him in his interim
report of 5 August 1975, to ensure that UNFICYP “will
have free and normal access to Greek Cypriot villages and
habitations in the north” /S/11789, annex, point 4f.
Nevertheless, this agreement, among others, has been
violated by the Turkish side, as its practice all along has
proved. Thus, the deliberate obstruction of the highly
needed work of UNFICYP in the north continues to this
day, notwithstanding repeated calls by the Security Council
to all parties “to extend their fullest co-operation so as to
enable the United Nations Peace-keeping Force to perform
its duties effectively”.

18. It is indeed disappointing that the Turkish side has
also rejected all proposals for the establishment of an
International Red Cross committee to search for missing
persons and provide information to their relatives. Members
of the Council understand, I am sure, the agonising drama
of the families of the more than 2,000 missing persons in
Cypr& who demand to know the fate of their loved ones.
It is our earnest hope that the Turkish side will co-operate
with the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
in this respect and, recognidng the urgency of the matter,
will finally agree to the setting up of an International Red
Cross committee, whose mandate would be to account for
the missing persons, thereby bringing an end to the ordeal
of their families.

14. By contrast, in the government-controlled free areas of
the south, UNFICYP has all along had full freedom of
movement and function, both before and after the invasion,
and as the Secretary-General’s report of 9 June 1975 states,
UNFICYP could “investigate any rumours and allegations
of harassment or damage to property [of Turkish Cypriots]
within a matter of hours” [S/I1 717, parn. 241,

19. Turning now to the intercommunal talks, we can see
from the reports of the Secretary-General that they have so
far been unproductive and meaningless. There can be little
doubt that the presence of the foreign army in the north
can hardly make for free negotiations as provided for by
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
which the
Security Council endorsed in its resolution 365 (1974), as
well as by Council resolution 367 (1975). In its last
resolution on the subject-resolution
401 (1976)--, pursuant to which the Secretary-General submitted his report,
the Council emphatically called for the urgent and effective
implementation of those resolutions.

1.5. Qne Of many indications of the situation resulting
from the lack of access by UNFICYP in the occupied north
is the continuous looting still taking place in the occupied
areas and currently in the new Famagusta town. The
explanation given to the Secretary-General by the Turkish
side and their leaders to the effect that they keep a record
with lists of removed property is wholly unconvincing in

20. These resolutions, in their substance, demand the
cessation of foreign military intervention against the Re2

public of Cyprus, the speedy withdrawal of all armed
military forces from the territory of the Republic and the
return of the refugees to their homes in safety. With
reference to the constitutional system, those resolutions
cammend that contacts and negotiations between the two
communities should be freely conducted through the good
offices of the Secretary-General.

Turanians transferred from Turkey to the north is increasing from day to day”, and it describes the situation as
“wholly alarming”.
25. This aggregate of a series of international illegalities
and violations of human rights perpetrated since 1974
against Cyprus and against its people as a whole, Greek and
Turkish alike, is audaciously presented to the world as the
“new reality” reflected in the so-called Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus. Now, I ask: at what point does an
international crime become a legitimate reality? I would
say at no time, for it is ever alive, ever calling for
atonement.

21. As appears from these resolutions, the implementation
of which is urgently called for by resolution 401 (1976),
priority of place and time is given to the process of
withdrawal
of the foreign occupation forces and the
cessation of foreign interference. This priority was obviously considered essential, so that the negotiations between
the two communities on the constitutional system could be
freely and meaningfully conducted. However, Turkey
treated resolution 401 (1976) in the same way it had
treated previous unanimously adopted Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on this subject. I hope that
the present resolution, which reiterates the call for the
urgent and effective implementation of the Assembly and
Council resolutions, will be given more careful consideration by Ankara.

26. From another aspect, the progress of the talks is
hindered by the blatant reneging by the Turkish side on
essential agreements reached at the Vienna talks. Characteristic is the case of the humanitarian agreement of
2 August 1975, entered into in the presence of the
Secretary-Gpneral, by which, in exchange for the Govemmerit allowing 8,000 Turkish Cypriots to be transferred to
the north, the Turkish side undertook, reaffirmed and
agreed, as reported by the Secretary-General:

22. Now, the second reason for the unproductiveness of
the talks relates to the fundamental premise for any
negotiation process: that of common purpose. This essential element is sadly lacking. The Turkish side to the
negotiations appears not to be interested in the independence, territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus, so necessary for its survival as a sovereign and non-aligned Member
State of the United Nations. In contrast, our abiding
concern, as well as the generally accepted and declared
purpose of the United Nations, is precisely the survival of
the Republic as a Member State.

“that the Greek Cypriots at present in the north of the
island are free to stay and that they will be given every
help to lead a normal life, including facilities for
education and for the practice of their religion, as well as
medical care by their own doctors and freedom of
movement in the north” p/u 789, annex, point 2/.
It was furthermore

therein agreed that:

“The United Nations will have free and normal access
to Creek Cypriot villages and habitations in the north.”
pai., point 4. f

23. The policy and objective of the Turkish side appear to
be to conduct negotiations from a position of strength,
while at the same time, in Cyprus, Turkey is deliberately
undermining and forestalling the purpose of the talks
through unilateral actions, one such act being the illegal
declaration of a so-called Turkish Federated Stale of
Cyprus. This is a fictitious entity which, from the point of
view of its territory, is none other than the invaded 40 per
cent of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus, a Member
State of the United Nations, which is still under occupation
by another Member State, Turkey-all
this in flagrant
violation of the Charter and repeated General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions. Furthermore, the Turkish side
is taking advantage of the intervening period to consolidate
the illegal de facto situation and promote its separatist
plans.

27. The Turkish side, however, after fully obtaining its
own benefit from the agreement, completely ignored and
reneged on its corresponding obligation in the agreement, as
already stated. Furthermore,
the commitment to allow
UNFICYP free and normal access to the Greek Cypriot
habitations in the north was also reneged on, as shown in
the TCpOTt of the Secretary-General
of 5 June 1976
[S/l 2093, para. 65/.
28. As a consequence of that reneging on and ignoring of
agreements, commitments and resolutions, the daily expulsions through harassment and brute force by the Turkish
authorities were soon resumed and intensified, thus TCducing the remaining 15,000 Greek Cypriots who were still
in the north to 2,000, as shown in paragraph 20 of the
Secretary-General’s report before us.

24. As to the population of this “Turkish Federated
State”, it is substantially alien to the territory; it is
extensively made up of people from Turkey, massively
implanted in the usurped homes and properties of the
expelled Greek Cypriot inhabitants. It is relevant in this
connexion to note that the Turkish Cypriot leader and
former Vice-President, Mr. Ktictik in an article in Hal/&
Sesi of 19 May last, refers to the Turks transported from
mainland Turkey as “professional murderers and thieves”.
The same Turkish Cypriot daily, in its edition of 16 April,
carries a report according to which “brute force used by

29. I was saying that one of the reasons for those talks
being unproductive was the reneging by the Turkish side on
any agreement reached in those talks. A more recent
instance of essential disregard of agreements is the case of
the guidelines agreed upon by the President of the Republic
and the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mr. Denktag, in respect of
talks within the framework of the United Nations resolutions. It was then agreed that a federal State would be
established with such powers and functions vested in a
federal government as would safeguard the unity and
3

gotiate meaningfully and constructively, as required by
United Nations resolutions, the Security Council should,in
our opinion, take a fresh look at the situation with a view
to adopting more effective measuresin the light of the
appealmade to the Council by the GeneralAssemblyin its
most recent resolution-3 1/I 2 of 12 November 1976-and
to adopting the necessarymeasuresfor implementation,
through enforcement action if necessary, of the General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

viability of the State. Despite that express provision, the
proposals made by the Turkish side at Vienna flowing from
that agreement were proposals for the establishment of two
almost completely separate States, to be IooseIy connected
together in a feeble confederation in a way that would
amount to the legalization of the dismemberment of the
Republic of Cyprus.
30. These are the results of the agreements so far reached
in the intercommunal talks.

36. It should be borne in mind that the main problem
confronting Cyprus today is not that of devising a
constitutional system to amend or replace the existing
constitution. It is an international problem of far-reaching
dimensionsin its implications and repercussions.It is the
problem of the armed invasion and continued military
occupation of a large part of the territory of Cyprus, a
State Member of the United Nations, through aggression
on
the part of another Member State, Turkey.

31. It is increasingly obvious that the said Turkish
proposals are not designed to safeguard the independence
or the unity of the State, as provided in the guidelines, but
rather to make sure that the northern part of Cyprus, which
isnow under occupation by the Turkish army, will remain a
Turkish protectorate and, at a certain opportune moment,
will become an integral part of Turkey. What those
proposals are, in fact, aiming at is the partition of Cyprus
with an eye to annexation through the consolidation of a
de facto situation createdby the useof brute force.
32. The whole attitude of the Turkish side towards the
intercommunal talks and their policy of procrastination and
reneging on agreementsclearly demonstrate that they are
not after a viable solution of the Cyprus problem, and this
bringsus to the point, asI saidbefore, where there seemsto
be no common purpose in the negotiations. The constant
arbitrarinessin the conduct of the Turkish sidein the talks,
namely, their unilateral acts, their renegingon agreements
and so forth, springs from their consciousnessof acting
from a position of strength, emboldenedby the presence
and power of the Turkish army and their feeling that they
can proceed with any action that suits their designs,
irrespective of agreementsor law. This also servesas an
indication that behind their manoeuvreslies the threat of
the useof force by the foreign occupying army.
33. It is an axiom, universally accepted and recognized,
that any negotiations, in order to be at all meaningful and
to yield results, must be conducted freely. Obviously, the
negotiations on the Cyprus problem fall short accordingto
this axiom.
34. We still maintain, however, that the intercommunal
talks, when freely conducted within the framework of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, could provide
one of the best means of solving the problem of an
independent, integral and viable State of Cyprus. For our
part, therefore, we shall continue, in a modest and
accommodatingway, our efforts towards finding a just and
enduring solution of the Cyprus problem and we hope that
it may prove possible, should the new Government in
Turkey adopt a more positive and imaginative approachto
the problem in the interests of all concerned, It must,
however, be made abundantly clear that, under no circumstances,will we accept the legitimization of the fait
accompli brought about through the useof force, nor will
we agreeto a form of constitution that is calculated to lead
to the dissolution of the Republic of Cyprus as an
independent, sovereignand non-alignedState.

37. As the President of the Republic, Archbishop Makarios, stated a few days ago at the current Meeting of
Commonwealth Heads of Government in London, the
problem of Cyprus today is one that
“should concern each and every country, becauseinvolved in it are fundamental principles and human rights
of universal validity. When such universalprinciples and
human rights are violated in one country, it is the duty of
all countries to stand for them and to defendthem”.
The Commonwealth Headsof Government, in their final
communiqud issuedyesterday, referred to the question of
Cyprus and, in an expression of solidarity with the
Government and people of Cyprus, called ‘Lfor the implementation of the General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions on Cyprus in all their parts”. That emphasis
conveyed by the phrase “in all their parts” is very
important, for the resolutions in question call for the
withdrawal of the occupation forces, the cessation of
outside interference, the return of the refugeesto their
homes and, lastly, for intercommunal negotiations on a
systemof constitution. In none of the first three hasthere
been an endeavour to implement those resolutions, all
efforts having been directed to the intercommunal talks
which, as I have already explained, have so far been
notoriously Unproductive.
38. Of course, negotiations between Turkish and Greek
Cypriots would be valid and important and could produce
results, and we still believe that they can; but they mustbe
freed of outside interference. We are convinced that if the
Cypriot people-of both Greek and Turkish origin-were
left alone, free from foreign military intervention and
outside interference for purposesalien to the interestsof
Cyprus, as demandedby the relevant unanimouslyadopted
resolutions,they could easily reconcile whatever differences
they may have and live amicably together, asthey did in
the past for many years.
39. The senseof the common interests of all Cypriots, as
the rightful inhabitants of that island, hasalwaysexisted in
the hearts and minds of the ordinary people, Greek and
Turkish alike. This has been recorded in a number of

35. If Ankara-contrary to our hopes about its future
policy-continues, through its instruments, to fail to ne4

reports of the Secretary-General over the years and also
otherwise attested to. I would refer to the report of 10
June 1966, which states that
“the yearning and impatience of the ordinary people of
Cyprus for a full return to normal conditions [is
obvious] ” [S/7350, para. 1781.
The report of 9 March 1968 states:
“it had beengratifying to observe. . . the easewith which
ordinary people of both communitieswere beginningto
resutne their former amicable relations” [S/8446,
para. 1491.

40. However, there were forces from outside Cyprus
striking at this tendency to reconciliation and co-operation,
and those forceshave not ceasedthat nefariouswork.
41. Lord Caradon, former Governor of Cyprus, stated in
the Security Council on 11 December1969:
“For more than a hundred years the peopleof Cyprus
lived together in friendship. . . . They have lived together
for generationsin amity in every town andin morethan a
hundred villages in the island. There is no reasonwhy
they shouldnot do so again.”(1521st meeting, para. 83.1

will eventually come to Cyprus, to its surroundingsand to
the Middle East region, so that the whole situation may be
relieved and the prospects for world developmentbecome
more hopeful,
45. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris Mr. Celik, to
whom the Council has extended an invitation (2012th
meeting] under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.
46. Mr. CELIK: Mr. President, I should like to thank you
and the membersof the Council for having given me the
opportunity today to present in brief the views of the
Turkish Cypriot side regarding the latest developmentsin
Cyprus.
47. Allow me first to express, on behalf of the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus, our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his dedicated and untiring efforts to achieve a
just and lastingsolution of the Cyprus problem. Our thanks
go also to Mr. Perez de Cuellar, the SpecialRepresentative
of the Secretary-Generalin Cyprus, for the exemplary and
efficient way in which he has carried out his most
important task both in Cyprus and during the intercommunal talks at Vienna. I should like also to thank the
Secretariat staff for the impartial manner in which it has
dischargedits difficult responsibilities.

42. Thesefeelingsof commoninterest betweenGreek and
48. I should like to take this opportunity alsoto express
Turkish Cypriots have clearly emergedsince the 1974
our gratitude to the Commander of UNFICYP, Majorforeign invasion. Many are the instancesreported of such
feelings of solidarity, despiteall ruthlessmilitary pressures General Quinn, and to all the officers and men for their
peace-keepingefforts in the islandand to all thosecountries
for their suppression.In Ms report, Mr. Kenneth Ziebel,
that have contributed towards the maintenance of the
Executive Secretary of the World Council of Churches,on a
Force.
visiting missionto Cyprus after the invasion, wrote the
following:
49. Last but not least, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your loyal and valiant efforts during the
“Numerous incidents are related in which Turkish
Cypriots aid Greek Cypriots againstthe Turkish invaders past few days towards the adoption of the present
resolution [410 (1977//, which, although it doesnot go all
or even, incredibly enough, in which Turkish Cypriots
the way to satisfying our side, at leasthasmadepossiblethe
sought the help of Greek Cypriot friends for protection
extension of the mandateof UNFICYP.
af themselvesfrom the Turkish invaders”.
The spirit of friendlinessand solidarity is not lacking in the
Cypriot people. It is ever alive and can at any motnent
flower whennot frustrated from outside.

50. First of all, I should like to comment on that
resolution which wasadopted last night. It is not acceptable
to us in tofo, for the following reasons.

43. As things are, the immediate cessationof unilateral
and divisive action by Ankara and its forces and the
impletnentation of Security Council resolution365 (1974)
with its endorsement of General Assembly resolution
3212 (XXIX) have to be set in motion, sothat there can be
meaningful negotiationslikely to yield positiveresultsfor a
just and lastingsolution, as is expresslyprovided for in the
resolutionsof the Security Council and, in particular, in the
onejust adopted.

51. We have on numerous occasionsput on record our
position regarding the term “Government of Cyprus”. It
will suffice here simply to restate that there exists in
Cyprus no government which can represent or which is
entitled to speak for both communities. There exist two
separate autonomous administrations representing the
Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communitiesrespectively, As the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, Mr. Owen, rightly
saidin the Houseof Commonson 22 December1976:

44. We are now at the threshold of a new and, I trust?
more hopeful era in the approach to international problems. There are signsof a new approachin the leadership
of great nations, We are entering, I hope, an era of more
humanitarian spirit and global understanding,extending
beyond the confines of narrow nationalistic pursuits into
the realms of wider concepts in a closely interdependent
world unified by technology. It is our hope that this spirit

“We must bring the Turkish and Greek Cypriot communities together and forge again a proper Government
of Cyprus, capable of speakingfor all the people [of the
island] .“I
1 See Parliamentary Debates (Hansard), House of Commons,
Official Report, Fifth Series, vol. 923 (London, Her Majesty’s

StationeryOffice),col. 658.

52. I can only say that the continuation of the recognition
accorded to the Greek Cypriot administration as the
Government of Cyprus merely because it happens to be
occupying the Cyprus chair here-or rather I should say
“usurping it”-is
not conducive to the solution of the
problem. I am sure that this is not intended by the Council
to be an invitation to us to occupy a parallel chair.

no alternative. Nevertheless, it is not my intention to make
a lengthy statement, nor do I intend to answer each and
every point just raised by him. They are baseless allegations
that have been made here time and again for the last three
years and to which we have placed on record our
convincing replies. Only one new element that has been just
introduced is worthy of reply.

53. The two communities of Cyprus and their respective
autonomous administrations should be put on a par and
should be treated on an equal footing, in accordance with
the letter and spirit of the United Nations resolutions.

59. There has been an allegation that the mechanism
established during the intercommunal talks regarding missing persons has not been able to operate because of
intransigence or because Turkey did not like it. I am sorry
to state here that even at this moment the Greek Cypriot
representative is still trying to present the problem as one
between Cyprus-which
they claim to represent-and
Turkey. Cyprus is an intercommunal problem and efforts
are being made to solve it through intercommunal talks. At
those intercommunal talks, it is true, a mechanism has been
agreed upon for the tracing of missing persons. That
mechanism provides for Archbishop Makarios to make a
statement regarding Turkish persons who were reported
missing during the period 1963.1974, a period which the
Greek Cypriot representative still claims to have been one
of peace and quiet in the island. Hundreds of people
disappeared from their homes and on the highways and we
are still anxious to know where they are. After that
statement, representatives of the Red Cross and the Red
Crescent in Cyprus would constitute a committee to trace
the remaining files that have been given to us by the
International Red Cross-which,
incidentally, has completed its work in Cyprus, closed its offices because of the
normalization of the situation on the island, and returned
to Geneva. We are prepared to investigate and to tinalize
with that committee the outstanding files that number
about 40.

54. Further, the resolution makes reference to past resolutions-resolutions
which were adopted in our absence and
which have been affected, amended or rendered obsolete by
subsequent developments on the island, as well as by
agreements reached between the two sides. A reference to
those resolutions, therefore, is unrealistic and serves no
useful purpose.
55. We are of the opinion that the Security Council should
give more emphasis to the intercommunal talks and more
particularly to the framework agreement reached between
the two leaders, President Denktas and Archbishop Makarlos, on 12 February 1977 [see S/12323, para. 51. Such an
approach would, I am sure, make a more positive contribution to peace-making efforts and would better serve to
facilitate the early solution of the Cyprus problem.
56. The preambular paragraph regarding UNFICYF?
freedom of movement in the north is misleading, It sounds
as though UNFICYP has no access to the north-which
is
not true. Despite the fact that 18 months have elapsed since
the signing of the pro&s-verbal between the United Nations
and the Turkish Cypriot authorities, it has not yet been
possible for a status agreement to be concluded to fill the
legal vacuum that exists in the north in connexion with the
functioning of UNFICYP in northern Cyprus. As confirmed
by the Secretary-General’s report, UNFICYP enjoys full
freedom of movement in the confrontation area, which is
the principal operation area, and UNFICYP personnel are
able to travel in the north. In the absence of a status
agreement, ‘what is the criterion for judging’ the alleged
restrictions?
I am sure that, when such an agreement has
been concluded, the ,problem will be satisfactorily resolved.

60. The only obstacle preventing that mechanism from
going into operation is the refusal by the Greek Cypriot
administration to accept or recbgnize the existence of the
Red Crescent in Cyprus. They do not have the authority to
refuse to do so as their President accepted the mechanism
during the intercommunal talks under the .auspices of the
Secretary-General.
61. Unlike Mr. Rossides, I do not believe in the usefulness
of an acrimonious debate here; I shall therefore confine my
comments very briefly to the recent developments and
what we on the Turkish side consider to be the main
obstacles to a settlement.

57. Finally, on the subject of resolutions, I should just like
to say that, in an effort to prevent an acrimonious debate
here, there is a tendency to refrain from incorporating in
resolutions positive developments, purely for the sake of
convenience. Unfortunately, the-result of this is that the
resolutions adopted neither reflect the true position nor are
conducive or helpful to the solution of the problem. They
merely give the Greek Cypriots the opportunity to exploit
the resolutions to maintain international pressure on the
Turkish side and, hence, to prolong the Cyprus problem.

62. We have just had a very pessimistic presentation from
the Greek Cypriot side. While I do not pretend that a
settlement is at hand, I certainly do not share the
pessimism. We must be realistic. The Cyprus problem
involves two communities which have been in a state of
conflict for the past quarter of a century; two communities
which have been physically and politically separate since
1963; two communities which have not been able even to
play football together for the last 20 years. Any settlement
necessitates, above all, patience and perseverance. The
Cyprus problem, a problem with a long and turbulent
history, is not one which can be settled overnight. I feel
therefore that the pessimism expressed is totally unwarranted. The problem is to find ways and means of

58. It was not my intention today to make a statement on
the substance of the Cyprus problem which is being
currently negotiated at the intercommunal talks, but the
Greek Cypriot representative, whose disappointing statement we have just heard and who does not seem to show
even the restraint of his Foreign Minister, has left me with
6

re-establi’shing a joint government in Cyprus. I believe that,
given goodwill and a realistic approach, there is no reason
why a satisfactory solution should not be found to the
problem of the two communities.

67. In the light of the framework
agreement reached
between the leaders of the two communities, the sixth
round of the intercommunal talks was convened at Vienna,
where concrete proposals were exchanged between the two
sides for the first time.

63. What has been done to facilitate and expedite the
solution of the Cyprus problem since the last meeting of
the Security Council on this subject last December? The
Turkish side, for its part, has made renewed and increased
efforts with a view to achieving a just and peaceful solution
of the Cyprus problem. As confirmed by the SecretaryGeneral, it was the bold initiative of President Denktag in
January of this year that succeeded in bringing about the
resumption of the intercommunal talks, President Denktap,‘s
initiative was prompted, above all, by the genuine desire of
the Turkish Cypriot community to attain a just and lasting
solution of the Cyprus problem, and that initiative constitutes the best evidence of the goodwill and sincerity of the
Turkish Cypriot side.

68. Despite the fact that the positions of the two sides still
remain far apart, it is our sincere belief that tith patience,
good statesmanship and mutual accommodation a realistic
solution can be found to our long-standing problem.
69. Why has it not been possible to bridge the gap
between the positions of the two communities? Unfortunately, the goodwill displayed by the Turkish Cypriot side
has not received the response it deserves from the Greek
Cypriot side. During the past six months, the attitude of
the Greek Cypriot side has continued to be characterized
by its intransigence, its lack of goodwill and its determination to divert efforts away from the intercommunal
talks and to look outside Cyprus for the solution of the
problem-a problem which is, in essence, a constitutional
problem between the two communities.

64. In his letter of 9 January 1977 to Archbishop
Makarios which led to the historic meeting of the two
leaders, President Denktag expressed his readiness to discuss
with the Archbishop all aspects of the Cyprus problem.
President Denktag also stated:

70. The Greek Cypriot side continues to regard the Cyprus
problem as a question of territory or as a simple boundary
dispute. The Cyprus problem is not a dispute which can be
settled by having so many square miles of land go to one
side or the other. The problem involves imp&tan& fundamental constitutional issues. It necessitates the establishment of a new arrangement whereby the two communities
will be able to participate in the adrfiinistration of the
island on a basis of equality. It concerns the equal status of
the two communities. It concerns the security of life and
property of the Turkish Cypriot community, which, being
smaller in number, has been the suffering party for the past
20 years, It concerns the defendabiIity of the territory to
be administered by each community. It concerns the
attainment by the Turkish Cypriot community of an equal
opportunity to develop economically without hindrance
and discrimination.

“Needless to say, I am also ready to discuss with Your
Beatitude the establishment of a transitional bicommunal
administration as a first step in the right direction, as I
feel that the prolongation of the present situation will
make it harder for us to re-establish a bicotnmunal
federalism in the future. Generations of Greeks and Turks
are growing up who regard each other as enemies.
“A bicommunal political show in which the actors will
be those enemies does not seem to be a just and fair
inheritance which we can leave to our own people.”
President Denktag added:
“Any positive steps which can be taken in this direction
will, I am sure, contribute to a peaceful settlement of the
Cyprus problem and consequently to the alleviation of
many of the hardships which are at present suffered by
both communities, the alleviation of which is contingent
upon a political settlement.”

71. Let us therefore not blur and oversimplify the
fundamental issues which are at stake. Let us examine
carefully and objectively why there has been no agreement
so far.
72. The slow progress in the intercommunal talks is
primarily the result of the different approach to the
problem taken by the two parties. The Greek Cypriots
speak of devolution. They still look upon Cyprus as a Greek
island and they are considering how few rights they can give
the Turkish Cypriot community within a Greek-dominated
administrative set-up. They ignore the fact that separation
does exist-a separation which they themselves brought
about through their oppression and armed onslaught against
the Turkish Cypriots in 1963, They continue to pretend
that there is one Cyprus, one administration, one region
and that they are the government in control of the whole
island and entitled to speak for and on behalf of both
communities.

65. As a result of that initiative, Archbishop Makarios,
who had up to that time spurned any such meeting, met
President Denktag on 27 January. That meeting in itselfthe first one in 13 years-constitutes
an important step
towards the solution of the Cyprus problem.
66. A second meeting between President Denktag and
Archbishop Makarios-this
time in the presence of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim-took
place on 12
February. During this significant meeting, which was
described by a United Nations spokesman as “positive and
cordial”, instructions and a framework were worked out as
a basis for future negotiations between the two communities, and it was agreed that an independent, nonaligned, bi-communal, Federal Republic should be. established.

73. The fact that I am here addressing the Council is proof
in itself that there is ‘tie one government which can speak
for both communities. The whole world knows that there is
7

such
government. There are today two separate autonomous administrations
exercising exclusive control and
authority over two distinct regiohs of the island.

produce and industrial goods,with a view to crippling our
economy. In that regard, they went so far last month asto
imprison a Danishcaptain for two months for having called
at the Turkish Cypriot port of Famagusta,asthough he had
committed a seriouscriminal offence.

no

74. There has been so much bloodshed and there is such
deep-rooted mistrust between the two communities that it
will definitely take time to restore trust and co-operation
between the two sides.

81, Hardly a month passes
when we do not have to defend
ourselvesin a political court casein Europeancapitals or
fight political battles at international forums.

75. In view of the past, it would not be realistic to expect
normalization overnight. It is of the utmost importance to
exercise caution at the initial stages lest conditions which
created the tragedies of the past be revived. It is pertinent
to note here that there are still over 70,000 weapons in the
hands of unauthorized Greek Cypriots in the south. That
has been confirmed
by none other than Mr. Glafcos
Clerides, who recently made a public statement to the
effect that, after Makarios suffered a heart attack, armed
groups belonging to rival Greek Cypriot terrorist organizations prepared to fight each other on an isiand-wide scale.

82. Are we to concentrate on peace talks or are we to go
all around the world, with our very limited personneland
financial means, fighting political battles and defending
ourselvesin politicai court casesbrought againstus by the
Greek Cypriots? Every such confrontation not only causes
a drain on the resourcesof both communities and further
hardensthe positions of the two sides,but deepenseven
more the separation and division of the two communities,
thus putting off a political settlement.
83. Recently the Greek Cypriot-administered Central
Bank issuedinstructions to foreign banks operating in the
north to terminate foreign exchangetransactionsand not to
issueforeign exchange to Turkish Cypriots, despitethe fact
that all foreign currency deposited in these banks by
Turkish Cypriots found its way to the Greek Cypriot
Central Bank. Furthermore, the Central Bank usurpedthe
Turkish Cypriot share in its funds following the eventsof
1974. Such action by the Greek Cypriots only servesto
force us to establish our own central bank and hence
further perpetuatesthe division of the two communities.

76. The Turkish Cypriot side envisages the establishment
of a b&communal, bi-zonal and non-aligned federal republic
in which the two national communities will be able to live
side by side in their respective regions in peace and security,
free from the domination of one by the other.
77. We should start cautiously and realistically and, to
begin with, should give only limited powers and functions
to the central federal government. With the growth of
mutual trust and confidence, demonstrated not merely by
words but also by deeds, it would be possible for the links
between the two federated States to become strengthened
in time.

84. Each action calls for a reaction, and I am sure that,
when the time comes, the Council will differentiate
betweenthe action and the legitimate andjust reaction.

78. The federation we propose, while starting with loose
links, will continuously evolve with the passage of time into
a stronger and lasting federal republic, through a process
which may be described as “federation by evolution”.

85. If the Greek Cypriot sidegenuinely desiresmeaningful
negotiations, it should refrain from such acts and COoperate with us in order to establisha suitable climate for
meaningfulnegotiations.

79. A realistic solution of the Cyprus problem can be
achieved only if the Greek Cypriot side acknowledges the
past bitter experiences of the Turkish Cypriot community
and realizes that any settlement must embody effective
safeguards tu prevent the recurrence of the unfortunate
events of the past, Unless the Greek Cypriots appreciate the
genuine fears and anxieties of the Turkish Cypriots about
the future and unless they agree to an arrangement which
will ensure equality, security and economic prosperity to
the Turkish Cypriot community in the future, there will be
no significant improvement
in prospects
for an early
settlement.

86. It is evident, therefore, that the underlying reasonfor
the lack of progress towards the solution of the Cyprus
problem has been the reluctance of the Greek Cypriot side
to accept the realities of Cyprus, and its failure to work
with usfor the normalization of the situation.
87. I should like to state yet once again that the Turkish
Cypriots do not want anything in excessof their legitimate
rights: their right to live as equal citizens enjoying full
security of life and property and their right to prosper
economically under conditions of equal opportunity and
without the discrimination and hardshipsthey have facedin
the past. In short, what the Turkish Cypriots want is a new
constitutional and administrative arrangement that will
enable them to live in peace and security and physical,
actual guarantees that will not again expose them to
dangersas in the past, an arrangementthat will prevent the
domination and oppression of one community by the
other.

80. Another factor jeopardizing
peace efforts is the
continuation and intensification
of the political and economic warfare of the Greek Cypriot administration against
the Turkish Cypriot
community.
In pursuance of this
warfare, the Greek Cypriots, inter alia, try to prevent the
operation of charter flights to northern Cyprus and
threaten foreign tourism agenciesorganizing packagetours
to northern Cyprus, hence undermining Turkish Cypriot
tourism. ‘They place obstructions in the way of foreign
ships and aircraft seeking to call at our ports and airports,
thereby preventing the exportation of our agricultural

88. It is my ardent hope and sincere belief that a
permanent solution of the Cyprus problem is possible
through the intercommunal talks, which are in fact the only
8

way in which the sides can best understand each others’
Positions
and hence find ways and means of accommodating each other.

Commander of the Force, Major-General Quinn, and to the
officers and men serving under difficult conditions in the
field.

89. As I have already stated, this process requires patience
and Perseverance,
a.nd the success of the negotiations
depends above all on a change of heart and a change of
approach on the part of the Greek Cypriot side.

99. The representative of Cyprus, Ambassador Rossides,
has already expressed his Government’s views as regards the
situation prevailing in the island as reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report and the wider implications of the
Cyprus problem. I shall therefore avoid going over the same
ground. But with the Council’s indulgence, I shall try to
deal as briefly as possible with points contained i? the
report that should be drawn to its attention.

90. With all due respect to the Council and its members, I
am 0f the opinion that there is more for UNESCO to do in
Cyprus than for the Security Council. There must be a new
pl~ilosophy . We must educate our people to look upon each
other as equals to be respected and not as enemies to be
hated.

100. First is the fact that UNFICYP’s access to the area
under Turkish military control remains restricted, and
humanitarian work continues to be carried out on a limited
scale. As stated in the report, UNFICYP’s freedom of
movement is limited to access to its camps and observation
and liaison posts, and the Force is denied access to Greek
Cypriot habitations. Moreover, UNFICYP personnel is not
permitted to deliver relief supplies destined for Greek
Cypriots and Maronites directly to the recipients. Notwithstanding UNFICYP’s unremitting efforts to alIeviate the
plight of the Greek Cypriots in the area under Turkish
control, the living conditions of the latter are still, and I
quote from the report, “a cause for concern” /S/12342,

91. As Mr. Clerides said during a television programme on
29 May 1975, the Greek Cypriot youth and the National
Guard should be educated so that they do not look upon
the Turkish Cypriots as their natural national enemy.
92. The Greek Cypriots must accept that we, the Turkish
Cypriots,
are a part of Cyprus and we should be treated as
such.
93. Efforts
by the Greek Cypriot side so eloquently
ernphasized by Mr. Rossides a moment ago not to accept us
as parties to the Cyprus problem are, to say the least, not
conducive to a settlement in Cyprus. I hope that his views
are not shared by his administration.
94. The
Greece.

PRESIDENT:

I call on the representative

para. 20/.

101. Secondly, the situation regardingmedicalcarefor the
Greek Cypriots in the north remainsas describedin the
Secretary-General’s report of 9 December 1976 [S/12253,
para. 36/, that is to say that, despite the Vienna communiquC of 2 August 1975, the Greek Cypriots in the
occupied area are denied the medical care of their own
doctors.

of

95. Mr. PAPOULIAS
(Greece): Mr. President, may I offer
you my warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. Your wide experience and your
diplomatic
skill as well as your deep knowledge of United
Nations matters are for us a source of confidence that YOU
will effectively,
efficiently and objectively guide the discussion on the item on the agenda. You represent a country
with’ which
my country has traditional bonds of close
friendship and co-operation. At the same time, I should like
to thank the Council for having allowed me to participate
in the discussion.

102. Thirdly, the Avlona situation, which, asthe Council
knows, constitutes another attempt to encroach upon
Greek Cypriot property, remainsasit was describedin the
last report of the Secretary-General[ibid., papas..X-26],
103. Fourthly,
states:

paragraph 30 of the report before US

“Appreciable quantities of commercialcommodities. . .
have continued to be taken from Greek Cypriot-owned
businesshousesand other premisesin the Famagustaarea,
giving rise to complaints of looting. The Turkish Cypriot
authorities have indicated to UNFICYP that recordsare
kept and that certain confiscated properties would be
accounted for in the event of a political agreement.”

96. On the proposal of the Secretary-General, the Security
Council has decided to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus for a further period of six months.
This resolution,
to which the Government of Cyprus has
agreed, is supported by my Government.
97. I take this opportunity to express to the SecretaryGene&
our deep appreciation for his dedicated and
untiring efforts in the search for a just, peaceful and lasting
solution to the Cyprus problem. We also express sincere
thanks to the Special Representative of the Secretary&nerd
h Cyprus, Ambassador PBrez de CuBllar, and t0
he Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr. Roberto Guyer and
Mr, Brian Urquhart.

Apart from deploring the grim continuation of the looting
of Greek Cypriot property, may I, through you, Mr. President, ask what is the meaning of the word ‘<certain” in
this paragraph and what is to be the fate of the Greek
Cypriot properties which may be refusedinclusion in that
term. Perhaps those also are destined for so-calledexportation.
104. Fifthly, the report registers no progress in the
humanitarian question of missingpersons.

98. Our gratitude goes also to the Governments which,
tllrou@l voluntary
contributions in personnel and funds,
enable UNFICP
to continue its peace-keeping and humanitarian
role. We wish to pay a tribute too t0 the

105. Sixthly, in Kyrenia, Greek Cypriots have ,remained
without religiousassistance.
9

mandate entrusted to him by the General Assembly and the
Security Council, the negotiations have still to enter the
substantive phase. Chapter VII of the report voices eloquently the Secretary-General’s disappointment, which we
share.

106. Paragraph 54 of the report states that
“The daily exodus of Greek Cypriots from the north
virtually ceased in late January and, with the institution
of a system whereby UNFICYP carefully monitors the
movement of Creek Cypriots between the north and the
south, the transfers have been reduced to a trickle.”

111. It is obvious that as long as the negotiating process is
used by the other side as a convenient delaying tactic in
order to perpetuate faits accomplis and to create so-called
irreversible situations, there is little hope of making real
a peaceful settlement. It should be
progress towards
pointed out, however, that the United Nations and humanity have bitter experience of the results of such methods
and tactics.

I feel this paragraph merits closer examination. First of all,
the reduction of the Greek Cypriot population in the north
during the period covered by the Secretary-General’s
report, 7 December 1976 to 7 June 1977, is much more
drastic than a reading of this paragraph would reveal prima
facie. According to paragraph 29 of the Secretary-General’s
report of 9 December 1976, on 6 December 1976 the
Greek Cypriot population in the north was 3,631. The
figure given for 7 June 1977 is 2,000, which represents a
reduction of 1,631, in other words, a further decrease of 45
per cent of the remaining Greek Cypriot population. It is
no wonder that the report speaks of a “trickle”,
since it
refers to a source that is being systematically dried out, if
we take into account the fact that the population, which
represented more than 200,000 souls, has been reduced to a
mere 2,000. Only so few have been left in the north of the
island out of the vast indigenous majority population that
had lived there since the dawn of history.

112. I would assure the Council that the Greek Government will continue as in the past to lend its full support to
the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices, and we
welcome his intention expressed in paragraph 59 of the
report to continue with his efforts in order to clear the way
for substantive negotiations on all issues of the Cyprus
problem at future rounds of talks. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General that he is ready to spare no effort to
assist the parties in this regard.
113. The Greek Cypriot side has shown its goodwill and
readiness to negotiate seriously by submitting concrete
proposals on the territorial aspect of the Cyprus problem,
as well as on other related aspects. The Greek Cypriot
community is still awaiting a positive response. For our
part, we shall not give up repeating that a solution can be
found only through serious, sincere and meaningful negotiations in conformity
with the basic principles of the
Charter and through the implementation of the General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

107. The present unacceptable situation in Cyprus is, as
the Council knows, the result of the continuous and
blatant disrespect of the other side for the principles of
the Charter, for the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and for a whole series of General Assembly and Security
specifically Assembly
resolution
Council resolutions,
32 12 (XXIX), resolution 365 (1974) by which the Council
endorses resolution 3212 (XXIX), and subsequent ones
which provide for respect for the sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity of the non-aligned Republic
of Cyprus, the withdrawal of all foreign armed forces from
Cyprus, the return of refugees to their homes in safety and
the settlement of the problem through negotiations
between the two communities with the help of the good
offices of the Secretary-General.

114. Only a peaceful settlement will eliminate the potentially explosive situation in the island as stated by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 60 of his report, where he
proposes the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP, and
only thus will the danger be averted that threatens the
international peace and security, as recognized by the
General Assembly in its resolution 31/12.

108. Three full years after the Turkish invasion, 40 per
cent of the Republic’s territory is still under foreign
military occupation,, including 70 per cent of the island’s
resources, plus the most fertile land and important Greek
Cypriot investments in industry, tourism and other sectors
of the economy-and all this in the name of a minority
community that does not exceed 18 per cent of the total
population of the island.

115. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on whom I now call.
116. Mr. TURKMEN
(Turkey): Mr. ,President, I should
like to congratulate you warmly upon your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of June, and
to express to you our deep appreciation for the efficient
and diligent way in which you have conducted the
consultations in connexion with the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus.
In paying a tribute to your wisdom, diplomatic skill and
wide experience, I should like also to stress the satisfaction
that we feel in seeing as President a representative of a
country with which Turkey enjoys cordial and fruitful
relations in all fields.

109. The massive and systematic expulsion of the Greek
Cypriot
population from the area under Turkish military
occupation has brought the number of refugees-refugees in
their OWII country-to
198,477, as stated jn paragraph 36 of
the Secretary-General’s report, whereas the colonization of
the island by migrants from the Turkish mainland is an
attempt to alter the demographic pattern of the island in
violation of paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution
3395 (xxx).

117. I wish to seize this opportunity to reiterate to the
Secretary-General that we highly value his tireless efforts in
the search for a solution to the Cyprus conflict. We renew
our appreciation to the countries providing troops and
contributing financially to UNFICYP.

110. After many successive rounds of intercommunal talks
held under the Secretary-General’s auspices by virtue of the
10

118. We should like once again to express our thanks to,
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative in Cyprus,
Ambassador Perez de Cuellar, and Under-SecretariesGeneral Mr. Urquhart and Mr. Guyer for their sustained and
dedicated efforts in the fulfilment of their functions. We
should like to commend Major-General Quinn who has
proved to be an exemplary Force Commander since he
assumed his responsibilities.

123. Room for optimism increases not only because of the
relative calm and tranquillity prevailing in the island but as
a result of the significant developments since the beginning
of 1977 in the search for a peaceful settlement. Upon the
initiative of President Denktat, the leaders of the two
communities held two meetings, in late January and early
February of this year, and concluded a framework agreement. These high-level meetings between the two leaders,
their first in more than a decade,as well asthe framework
agreement, have been unanimously termed a breakthrough
in the quest for a solution by all concerned. In the sixth
preambular paragraphof the resolution, the Council, in its
wisdom, takes note of the meeting between President
Denktag and Archbishop Makarios and emphasizesthe need
to adhere to the framework agreement reached at that
meeting. My delegationis gratified to seethat the Council,
in doing so, hastaken a realistic and constructive approach.
Indeed, the framework agreementhas establisheda new
basisfor intercommunal talks. The negotiating processcan
be long and arduous, but there is no doubt that it has
moved into a more concrete phasefollowing that agreement.

119. We have carefully studied the report of the Secretary-General (S/12342/. Although we may not agree with
each and every element in the report, we consider it
nevertheless to be the outcome of a serious and fair
endeavour to assess the developments in Cyprus during the
last six months.
120. In paragraph 28 of the report, the Secretary-General
makes reference to the restriction on the freedom of
movement of UNFICYP. In this respect, it should be borne
in mind that, in contrast to previous reports, this one does
not mention the arrangements which were being negotiated
on the stationing, deployment and functioning of
UNFICYP in the territory under the authority of the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus. Last year, it was
reported that an agreed text of letters to be exchanged had
been drawn up. This exchange has not taken place. It is
evident that UNFICYP has to reach an understanding with
the Turkish administration for the discharging of its
functions in the north of the island. In the absence of such
an agreement, it is difficult to judge the criteria which are
used in determining the exact nature of the restrictions
mentioned.

124. The Secretary-General,in paragraph58 of the report,
observes:
“The task that now confronts the parties is to bridge
the conceptual and substantive differencesthat separate
their positions regarding the basic structure and future
development of an independent, non-aligned, bi-communal federal republic of Cyprus.”
Then he concludes,in paragraph59:

121. The Security Council, in all its resolutions, combined
the renewal of the mandate with a call for negotiations and
has expressed the hope, year after year, that at the end of a
six-month period there would be no need for yet another
renewal. This is what the Council has done once more. We
hope that this is the last such call. If, indeed, in the next six
months there is not substantial progress towards a solution,
the Council should perhaps at least review the mandate of
the Force as it was established in 1964 and adapt it to the
prevailing circumstances.

“I still believe that the negotiations between the
representatives of the two Cypriot communities, at the
level of the interlocutors and at other levelsasnecessary,
are the best available method of achieving a just and
lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem.”
My Government sharesthese opinions and will lend every
assistanceit can to achievethose purposes.
125. I should like to state the position of my Government
on resolution 410 (1977) which was adopted yesterday. In
the eighth preambular paragraph there is an unfortunate
reference to a “Government of Cyprus”, which compelsmy
Government to dissociate itself from the resolution. A
reference to such an entity, which is non-existent, is all the
more misleadingwhen the leadersof the two communities,
in their framework agreementof 12 February 1977, have
decided to establish an “independent, non-aligned, bicommunal Federal Republic”, and thus merge the two
separate administrations of Turkish Cypriot and Greek
Cypriot communities. Therefore, the resolution adopted
yesterday is unacceptableto us in tozB.

122. When one reads the report and bears in mind the
previous reports, it becomes clear that the island has
recently, for the first time in many years, enjoyed
unprecedented calm and tranquillity. Some of the issues
which in the past had adversely affected the relations
between the two communities have abated. In paragraph
51, the Secretary-General reaches the same conclusion:
“The situation in Cyprus was quiet during the period
under review, especially since the meetings between the
leaders of the two communities that were held on 27
January in the presence of my Special Representative and
on 12 February 1977 under my personal auspices. Thus,
three years after the events of 1974, a substantial trend
towards stabilization of the security situation has developed and is being maintained.”

126. The resolution contains two basic and operative
elements. First, it gives UNFICYP a mandate for another
period of six months to carry out its functions. Weconcur
with this extension, having heard Minister Celik, who
informed the Council of the consent of the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus. Secondly, the resolution reiterates the missionof good offices of the Secretary-Generalin

In the fifth preambular paragraph of the draft resolution it
adopted late last night, the Council also takes due note of
the improved situation in Cyprus [see resolution
410 (1977/l.
11

the intercommunal negotiations. My Government has supported the mission of the Secretary-General within its
present framework. It will continue to do SO.

other. That is why my country, itself a recent victim of
armed aggression in which vile mercenaries were used
against its independence and sovereignty, condemns all
States which in one way or another have violated the
sovereignty of the non-aligned State of Cyprus:

127. The representative of Greece has again, in his
statement, used the words “invasion” and “occupation” in
referring to the intervention of Turkey in Cyprus in 1974
and to the presence of Turkish forces in the island for the
purpose of protecting the Turkish community until a
settlement can be achieved. He omitted, as usual, to
mention the reason for which Turkey had to intervene on
20 July 1974. His memory can only go back that far; he
does not recall what had happened only a few days earlier,
on 15 July 1974. But it was none other than Archbishop
Makarios who described what happened on that day as “an
invasion by Greece with the aim of annexing Cyprus”. The
solicitude of the representative of Greece for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus has, therefore, a
rather cynical ring. I think, I shall limit my reply to the
representative of Greece to those few words, The other
points he has raised have been dealt with already by
Minister Celik.

132. The continued occupation of a major part of the
territory of Cyprus by Turkish forces is unacceptable, and
“the international community cannot countenance that
challenge.
133. Any policy aimed at transforming the island into a
strategic military base will be energetically opposed by my
country, because such a policy would constitute a serious
threat that is all the greater since Cyprus, like Benin, is a
small and defenceless country. My country condemns all
the plots and expansionist aims that violate the sovereignty
of the Cypriot State.
134. The Cypriot crisis, seen from within, is a national
problem that must be settled peacefully and in full
freedom, without outside interference by anybody whatsoever and under United Nations auspices. The Cypriot
ethnic communities have lived side by side so far, and have,
in consequence, a common history and culture. My
delegation is therefore of the opinion that the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his staff should be encouraged so as
to facilitate a dialogue between those communities.

128. Mr. HOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation from
French): Sir, my delegation wishes to congratulate you
upon your brilliant assumption .of the presidency of the
Council. My delegation is satisfied with the responsible
manner in which you have been conducting our deliberations since the beginning of the month. Your beautiful and
great country, Canada, and my country, the People’s
Republic of Benin, enjoy friendly, cordial and close
relations. Co-operation between our two countries has
recently developed in an encouraging way. The Beninese
people, which highly esteems the Canadian people, is most
appreciative of the generous assistance provided by Canada
for the development of the People’s Republic of Benin. On
behalf of my country, I wish to express to yours our sincere
gratitude.

135. The Secretary-General’s report, which my delegation
read with great care, is an objective one that enables us to
consider the Cypriot crisis in which there has been no
improvement since it arose. Despite a relative calm, the
basic problems remain unsolved. All that should be a
subject of major concern for the Organization and particularly for the Security Council.
136. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): Mr. President, first of all I should like to record our appreciation
for the work of your predecessor, Ambassador Boya, the
representative of Benin, as our President last month. We
were particularly pleased that it was under his leadership
that the Council took another significant step towards
tightening the sanctions against the illegal regime in
Rhodesia. His diplomatic skills and dedication made an
important contribution
to the successful work of the
Council last month, in this and in other areas.

129. My delegation has followed attentively the impartial
manner in which you, Mr. President, have so far guided our
long and difficult informal consultations, which made
possible the adoption of the resolution renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-Keeping Force in
Cyprus. My country recognizes that the maintenance of the
Force in Cyprus is an unquestionable necessity, since the
effects of the armed aggression against the peaceful people
of Cyprus have alas not been eliminated. That explains the
favourable attitude of my country towards the resolution
we adopted yesterday.

137. I should also like to welcome you, Mr. President, to
your responsibilities, responsibilities which you have already been carrying out in a vigorous and effective manner
these last days. We are indeed fortunate to have in this
Council leadership of such high quality as that represented
by you.

130. My delegation congratulates the Secretary-General
and his staff on their work to achieve a peaceful settlement
of the crisis. My delegation sincerely hopes that their
efforts will be crowned with success and that the Cypriot
People, which is one and indivisible, will find peace and
serenity once again.

138. The Council’s renewal last night of the mandate of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus was an
expression of our concern, of our responsibility and of our
confidence that the still unsettled situation in Cyprus can
and will be resolved. We are encouraged by the fact that
there was a resumption this spring of the intercommunal
negotiations. The Secretary-General states in his report that
UNFICYP
fulfils a vital and indispensable mission in
maintaining quiet on the island, and thereby facilitating the

13 1. The position of my country on the Cyprus question
is known to all. It is based upon principle. My country is
categorically opposed to the annexation and appropriation
of territory by force. My country is categorically opposed
to the use of force to settle disputes that pit States or
ethnic communities within a single nation against each
2

search for a peaceful settlement. My Government shares
that view. WC do not underestimate the difficulties in
overcoming the deep differences between the parties on the
basic elements of a settlement. We believe that the parties
must continue to explore their requirements for a settlement in a serious and sustained manner. Through that
process, steps can be taken towards the permanent settlement for Cyprus that we all seek.

United Kingdom Governmenthopes to maintain the British
contingent at its present strength for the next six months.
We shall continue to meet the costs of our contingentwhich is the largest in the Force-in full. We shalf also
continue to meet a largepart of the cost of logistic support
to the Force. In the financial year 1974/77, the United
Kingdom’s contribution to UNFICYP’s logistic support
may be asmuch asEl .7 million.

139. The events of the last six months underscore the
importance of UNFICYP continuing its essential mission.
We are therefore concerned by the Secretary-General’s
report of the growing financial difficulty for the United
Nations in maintaining the Force. It is disturbing that the
UNFICYP deficit has grown to over $54 million. That
means that the United Nations has been unable to pay the
reimbursement
claims of troop-contributing
countries
beyond the second half of 1973. We have consistently
expressed our belief that the financial burden of UNFICYP
must be shared by all Member States who profess concern
for the realization of an enduring peace in Cyprus. The
permanent members of the Security Council have a special
obligation to provide financial support to peace keeping in
Cyprus. We hope that the Governments to which the
Secretary-General has made a special appeal for assistance
will respond generously.

145. The Secretary-Generalhas,as w&have now cometo
expect, given us a further comprehensive,yet lucid, report
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus for the last six
months. I should like briefly to refer to four parts of the
report that my delegation regards as being particularly
important.
146. The first point I wishto makeconcernsparagraph10
of the report, where it is stated that the exodus of Greek
Cypriots from the north has slowed down substantially
since the end of January 1977, and that a new improved
procedure has been instituted for screeningtransfers of
Greek Cypriots from the north to the south. My delegation
regards the tragic sufferings of the ordinary people of
Cyprus as a matter just asseriousasthe political aspectsof
the Cyprus problem. It is perhaps scarcely a cause for
satisfaction that the flow of Greek Cypriots from their
homes has been reduced. It continues to be a causeof
concern to my Government that UNFICYP’S freedom of
movement in the north of Cyprus remains restricted.
However, the reduction in the numbers of Greek Cypriots
leaving their homes in the north representsa modeststep
towards a return to normality in the island. We hope that
still more can be done and that in the Secretary-General’s
next report he will no longer be obliged to include a
sentence to the effect that the living conditions of the
Greek Cypriots remainingin the areaunder Turkish Cypriot
control arestill a causefor concern.

140. My Government wishes to commend the officers and
troop contingents of UNFICYP-including,
Mr. President,
the contingent from your country-for
their continued
excellence in carrying out their important mission.Wealso
wish to expressour deepestappreciation of the efforts of
the Secretary-Generaland his associates.They especially
deserveour praisefor their continuing efforts to help the
Cyprus parties to negotiate a mutually acceptable settlement.
141. Finally, may I expressthe hope of the United States
Government and of the American people that the months
ahead will seesteady progresstowards a negotiated settlement in the questionof Cyprus.

143. I alsotake this opportunity to askthe representative
of Benin to convey to your predecessor,AmbassadorBoya,
my delegation’scongratulationson the successfulway in
which heconcludedhis term of office last month.

147. Secondly, it is most welcome that the military
situation in Cyprus hasbeen quiet during the period under
review and that the Secretary-Generalis able to record what
he describesas a substantialtrend towards stabilization of
the security situation. In this context the Secretary-General
rightly pays tribute to the efforts of the officers and menof
UNFICYP who have carried out their taskswith exemplary
efficiency and devotion to duty. Major-General Quinn can
be proud that his first six monthswith the Force have seen,
on the military side, a notable reduction in breachesof the
cease-fireby shooting and in the number of violations of
the cease-fireby movement forward. No one would assert
that the absence of incidents will lead of itself to a
settlement of the Cyprus problem, but, equally, no one
would deny that a settlement of the problem would
scarcely be possible against a background of cease-fire
violations and military confrontation.

144. I now turn to the question on today’s agenda.The
United Kingdom voted for the resolution that we adopted
last night becausewe agreewith the view expressedin the
latest report of the Secretary-General/S/12342] that the
United Nations Peace-keepingForce in Cyprus is an
indispensablefactor in keeping the peace in Cyprus and
becausewe support his proposalthat the mandate of the
Force should be extended for a further six months. The

148. Thirdly, there is the continuing and disquieting
problem of the Force’sfinancial situation. In his report, the
Secretary-General again warns the Council that the time
may come when UNFICYP will not be able to continue to
function, becauseof lack of funds. He points out that the
troop contributors bear a disproportionate burden in
making possiblea peace-keepingoperation establishedand
repeatedly extended by the Security Council. We,sharethe

142. Mr. BYATT (United Kingdom): Mr. President,let me
start by congratulating you on your assumption of the
office of Presidentof the Councilso early in Canada’sterm
of membershipin the Council. A high reputation preceded
you from Geneva,and having had the opportunity to work
closely with you, both in the Council and in other bodiesof
the United Nations, my delegationknows that that reputation ismore than justified.

13

Secretary-General’s hope that the special approaches he is
now making to a number of Governments will have more
encouraging results than previous approaches of this kind.
Otherwise the day may come when troop contributors are
no longer willing to make possible the implementation of
the mandate given by the Council. The status of the United
Nations in the eyes of world public opinion would not be
enhanced by the spectacle of the Security Council solemnly
voting for the continued existence of a peace-keepingforce
which was then unable to continue to operate becauseof
the absence of funds,
149. Finally, I wish to refer to the political aspects of the
Cyprus situation. When we met to renew the UNFICYP
mandate six months ago, the intercommunal talks were in
suspense and the Secretary-General observed in his report
(S/122.53, pm. 761 that if the impasse was allowed to be
prolonged the basic issues would become more and more
intractable and the situation increasingly dangerous. HOWever, in January, Archbishop Makarios agreedto Mr. Denktq’s proposal that the two of them should meet. That
meeting led, on 12 February, to a further meeting under
the auspices of the Secretary-General, at which the two
leaders agreed that the intercommunal talks should be
reconvened. A number of meetings have now beenheld at
Vienna and at Nicosia, latterly under the auspices of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr, Perez de
Cuellar, to whose diplomatic skill the international community owes a great debt of gratitude.
150. I should like at this point to express my delegation’s
regret that Mr. Perez de Cuellar is prevented by illness from
being present in the Council chamber today. It is our
earnest hope that he will speedily recover his health and be
able to continue his valuable work.
151. While the resumption of the talks is most welcome,
the Secretary-General pointed out in his report of 30 April
(S/12323] that there is still a long way to go; both sides
must make vastly increased efforts to appreciate one
another’s positions, apprehensions and aspirations. However, it is encouraging that at the Vienna meeting on 31
March the Greek Cypriot side for the first time submitted a
specific territorial proposal, together with a inap, and the
Turkish Cypriot side submitted a constitutional proposal.
Both sides made it clear that their proposals were negotiable. The United Kingdom Government shares the view
expressed in paragraph 58 of the Secretary-General’s latest
report that the task before the negotiators, though difficult,
is not insuperable; the parties must now initiate the process
of identifying, exploring in depth and broadening such
common ground as may exist between them with regard to
the territorial and constitutional issues and the related
specific questions of principle.
152. In paragraph 57 of hisreport, the Secretary-General
refers, in suitably diplomatic language, to the fact that
“certain political developments are being awaited before
the next step is taken”. Those political developments have
now taken place. I want to leave the parties in no doubt
that, with the relatively stable situation in the island, with
the intercommunal talks once again under way and with
those political developments behind us, there are widespread expectations of progress. We who support the

United Nations operation in Cyprus can make our contribution to the maintenanceof peace; but the responsibility
lies with the Cypriot leaders themselvesto ensure an end to
the bitterness and bloodshed of the past. My delegation
believesthat favourable circumstances now exist for the
fulfilment of that responsibility. We hope that, when we
next meet to renew the mandate of UNFICYP, this belief
will not havebeen disappointed. If it is disappointed, I fear
that the frustration of expectations both inside and outside
the island could dangerously aggravatewhat the SecretaryGeneralstill rightly describes as the potentially explosive
situationin Cyprus.
153. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation flow
French): Mr. President, my first words are words of cordial
congratulationsto YOU on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for June. Your competence and,
aboveall, your patience and calm have already borne fruit
in the adoption of resolution 410 (1977). I should like to
assure you that, as in the past, we are ready to offer our
whole-hearted and friendly co.operation in the accomplishmentof your important task.
154. Permit me to take this opportunity to express to
AmbassadorBoya, to his assistant, Mr. Houngavou, and to
the other members of his delegationour sincere gratitude
for their efforts in May when Benin assumed the presidency
of the Council and for the competence and devotion with
which Mr, Boya conducted the proceedingsof this body.
155. In spite of certain encouraging events in contacts
between the representatives of the two parties involved in
the Cyprus conflict, over the past six months we have not
witnessed any true progress towards a solution of the
substantive problems. Consequently, the de facto political
and military situation in the island has remained unchanged
and this has made it necessary for the Security Council to
extend, for a further period of six months, the mandate of
the United Nations Peace-keepingForce in Cyprus. The
Romanian delegation agreed with that Security Council
decisionbecauseof the positive role played by UNFICYP
and particularly because the legal Government of the
Republicof Cyprus gaveits assent.
156. Ever since the Cyprus conflict broke out, Rotnania
has consistently been in favour of respect for the sovereignty, independenceand territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, as also of the immediatewithdrawal of all
foreigntroops on that country’s soil and the cessation of all
foreign intervention in its affairs. My country has always
stressedthe need for a political settlement of the situation
by negotiations between the two communities under the
aegis and with the active contribution of the United
Nations and in the terms of its relevant resolutions. It is
only in this way that it will be possible to bring about a
final settlementof the Cyprus problem in accordance with
the rights and aspirations of the two communities, a
settlement that would ensure their coexistence within a
single,independentState,
157. Until we succeedin bringing about such a settlement,
it is quite natural for the Council to urge all the parties
concernedto demonstrate moderation, to refrain from my
action likely to hold up further a settlement of the conflict

and to comply with all the agreements that have already
been achieved.

accordance with the principles of peaceful coexistence, the
Soviet Union would consistently continue the development
with Canada, as well as with other Western countries, of
relations of long-term, mutually advantageous co-operation
in various fields-political, economic, scientific and cultural.

158. A positive development in the efforts aimed at
bringing about a settlement of the Cyprus problem was the
high-level meeting and the joint communique published on
that occasion.

164. The Soviet delegation would also like to express its
gratitude to your predecessor, President of the Council in
May, the representative of the People’s Republic of Benin,
Ambassador Boya. Under his skilful leadership, the Council
took decisions on a number of important items.

159. We should like to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, and to his Special
Representative, Ambassador Perez de Cuellar, thanks to
whom it was possible to organize those meetings and the
new series of intercommunal talks at Vienna and Nicosia.
As the Secretary-General writes in his report, in spite of his
efforts, it has not proved possible to reach a stage where an
effective negotiating process could emerge from the statement of contradictory positions adopted by the parties to
the talks. However, like the Secretary-General, we remain
convinced that negotiations between the representatives of
the two Cypriot communities are the best means of arriving
at a lasting and just settlement of the Cyprus probIem.

165. Today, the Council is once again discussing. the
question of extending the mandate of UNFICYP. However,
it should be obvious to everyone that this question cannot
be considered in isolation outside the context of the
situation at present prevailing in Cyprus or separately from
a settlement of the Cyprus problem.
166. About three years have gone by since the time when,
as a result of foreign intervention, the normal life of the
Republic of Cyprus and its people was disrupted. However,
we once again have occasion to note that the causes
underlying the Cyprus crisis and fundamental elements of
the Cyprus problem still remain unresolved. Tens of
thousands of Cypriots continue to live as refugees in their
own country. There are still foreign troops on the territory
of Cyprus. As is shown by the latest report of the
Secretary-General, the talks between the representatives of
the two Cypriot communities have encountered serious
difficulties and have not led to any appreciable progress in
the settlement of the fundamental aspects of the Cyprus
problem. Attempts are still being made to exploit the
difficult situation of the Republic of Cyprus in order to
impose decisions alien to the interests of the Cypriot
people.

160. We have noted with satisfaction the SecretaryGeneral’s intention of continuing the mission of good
offices which the Security Council has entrusted to him,
and we should like to encourage him to continue his efforts
with the same energy and devotion. The parties concerned
should take advantage of the extension of UNFICYP’s
mandate to get real negotiations under way on controversial
aspects in order to achieve an equitable solution to the
Cypriot problem.
161. We feel that it is the duty of the United Nations and
the whole international community, in particular the other
countries in the area, to make their contributions to the
success of negotiations between the parties concerned and
to an overall settlement of the Cyprus problem. To that
end, the Security Council should keep the Cyprus situation
under review in view of its own responsibility for a
settlement of the situation, the continuation of which is
liable to threaten international peace and security.

167. The decisions adopted by the Security Council and
the General Assembly with a view to a settlement of the
Cyprus crisis have not been complied with; that situation is
not normal. A lasting political settlement in Cyprus is a
vital necessity.

162. My country remains ready-as it has been in the past
and will continue to be in the future-to support the action
to be undertaken by the Organization on this matter, as
well as any other initiative designed to facilitate a solution
of the Cyprus problem by the Cypriots themselves, to
eliminate tension in the Mediterranean area and to develop
relations of friendship and co-operation among the countries in that part of the world.

168. The Soviet Union has always, from the very beginning of the Cyprus crisis, insisted that a settlement should
be founded on the principles of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus,
and that all foreign intervention should be excluded and the
internal affairs of Cyprus settled by the Cypriots themselves, reasonable account being taken of the interests and
rights of both the Greek and the Turkish communities. AS
we know, it is precisely those principles that have been the
key provisions of a number of resolutions adopted by the
United Nations. The Soviet Union is convinced that the
implementation of these provisions would open the ‘way to
a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem and
would make possible the elimination of the hotbed of
tension existing in Cyprus. The Soviet Union is firmly in
favour of the immediate and full implementation of United
Nations decisions on Cyprus. We have repeatedly stated our
readiness to co-operate with other States in the interests of
a just settlement of the Cyprus crisis.

163. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Repubhcs) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President,
before turning to the substance of the question being
considered by the Council, the Soviet delegation would like
to congratulate you, the representative of Canada, a
neighbour of the Soviet Union, on the successful performance of the important function of the presidency of the
Council. We note with satisfaction the stability and fruitful
development of good-neighbourly Soviet-Canadian relations. It is appropriate to point out here that, in the report
to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union at the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Party, the
General Secretary, Mr. Brezhnev, stressed last year that, in

169. The delegation of the USSR believes it necessary to
reassert that, in our view, the best possibilities for settling
15

endeavoured to facilitate normal faiming activity in the
sensitive areas; it also continues its best efforts to discharge
humanitarian functions, and the living conditions of the
Greek Cypriots in the north have registered an improvcmerit. Intercommunal incidents have dcclined.considcrably
and the movement of the Greek Cypriots from the north
has slowed down substantially. It is our confident expectation that the situation Will continue to improve
in the
months to come.

the Cyprus problem would consist in the convening of a
representative international conference on Cyprus within
the framework of the United Nations.
170. The delegation of the USSR supported the resolution
for the extension of the stationing of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus for a further six months, on account of the
fact that the Government of the Republic of Cyprus had
given its consent to that extension. The delegation of the
USSR still understands that the financing of the Force will
continue to be on a voluntary basis.

176. My delegation would like to put on record its
appreciation of the dedication and diligence with which the
Force, under the able command of Major-General James
Joseph Quinn, has discharged the difficult tasks assigned
to it.

171. In conclusion, the USSR delegation considers it
necessary to stress that extending the mandate of the Force
one more time will not of itself resolve the substance of the
Cyprus problem; nor will it promote a settlement
of that
problem. It is the duty of the Security Council to step up
the efforts to ensure the implementation of United Nations
decisions on Cyprus.

177. The reports of the Secretary-General also describe
the all-important efforts undertaken by the two sides,
under the good offices of the Secretary-General, for
resumption of negotiations. It is indeed encouraging that
the leaders of the two Cypriot communities, His Beatitude
Archbishop Makarios and Mr. Rauf Dcnkta+ met in January and February last and, after the meeting of 12
February, held under the auspices of the Secretary-General,
four important instructions- or guidelines --were agreed
upon and announced. Talks were also held subsequently at
Vienna, in March and April, under the auspices of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative and pro.
posals regarding the territorial and constitutional aspects
were submitted and discussed hy the two sides. It is a sign
of good faith that each interlocutor made it clear that his
own proposals were negotiable and that the talks would IN:
resumed later this month.

172. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): I have much pleasure, on
behalf of the delegation of Pakistan, in joining other
colleagues in conveying warm felicitations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. We are confident that under your wise,
patient and able guidance-which has already produced
such positive results-the Council will conduct its proceedings smoothly and efficiently.
173. I should like to take this opportunity also to express
our appreciation for the sincerity and success with which
Ambassador Boya of Benin presided over our deliberations
last month.

178. In that context we should like to express our
delegation’s appreciation to the Secrctnry-General for his
persistent efforts aimed at bringing ahout a l>eacefih and
just solution of the Cyprus problem. WC would also like to
put on record our appreciation to his Special Representative, Ambassador PBrez de CuBllar, for the valuable services
he continues to render in the cause of peace. WC fully share
the assessment of the Secretary-C;eneriil that the negatiations between the representatives of the two Cypriot
communities, at the level of the interlocutors and other
levels as necessary, are the best available method OT
achieving a just and lasting settlement of the CY~IIIS
problem.

174. Last night, the Security Council adopted a resolution
extending the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus for another six months. We are glad that
this resolution was adopted without dissent and with the
agreement of the parties concerned. The delegation of
Pakistan fully associates itself with the sentiments expressed by previous speakers, in paying a well-deserved tribute
to you, Mr. President, for your untiring efforts, which
produced such a satisfactory result. The two communities
of Cyprus deserve our special appreciation for the spirit of
understanding and accommodation they have manifested in
agreeing to the text of the resolution. We have no doubt
that the extension of the mandate of the Force is essential
for the maintenance of peace in the island and that a lasting
settlement, based on justice, can be achieved only under
peaceful conditions,

179, My country continues to :rttach great importance to
the search for an early solution of the problem of Cyprus.
We are of the firm opinion that such a solution is possihie
provided it fully protects the fundamental rights of the two
communities, We fully share the view that, in the continuing efforts toward a political solution of the Cyprus
problem, the Secretary-General will have a crucial ralc to
play. We are confident that, with the goodwill and Ihc
evident determination
of the parties to live together
in
peace, the mission of good offices entrusted to the
Secretary-General by the Security Council will bc fruitful.
We wish the Secretary-General all si~cccss in his efforts
towards the promotion of a just and lasting peace in
Cyprus.

175. While the question of Cyprus remains to be resolved
on a basis which will guarantee fully the rights of the two
communities, we are encouraged by the two reports of the
Secretary-General /S/12323 and S/12342] describing the
latest developments relating to the question of Cyprus, The
situation in the island is not normal, as indeed it cannot be
under the circumstances, At the same time we note from
the one on peace-keeping that there has been a considerable
reduction of cease-fire violations and that a substantial
trend towards stabilization of the security situation has
developed and is being maintained, thanks in good part to
the peace-keeping efforts of the Force and the in&spensable
co-operation
of the parties. Further, the Force has

180. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (irztcrprctation
fimtr
fietzchl: Mr. President, I should like first of all, on behalf
16

of my delegation, to congratulate you upon your assumption of the presidency of the Council. Your talent, your
qualities as a diplomat and negotiator and your vast
experience of the United Nations have already been
acknowledged and appreciated in many international
forums, and in the delicate task that has been entrusted to
you you have carried out your work successfully. We thank
you.

associates itself with the comments made by the Secretary-General at the end of his report. He and his Special
Representative, to whom we send our wishes for a speedy
recovery, are skilfully and patiently engaged in efforts to
prompt and foster the dialogue, efforts which deserve our
appreciation. But the final result is not contingent upon
them alone. The parties will have to resolve the differences
of opinion which separate them; they will have to give
proof of understanding and moderation in order to con.
tinue and develop the negotiations and refrain from any
initiative likely to jeopardize them. We hope that the
evolution of the political situation will assist them in that
task.

181. Before J address myself to the subject of OUT
meeting, I should like to congratulate the representative of
Benin, Ambassador Boya, who is not with us today, on
having so competently and effectively guided the work of
the Council during the month of May. I would ask his
collaborator, Mr. Houngavou, to convey to him our feelings
of friendship and appreciation.

185. I should now like briefly to comment on specific
aspects of the report submitted to us. In December last
(1980th meeting], I had occasion to say how concerned we
were with the situation in the northern part of the island
regarding both the relations between the two communities
where they do come into contact and the obstacles
encountered by the .Force in the discharge of its mission.
On this last point, we must note that, regrettably, the
situation remains unchanged; the freedom of movement of
the Force is still subject to restrictions. However, the
Secretary-General notes that, thanks to the institution of a
system ,whereby the Force carefully monitors the movement of Greek Cypriots between the north and the south,
the daily exodus of Greek Cypriots from the north has
considarably slowed down. This encouraging element leads
us to regret even more the non-establishment of the
machinery on which both parties reached agreement to
trace missing persons of both communities.

182. One might have thought that the renewal for a
six-month period of the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus would be a simple routine
measure, but the vicissitudes that have marked the consultations on the subject by the Council have shown that not to
be so. They clearly demonstrated, if demonstration was still
required, the merits and the great utility of the decision we
have taken. An essential factor for the containment of the
still dangerous situation prevailing in the island, the Force is
an indispensable element in the continued search for a
peaceful settlement. As it discharges with great merit the
many and often delicate tasks circumstances have led it to
assume, it should benefit from all the authority conferred
upon it by the support and confidence of the Council. My
delegation wishes to pay a tribute to its Commander,
Major-General James Joseph Quinn, and to the contingents
which comprise the Force. We associate ourselves with the
thanks that have been addressed to the countries which
provide those contingents for the valuable contribution
they are making to the cause of restoring and maintaining
peace.

186. Concerning the maintenance of the cease-fire, the
Secretary-General has informed us of relative progress in
the area of security. This trend is satisfactory and encouraging, but it should not lead us to forget that this is
progress that will continue to be very fragile and precarious
for as long as the fundamental problems confronting
Cyprus remain unsolved. In our view, these problems, for
the most part, are still unchanged, fully justifying the
Secretary-General’s view that the situation in the island
remains potentially explosive. Therefore we note with
satisfaction his intention to pursue his mission of good
offices and to spare no effort in assisting the parties to
arrive at a just and lasting settlement of the problem of
Cyprus. He may, as in the past, rest assured of our entire
support in this essential and difficult task.

183. The analysis of the present situation in Cyprus
emerging from the very complete report submitted to USby
the Secretary-General on 7 June leads us to deem desirable
the renewal of the mandate of the Force. But that very
same analysis also shows us the extent to which the hopes
we placed in the process of negotiation have been disappointed in the past. Also, in renewing the Force’s mandate,
it is not our intention to maintain the status quo but to
prevent the efforts under way and the search for a
settlement from encountering new obstacles.

187. Mr, CHEN Chu (China) (translation from Chinese):
More than half a year has elapsed since the Cyprus question
was considered at the thirty-first session of the General
Assembly. During this period, the Cyprus situation has
witnessed some new development. We are pleased to note
that, on 27 January this year, a direct meeting was held
between Archbishop Makarios, President of Cyprus, and His
Excellency Mr. Denktag, leader of the Turkish Cypriots,
with a view to finding a solution to the Cyprus question,
the first meeting of its kind since 1974, and that on 12
February another meeting was held between them. These
meetings, as declared by them subsequently, constituted a
positive step in the correct direction. At present, the talks
between the representatives of the Greek and Turkish
communities are still going on.

184. Since our last meeting, in December 1976, a new
series of talks has taken place at Vienna. The existence and
nature of the guidelines established a few weeks earlier by
common agreement between the heads of both communities are such that they give rise to some hope
concerning the outcome of those talks. We must regretfully
acknowledge, as the Secretary-General notes f~ his reports
of April and June, that it was not possi6;le to embark on
any effective negotiating process on that occasion. We also
hope that the movement that has now been begun will not
be hindered and that the next stage to which the
Secretary-General has referred will not be too long in
Coming. I would emphasize that my delegation fully
17

188. We fully understand that the question of Cyprus is an
issue left over by imperialist colonial rule. Furthermore, in
recent years the question has been complicated by superPower meddling and its solution will take some time.
However, it is only the Cypriot people who will decide the
destiny and future of Cyprus. It is our sincerehope that the
two Cypriot communities and the countries directly concerned, bearing in mind the overall interests of opposing
imperialismand hegemonism,will heighten their vigilance,
continue to do away with super-Powerintervention and, in
particular, avoid giving any opening to that super-Power
which is bent on sowing discord, inciting trouble and
fishing in muddied waters under the pretext of “internationalization”, and that they will proceed in the correct
direction and carry on patient negotiations on an equal
footing and in a spirit of mutual understanding and mutual
accommodationso as to eliminate their differences gradually and achieve a reasonable solution of the Cyprus
question at an early date. Herein lie the fundamental
interests of the two Cypriot communities, and this is the
common desireof all the countries and peoples that have
true concern and respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Cyprus.

realistic and conciliatory attitude which would include a
willingnessto reachan agreementby mutual concessions.
193. His Beatitude Archbishop Makarios and His Excellency Mr. Rauf Denktag met twice, in January and February this year, under the auspicesof the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative respectively. Both leaders
were ableto agreeon guidelinesfor their representativesfor
the intercommunal taIks. A new seriesof intercommunal
talks was initiated on 31 March. Detailed proposalson
substantive issues were submitted by both sides. The
Secretary-Generalalso pointed out, however, in his report
of 30 April, that the parties continued to hold conflicting
positions and that increasedefforts would be neededto
reconcilethe persistent differences.Yet, he referred at the
sametime to the interlocutors’ statement in the Vienna
talks that their proposals were negotiable. Further intercommunaltalks were resumedin Cyprusin preparationfor
a new Vienna meeting which, it is hoped,will take placein
the very nearfuture.
194. My delegationhas alsonoted the Secretary-General’s
statementin his report of 30 April, repeatedin his report of
7 June, that the intercommunaltalks, despitethe dedicated
efforts of both himself and his SpecialRepresentative,had
not yet reached “a stage where an effective negotiating
processcould evolve out of the present statements of
conflicting positions” [S/12342, paru.5 7/. Nevertheless,
my delegation fully agreeswith the concluding assessment
that the task of bridging the remaining gap, though
difficult, is not insuperable.My delegationtherefore considersit essentialthat the Secretary-Generalshould continue his missionof good offices.

189. In view of the fact that the draft resolution in
document S/I2346 mainly concerns the question of the
United Nations Force, on which we have always held a
different position in principle, the Chinese delegation did
not participatein the vote on the said draft.

190. Mr. VQN WECI-IMAR (Federal Republic of Germany): Mr. President, it givesme great pleasureto welcome
you to the Presidency of the Council for the current
month, a mouth which many of us around this table did
not envisagewould hold such difficult negotiations in store
for you. Canadaand the Federal Republic of Germany were
electedto the CounciI for the sameterm of two years. This
fact alone would have provided an opportunity for close
co-operation,But I am happy to say that this co-operation
with you and your delegation during this past month went
well beyond the normal scope, to say the least. In
co-operating with you, I have learned to admire your
frankness and untiring efforts to arrive at satisfactory
solutions, and I am convinced that those qualities will
continue to help you in the fulfilment of your difficult
task.

195. The Federal Republic of Germany, both within the
European Community and individually, has continuously
endeavouredto contribute to a solution of the questionof
Cyprus by helping the parties to come together and by
lending its ‘full support to the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral.My Government appealsto the partiesto consider
their common interests and not to miss the present
opportunity to overcome their differences.

191. I should like to take this opportunity to thank the
outgoing President, the representative of Benin, for the
exemplary way in which he dischargedhis duties. It was
certainly no coincidence that the Council dealt with three
African itemsduring his Presidency.
192. My delegation voted in favour of the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus in the sincere belief that substantial progress
towards a solution of the question of Cyprus has become
possible.In this respect, my delegation sharesthe Secre.
tary-General’sevaluation, expressedin his report of 7 June,
that UNFICYP’s presence,in maintaining the peace on the
island, also facilitates the continued search for an agreed
political settlement. That report and the report dated 30
April [S/12323], though carefully and cautiously worded
and in no way over-optimistic, give rise to the hope that the
parties to the conflict are finally ready to adopt a more
18

196. My delegation feels deeply satisfied by the Secretary-General’s statement that the situation in Cyprus has
been quiet during the whole period under review. This
attests to the outstanding efficiency and dedication of the
Commander,Major-General JamesQuinn, aswell asof the
officers and men of UNFICYP and its civilian staff. My
delegation would like to extend to them our special
appreciation and gratitude, The quiet situation in the
military field also testifies to the willingnessof the parties
to maintain an atmosphereconducive to seriousnegotiations. In this connexion, my delegation would like to
convey its specialthanks to the countrieswhich have again
contributed troops to UNFICYP, including yours, Mr. President.
197. Let me conclude by paying a specialtribute to the
Secretary-Generaland his Representativein Cyprus, AmbassadorPerez de Cuellar, to whom we wisha speedyrecovery,
as well as to the Under-Secretaries-General
Mr. Urquhart
and Mr. Guyer and their excellent staff. Their untiring
efforts have provided the momentumon which our hope
for substantivenegotiationsis essentiallybased.

198. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Sir, I should like to convey to
you my delegation’s warm congratulations on your assuming the presidency of the Council for the month of June
and also to expressour appreciation of the tremendous
energy, tirelessendeavoursand skill displayedby you in
bringing about the consensus
resolution in the very nick of
time. But for your persistence,patience andgoodhumour,
aswell asthe many initiatives you took, we could not have
avoideda seriousdeadlock.
199. My delegation desires to record once again its
appreciationof the competent work done by your predecessor,the representativeof Benin, and pay its tribute to
hisefficient conduct of our deliberations.

Nations Force should be extended for another six months,
since its presence clearly helps to maintain peace and
security and also facilitates the continued search for a
peaceful settlement. It is clear to my delegation that
genuine national reconciliation must precede the withdrawal of the Force, It is alsoclear to usthat, for reaching
an agreedsettlement, there is, in fact, no viable substitute
for negotiations between the two communities. We are
therefore in favour of extending the mandate of the Force
and we support the Secretary-General’scontinued efforts to
keep the two parties at the negotiating table until they
reachagreement.

206. We shouldlike, at this point, to place on record our
high appreciation of the determination and dedication
shown by the Secretary-Generalin his ceaseless
endeavours
200. My delegation would like also to expressits satis- in the course of fulfilling his difficult rnandate. The
faction with the spirit of co-operation and statesmanship question is extremely complex and we are fully conscious
shown by the representativesof Cyprus, Greece and
of the problems faced by the two communities. My
Turkey, and by Mr. Celik, the representativeof the Turkish
delegation is pleased that certain countries have freely
Cypriot community, in the formulation of the final
volunteered their contingents for essential peace-keeping
resolution.
operations,and they deserveour gratitude in full measure.
We have in mind the contingents from Australia, Austria,
201. Now 1 come to the substanceof the question.The
Canada,Denmark,Finland, Ireland, Swedenand the United
Security Council hasbefore it two important reportsfrom
Kingdom, and we wish to place on record our appreciation
the Secretary-General.The first one [S/12323/ concerns of their performance.
the efforts madeby him to promote negotiationsbetween
representativesof the two Cypriot communities.Hisefforts
207. We have no right to expect these contingents to
have met with limited but noteworthy success.Two
remain indefinitely in Cyprus. Somehave been there since
meetingshave taken place between Archbishop Makarios 1964. Furthermore, we seemto need an additional $67
and Mr. Denktaaand they have reachedagreementon what
million by the end of this year. All this points to the
has ‘been called “the basic approach” to the Cyprus obvious desirability of the two communities showing
problem. That agreementis clearly an important landmark, greater flexibility and mutual understandingin arriving at
bedauseit provides the basisfor further negotiations.We an agreed settlement as quickly as possible. They should
are glad to note from that agreement that the inde- accelerate their efforts to co-operate with each other in
pendence, unity and non-alignment of Cyprus will be
their common interests. It would be a mistake to imagine
maintained.
that the United Nations Force will be maintained in Cyprus
indefinitely at others’ expense, While, of course, no
202. We have no desire to comment at presenton the
solution may be imposedfrom the outside, we certainly
other aspectsof the agreement.Each sidehaspresentedits expect quicker results from inside Cyprus through intenown proposalson the constitutional question,which the
sifiednegotiationsbetweenthe two communities.
other side has unfortunately rejected, and there is now,
apparently, a deadlock. The Secretary-Generalconsiders 208. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (interpretation from
that it will be necessary,therefore, for both sidesto make Spanish): Sir, the delegationof Panamacongratulates you
evengreaterefforts to bridgetheir differences.
wholeheartedly on your well-deserved‘assumptionof the
presidencyof the Council. For my country, which main203. We have looked at the various proposalsthat have tains fraternal and cordial relations with Canada, a promibeenmade,and I must confessthat I am impressed
by the
nent memberof the family of nationsof this continent, it is
sincerity and goodwill with which they have beenformua sourceof specialsatisfactionto seeyou presidingover the
work of the Council. Wewish you every successand pledge
lated. It is my belief that a constitutional solution can be
our determined co-operation in the discharge of your
found through further intensivenegotiations.
important functions.
204. Although the caseof Cyprusis unique andthereis no
209. I also take great pleasure in stating the fleep
exact parallel,none the lessthe world is full of a variety of
appreciation
of my delegationfor the splendidjob done by
constitutional arrangementsand a diversity of practical
your predecessor,AmbassadorThomasBoya of Benin, who
political experiencethat cannot be without interest to the
dischargedthe tasks of Council President most ably last
Cypriots, both Greek and Turkish. Perhapsthey might
month.
Our appreciation goes also to his colleague,
consideracceptingthe assistanceof neutral constitutional
Mr.
Houngavou,
who, as alternate representative of Benin,
experts from other countries in overcomingexisting obstaclesand evolving a typically Cypriot solution to the Cyprus most diligently assistedAmbassadorBoya, demonstrating
his experience,gentlemanly mannerand diplomatic tact.
problem.
205. In the second report (S/12342], the SecretaryGeneralhasrecommendedthat the mandateof the United
19

210. My delegation would like very briefly to explain its
reasonsfor voting in favour of resolution 410 (1977) which

extends, for a further six-month period, the mandate of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus. MY delegation was influenced by the fact that the SicretaryGeneral made it quite clear in his report [ibid.] that the
extension of the mandate was, in his judgement, in&spensable in order to keep under control the potentially
explosive situation in the island. We must also recognize
that this resolution is fully supported by the report of the
Secretary-General in pursuance of paragraph 6 of resolution
401 (1976) [S/12323] and by the report which is the
object of this debate.
211. We should like to express our thanks to the Secretary-General and his collaborators for the job they have
done, in particular to his Special Representative, Ambassador P&ez de CuBlIar, who we hope will recover speedily.
We should like the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to bring about, through his good offices, a just and lasting
settlement based on complete respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and the policy of
non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus.
212. I should now like to make a few additional comments with regard to the implications of resolution
410 (1977). During the debate, some participants referred
to de jure and de facto positions. For the Security Council
and for United Nations bodies as well as for States members
of the international community, a criterion must be
established to determine what factors should influence
them in the decision-making process. While it is certainly
true that in politics one must be realistic about de facto
situations, settlements, if they are to be lasting and to
endure, must be based on law, on morality, on reason and
on justice. Precisely what we all desire is a settlement that
will contribute towards the establishment of a peace and
security that will not be violated.
213. NOW, what elements should be considered in negotiations? Who are the spokesmen for the Republic of
Cyprus? Is there a Turkish federated State of Cyprus or
not? Is there or is there not at the present time a situation
based on force that inhibits freely conducted negotiations
between the parties?
214. The answers to those questions may be found in the
resolutions which are the basis of resolution 410 (1977)
and which are mentioned in paragraph 1, in which the
Council
LcReuffims the provisions of resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964, as well as subsequent resolutions and
decisions on the establishment and maintenance of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus-and other
aspects of the situation in Cyprus”,
Resolution 186 (1964) is based on a fundamental premisewhat I would call the legal foundation-that should underlie
our entire consideration of the problem. On that occasion,
the Council mentioned Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter. It said that the relevant provisions of the Charter
should be borne in mind, and particularly those of the
paragraph 1 mentioned, which reads as follows:
“All Members shall refrain in their international rela.
tions from the threat or use of force against the territorial

integrity or political independence of any State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”
The Council approached the then existing crisis on the basis
of the provisions of that Article, which is unquestionably
one of the principal tenets of the international Organization. In that resolution, the Council recognizes by what
the legal entity of the State of CYPIIIS is constituted,
stating, in paragraph 2, that the Government of Cyprus
“has the responsibility for the maintenance and restoration
of law and order” and that it must “take all additional
measures necessary to stop violence and bloodshed in
Cyprus”. In that same resolution, it arrived at the conclusion that the Secretary-General, in agreement with the
Government of Cyprus and the Governments of Greece,
Turkey and the United Kingdom, should designate a
mediator. From that time we may date the efforts of the
Secretary-General to resolve that problem.
215. In resolution 3212 (XXIX), adopted by the General
Assembly on 1 November 1974, other fundamental principles are established that cannot be either disregarded or
ignored. In paragraph 1, the Assembly
“GZ~~S upon all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of
the Republic of Cyprus”.
Any solution that may be adopted must adhere to those
fundamental principles. In paragraph 2 of the same resolution-and this is not just any resolution of the General
Assembly; we all know that it was later endorsed by the
Security Council-, the Assembly
“Urges the speedy withdrawal of all foreign armed
forces and foreign military presence and personnel from
the Republic of Cyprus, and the cessation of all foreign
interference in its affairs”,
Foreign intervention has not ceased, military occupation
has not ceased, and that is the crux of the distressing
problem that the Council can neither ignore nor postpone.
In that resolution the Assembly recognizes that the
constitutional system of the Republic of Cyprus concerns
the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities. That
is undeniable. Furthermore, it insists that contacts and
negotiations take place on an equal footing, with the good
offices of the Secretary-General, between the representatives of the two communities, with a view to reaching
a mutually acceptable political settlement, based on the
fundamental and legitimate rights of both communities. In
the same resolution, the Assembly considers that all the
refugees should return to their homes in safety and calls
upon the parties concerned to undertake urgent measures
to that end. That, again, is a problem that has not been
resolved and which has subjected the Cypriot people-that
is, a people whose two communities have one of the most
advanced civilizations and cultures-to the worst suffering.
216. In its resolution 36.5 (1974), the Council endorsed
resolution 3212 (XXIX) and, subsequently, resolution
3395 (XXX) reaffirmed the resolutions that I have just
mentioned and called for their urgent implementation.

217. As I have said, problems of legal status have arisen
here, which need to be examined in keeping with the legal
and political criteria that have been established by the
General Assembly and the Security Council.

223. The third preambularparagraph,-also like that of
resolution 401 (1976), notes
“from the report that the freedom of movement of the
United Nations Peace-keepingForce in CypmS and its
civil police is still restrictedin the north of the island”,

218. In resolution 367 (197.5), the Council made some
rather categorical statements that should serve as a guide to
its members. In paragraph 1, it

an irregular situationthat hasnot been resolved.
224. The fourth preambularparagraph is also like that in
resolution 401 (1976).

“(Ms
Once more u,von all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus”

225. The fifth preambularparagraph is new and notes
that,

and, going further,

“due to the efforts of the Secretary-General, his staff and
the United Nations Peace-keepingForce, and with the
co-operation of the parties, there has been a relative
improvement in the security situation, but that this
‘>evolution hasyet to relievethe underlying tensions in the
island”.

“urgently requests them, as well as the parties concerned,
to refrain from any action which might prejudice that
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment, as well as from any attempt at partition of the
island or its unification with any other country”.
In paragraph 2, going still further, it

“Regrets the unilateral decision of 13 February 1975
declaring that a part of the Republic of Cyprus would
become‘a FederatedTurkish State’ as,inter alia, tending
to compromisethe continuation of negotiationsbetween
the representativesof the two communities on an equal
footing, the objective of which must continue to be to
reachfreely a solution providing for a political settlement
and the establishmentof a mutually acceptable constitutional arrangement,and expressesits concern over all
unilateral actionsby the partieswhich have compromised
or may compromisethe implementation of the relevant
United Nationsresolutions”.
219. How can we summarizethoseresolutions? By saying
first, that the authority of the State of Cyprus is vested in
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus, represented
here by AmbassadorZenon Rossides;secondly, that the
military occupation of the islandis illegal, is at variance
with the Charter and has been rejected by resolutions of
both the GeneralAssemblyand the Security Council; and,
thirdly, that the FederatedTurkish State of Cyprus hasno
internationally recognized status, such status having been
formally denied by the highest United Nations organ by
votes, in many of which, asrepresentativesare aware,there
wasonly one opposingvote.

The wording of that paragraphshould be understood and
interpreted in the light of the Secretary-General’s report.
Although, as the resolutionsays,“due to the efforts of the
Secretary-General1, , and with the co-operation of the
parties, there has been a relative improvement”, the
Secretary-General,in paragraph51 of his report, says:
“However, this evolution has yet to relieve the underlying political tensionin the island, and the progressbeing
made towards a solution of the basic problems. . .
remainsdisappointinglyslow.”
The term usedby the Secretary-Generalis “disappointingly
slow”. This is how he presentedthe situation and this is
how that paragraphshouldbe understood.
226. The sixth preambularparagraphis a combination of
the correspondingparagraphof resolution 401 (1976) and
an additional fact. It reads:
“No&rg also the report of the Secretary-General of 30
April 1977 [S/12323] concerningthe high-level meeting
under the auspicesof the Secretary-General, and emphasizing the need to adhereto the agreement reached at
this meeting as well asto the agreementsreached at the
previous roundsof the talks”.
The report of the Secretary-Generalstates, in paragraph 14,
in connexion with this meeting:

220. In the light of that background,it is appropriate to
indicate what resolution 410(1977) truly represents. In
reality that resolution reproduces,word for word-with a
few exceptions in the fifth and sixth preambular paragraphs-the text of resolution 401 (1976).

“in spite of my own efforts and those of my Special
Representative,“- he is referring to what had been happening in connexion with those contacts-“it
did not
prove possible at Vienna to reach a stage where an
effective negotiating processcould evolve out of the
present statementsof conflicting positions.”

221. The first preambular paragraphtakes note of the
Secretary-General’s
report on the justification for extending
the Force’smandate.

That meansthere wasno effective negotiation. That is what
the Secretary-Generalsays.

222. The second preambular paragraph, like that of
resolution 401 (1976), takes note of the conditions prevailingin the island.

“On the other hand, and as stated in the agreed
communiqueof 7 April, there was some discussionof the

21

respective proposals and a number of clarifications were
made. These points will of course be pursued when the
talks resume. There is evidently still a long way to go in
order to reach the point where the necessary concessions
will begin to be made, including the submission of
substantive proposals on both main aspects of the
problem.”
In other words there have been no concessions and no
substantive proposals on the two main aspects of the
problem, But are there not problems of substance? If we
continue to look at the Secretary-General’s reports we can
find expressions such as these repeated time and again. For
example, in paragraph 58 of the report before US, the
Secretary-General says “with a view to substantive negotiations on those issues taking place”. That term “substantive negotiations” is repeated in several paragraphs.
There have been no substantive negotiations. What, then, is
the situation? It is one of prolonged military occupation
and of the suffering of a people which has the right to
tranquillity, peace and independence. The problem before
us is that there have been no substantive negotiations.
227. The seventh and eighth preambular paragraphs are
worded like resolution 401 (1976) and the operative
paragraphs are absolutely identical to those of that resolution.
228. Paragraph 3 was the subject of many informal
consultations. It reads:
rcUrges the parties concerned to act with the utmost
restraint by refraining from any unilateral or other action
likely to affect adversely the prospects of negotiations for
a just and peaceful solution and to continue and
accelerate determined co-operative efforts to achieve the
objectives of the Security Council”.
How can there be free negotiations on a footing of equality
when the country is occupied by the air, land and sea forces
of a foreign military Power? How can there be negotiations
that do not take place under coercion when 40 per cent of
the island of Cyprus is outside the control of its legitimate
Government? Thus, the idea that the negotiations should
be conducted freely, on a footing of equality and with
respect for the rights of both communities is a principle
that must be borne in mind.
229. In conclusion, I would stress that it must be
clear-and that is why I have made this statement-that the
Council, in reaffirming resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent resolutions and decisions on the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, has reaffirmed legal positions that have great moral weight and are based on reason,
justice and law, positions which cannot be disregarded and
which must be borne in mind in connexion with any future
settlement. Finally, I would state that the question of
Cyprus must be solved on the basis of justice and in keeping
with the interests of the people of Cyprus, the real
Protagonists in this drama, and not in terms of the military
and political alliances of the East or the West. The people
of Cyprus has a right to live and to decide its own future.
230. Mr. CONSALVI (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): I take great pleasure, sir, in greeting you in your

capacity as President of the Council. The bonds between
your country and mine are very deep and the outlook for
our future relations is very promising. Canada is coming
ever closer to the countries of Latin America, and in
Venezuela we have always felt that this is a positive and
productive trend.
231. I should like also to express the Venezuelan delegation’s appreciation to Ambassador Boya of Benin for the
way in which he conducted our debates in May.
232. Venezuela has been following with great attention
and interest the development of the crisis in Cyprus in the
past few years. We attach the greatest importance to the
maintenance of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus, and it is our hope that the States
and communities directly involved in the conflict will
display a sense of responsibility.
233. Fortunately, we have reached a point in our debates
when it has become possible to agree on a resolution
combining at least the necessary elements to ensure the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. I say “at least” because-as the
Secretary-General states in his report-time, goodwill and
continuing efforts are required if a peaceful and mutually
acceptable solution, based on respect for the fundamental
and legitimate rights of both communities, is to be found to
the essence of the Cyprus problem.
234. Peace and stability for the people of Cyprus must, in
our opinion, be the fundamental purpose of any solution,
235. We believe that the work of the Secretary-General as
a mediator in the negotiations between the two communities deserves our appreciation, and we wish to express
our thanks to him for his constant concern and devotion to
the search for understanding. We are confident that his
efforts will be rewarded in the near future by the
achievement of an agreement between the two communities.
236. I should like to take this opportunity to repeat my
Government’s position, a position based primarily on
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Cyprus; on the continuation of talks between
the parties on a footing of equality; on compliance with all
the relevant United Nations resolutions and the agreements
reached in the talks with the Secretary-General. We believe
that it would be harmful to take unilateral decisions that
could obstruct rather than facilitate a solution of the
question of Cyprus.
237. In accordance with our position, we voted in favour
of resolution 410 (1977), adopted last night, because we
are aware that in the present circumstances, as the
Secretary-General states in his report:
“ . . . the continued presence of UNFICYP remains
essential. The Force is an indispensable factor in keeping
the potentially explosive situation in the island under
control, supervising the cease-fire, mah&hing the status
quo in the area between the lines, and helping to defuse
incidents and other problems arising between the
parties.” [S/12342, para. 60.]

the security
situation was achieved and maintained
during the past six months. As a troop-contributing nation,
we take satisfaction at this evidence of the effectiveness of
UNFICYP. It is also worthy of note that, in the exercise of
his good offices, the Secretary-General was able to facilitate
the meetings between His Beatitude Archbishop Makarios
and His Excellency Mr. Rauf Denktag and to facilitate the
resumption of the intercommunal negotiations.

238. In oOnclusion,
we should like to reaffirm our
confidence
that the Secretary-General will continue his
work
in the search for a just solution by all possible
Peaceful means and that all the parties will respect the
Purposes
and principles
of the Charter of the United
Nations.
239. I should like also to express the appreciation of the
delegation of Venezuela for the work done in Cyprus by
Ambassador
P&ez de Cuellar, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General,
as well as for the work of UnderSecretaries-General
Urquhart and Guyer.
240.

Mr. RAMPHUL

(Mauritius):

244. The fact is, however, that those efforts on the part of
the United Nations have not thus far led to relief of the
underlying political tension in the island and that the
peace-making efforts continue to encounter serious obstacles. There can be no question but that relief of those
tensions and progress in peace-making is up to the parties to
the dispute.

My delegation,

Having voted in favour of resolution 410 (1977),
Considering
that the question of Cyprus
certainly be taken up again next December,
Mindful that Mauritius
Council next December,
Decides
stage;

to refrain

245. When the Council renewed the mandate of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, just two
weeks ago, I deplored the fact that three years had passed
with no apparent progress towards a just and lasting peace
between Israel and Syria. I need not remind members of the
Council that UNFICYP was established not three but 13
years ago and is still there. In a case like this, one cannot
help but be concerned that the two communities have not
used the presence of the Force as an opportunity to resolve
their differences and to live amicably together.

will almost

will assume the presidency of the

from making any comments at this

Expresses
its warmest congratulations to Ambassador
Barton of Canada, President of the Council, on having so
successfully
conducted
the negotiations leading to the
adoption of resolution 410 (1977);

246. Cyprus is an island blessed by nature, a garden spot,
whose beauty is the envy of us all and a,place where the
benefits of conditions of peace and prosperity could be
especially fruitful. It is thus all the more disheartening that
one can walk down a weed-choked path, in the middle of a
once thriving area of the city of Nicosia, between concrete
bunkers and sandbagged firing positions from which
Cypriots peer with enmity at one another. And it is all the
more striking that, in this fertile land, where there are fields
lying fallow, there were once prosperous orchards in which
the fruit now rots on the branches until it shrivels and falls
unharvested into unkempt vegetation that is choking the
trees, and there are empty hotels and beaches to which
tourists from around the world used to flock.

Places on record its deep appreciation of the persistent
efforts
of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative and staff, as well as its appreciation to MajorGeneraI Quinn;
Begs the parties concerned, in particular the two communities in Cyprus,
to solve their problems before next
December.
241. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Mauritius
for his kind remarks and commend him on the
wisdom of his advice to himself.

247. My country has been contributing a contingent to
UNFICYP since 1964. At present, Canada provides 515 of
the troops and police which make up the Force, together
with seven other nations. In the light of the recommen
dations of the Secretary-General,
my Government has
authorized me to announce that we will maintain that
contingent for this further mandate period,

242. As no other representative wishes to speak at this
time, I shall now speak in my capacity as representative of
CANADA.
As representative of Canada, I must say I do not
have very many kind words for the President, but I should
like to express my appreciation for the help and support
and teamwork
of all the members.of the Council in what I
think :nay fairly be called the difficult negotiations we have
I should also like to express my
just been through.
appreciation
to the parties concerned, Ambassador Rossides, Ambassador
Papoulias, Ambassador Ttirkmen and
Mr. Celik, for the co-operation in what might be called the
clutch at about five minutes to twelve last night which
brought our work to a successful conclusion.

248. This spring, I visited UNFICYP and met with the
Force Commander,
Major-General Quinn, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Perez
de Cuellar, and their staffs, as well as the troops from the
Canadian contingents and some of the other contingents. 1
can say that the Member States should be proud of the job
UNFICYP
is performing in the service of peace. The
members of the Force are working hard, under trying
conditions, to try to maintain peace on our behalf in a way
that should give the two communities an opportunity to
settle their differences. But they have been there a long
while and the differences are as yet unresolved. The parties
must realize that the international community cannot be

243. My delegation voted in favour of the resolution to
extend the mandate of the United Nations peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus to 15 December 1977. Thanks to the
efforts
of the Secretary-General,
of his staff and of
UNFICYP,
and with the co-operation of the parties, we
have noted that some progress towards the stabilization of
23
1

expected to continue to maintain a peace-keeping force in
Cyprus indefinitely, Thirteen years is already much too
long.

255. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the represen”
tative of Cyprus who wishes to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.

249, We are heartened to see from the report of the
Secretary-General that the talks being conducted under his
auspices have been renewed. But we know from experience
that, unless this progress is translated into solid agreement,
the dangers of international and external conflict will
remain. We understand the difficulties, but they will not go
away with time, and so we call upon both parties to seize
the opportunity presented by the presence of UNFICYP
and by the relative calm existing at the moment to make
real progress in overcoming their differences.

256. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): First I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council who
have requested to be allowed to speak to express their views
on the question of Cyprus. Some have been very brief, but
some have very eloquently expressed the feelings of the
international community as a whole on the question. The
facts and realities of the situation cannot be obscured by
any of the techniques of the representative of Turkey, by
silence, or by putting the burden of replying upon a
Cypriot citizen who comes here to speak on behalf of the
aggressor against his country and to find excuses for that
aggression.

250. As contributors to this peace-keeping operation, we
see no alternative to reaching an accommodation-an
accommodation, moreover, which is not sought sporadically over the next decade but one earnestly worked for
in the months ahead.

257. Of course we remember a similar situation, one
which led to the Second World War, and we know the
instruments used by those who wanted to invade the small
country involved. But I need not go into that because we
are experiencing that situation today in Cyprus.

251. Finally, I have mentioned that we can be proud of
the job UNFICYP is doing on our behalf, but I must point
out that they are doing it without the financial support of
many Member States and even of some members of the
Council. In his report, the Secretary-General has warned
that, without further financial support, UNFICYP may
collapse for lack of funds. I call upon all Member States,
and particularly those which have a direct stake in the
peace and development of Europe and the Mediterranean,
to show their support for the peaceful settlement of this
dispute by contributing to the UNFICYP special account.

258. What are the facts? I shall not be long because the
facts are so strong that we do not need many words to
explain them fully. There is Cyprus, a Member State of the
United Nations, a small country without a navy, army or air
force, being attacked by a neighbouring Power using
sophisticated weapons by air, land and sea, napalm
bombing the country and wreaking destruction for the sake
of destruction. When Turkey is charged here with these
acts-of course in more diplomatic terms-they simply keep
silent and put their Cypriot agent in, the onerous position of
trying to explain away or deny the’facts of the aggression
against his country.

252. I now resume my position *as PRESIDENT of the
Council. The representative of Greece wishes to speak in
exercise of his right of reply, 1 call upon him.

259. These are really historical facts that reflect a situation unworthy of our world of today. Then what do we
see? We see obviously from the report of the SecretaryGeneral and from the situation that there cannot be peace
and stability in Cyprus or freely conducted negotiations in
order to solve the problem so long as the island is under the
iron fist of the army of occupation-not a passive army of
occupation but one actively engaged in destroying the
demographic structure of the island by force and violence
and in expelling, as I have said, one third of the population
of Cyprus and supplanting it by colonizers from the interior
of Turkey, thereby causing further upheaval in the island
and creating a situation that should not be tolerated.

253. Mr. PAPOULIAS (Greece): The representative of
Turkey has again tried to justify his country’s aggression
against Cyprus. Since he specifically referred to my
statement, I shall give him a brief reply, although I do not
think he will ever succeed in justifying before the Council
or in any other forum an act which is expressly forbidden
by the Charter-that
is, the use of military force in
international relations-, as was very well said just now by
Ambassador lllueca of Panama. The United Nations resolutions on Cyprus are sufficient proof of this. But, whereas
Ambassador Tiirkrnen never fails to invoke the junta’s
abortive coup against the President of the Republic of
Cyprus, whom he conveniently quotes, he does not seem
ever to want to remember-and I can understand him! -the
fact that on 14 August 1974, when his country unleashed
the second, more destructive attack against Cyprus, the
junta had already disappeared, constitutional order had
been established in Cyprus and negotiations were under
way at Geneva for a peaceful settlement of the problem.
These facts are on record from previous discussions in the
Council, and therefore I do not have to prolong this
discussion.

260. In past ages, there was some kind of legal order. In
the nineteenth century there was the concert of Europefive or six big Powers that kept order in the world, although
maybe it was not a theoretically ideal order such as would
be kept by a world organization. Now we have an
Organization whose fundamental purpose and raison d’&tre
is to maintain international peace and security and to
prevent aggression by the means provided for in the
Charter, through resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and duly implemented. But, in the present world
situation, resolutions are adopted but not implemented and
nobody seems to care about it.

254. Since 1 have just heard about the illness of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus,
Ambassador PCrez de Cudllar, I should like to join those
who have wished him a speedy recovery.

261. Then we witness the strange phenomenon of a
President expressing appreciation to the parties for having
24

i

agreed on an acceptable text of the resolution while the
representative of Turkey comes here and says that he does
not recognize the resolution. Is that not a travesty-to
waste so much effort in order to obtain his agreement only
to have him come here and, after the agreement is obtained,
declare that he does not accept the resolution? It is really
pitiable to hear Mr. Celik state that he does not recognize
the present resolution or the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly which have repeatedly been confirmed
by this body and are confirmed even in the present
resolution. He states that those resolutions are unrealistic,
non-existent and obsolete.

I would recall some of those
of the Secretary-General.
reports, which show that the Turkish Government, through
its agents, has been the cause of their suffering and their
loss of freedom of movement, through their virtual seclusion in enclaves by the so-called Turkish Cypriot leadership.
This forced separation has prevented the normal development of their relations with the Greek Cypriots. Indeed,
one of those reports states:
“Except in rare and special cases, the Turkish Cypriot
leadership denies entry Into areas under its control to all
Greek Cypriots, whether government officials or private
individuals, This ban appears to be enforced as a matter
of political principle with little attempt at justification on
practical grounds.”
[S/761 I of 8 December 1966,
para. 109.j

262. I made certain charges against Turkey, which is
particularly responsible, and against its agent who spoke
before the Council. What is the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus which is not recognized by anyone and what does it
represent? What is its territory?
The territory is the
invaded area of Cyprus. That is where the invader has gone
and, by blood and iron, has taken the area. He has thrown
out the population and imported other populations. The
invader now claims to have created a State and demands
that it should be recognized. That so-called State, which
was formed by a unilateral and arbitrary declaration, has a
population which is not the indigenous population because
the indigenous population, until the invasion, was overwhelmingly Greek. After the invasion, the majority was
expelled. The 18 per cent minority remained and it was
supplemented mainly by Turks imported from Turkey. This
is now the population in an area occupied by force contrary
to international law. The invaders then make the arrogant
claim that they want recognition, as a stall. They even
haughtily ignore the resolutions of the Security Council and
the facts of the situation. They say that the Cyprus
problem is not an international problem at all. The invasion
and its sequel are wiped away. Everything that happens to
Cyprus is a matter of intercommunal difficulties, That is
another illogical situation which is plain from what has
been said here. I am not trying to answer it, because such
illogicalities are answered by themselves. I am only pointing
out the degree of irrationality engendered by the arrogance
of power and the use of force-&-this
in an age in which we
have Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, which was very
rightly mentioned by the representative of Panama, Ambassador Illueca, an eminent lawyer, as the basis of the Charter
and a fundamental rule under which the world should
function. The United Nations functions, but its credibility
through the effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions under the provisions of the Charter is still
lacking.

In other words, there was no reason; it was merely for the
purpose of dividing the people of Cyprus and keeping them
separate. A leaflet, which I read to the Council in 1965,
says the following:
“Turkish Cypriots
not in possession of a permit are
forbidden to enter the Greek Cypriot sector.”
-forbidden

by their leadersbip-

“(a) Those who disobey the order with a view to
having trade connexions with the Greek Cypriots should
pay a t25 fine or should be punished with imprisonment.”
-aiming to break
partition-

the relations and open the way to

“(b) A fine of 21 will be imposed on:
“(i) Those who converse or enter into any negotiations with Greek Cypriots or accompany
any stranger Into our sector.” (See 1270th
meeting, paru. 43.1
Then again:
“ . , ,, the lack of movement of Turkish Cypriots outside
of their areas is believed to be dictated by a political
purpose, namely, to reinforce the claim that the two main
communities of Cyprus cannot live peacefully together in
the island without some sort of geographical separation.”
I continue with another

quotation:

“The Turkish Cypriot leaders have adopted a rigid stand
against any measures which might involve having members of the two communities live and work together, or
which might place Turkish Cypriots in situations where
they would have to acknowledge the authority of
Government agents. Indeed, since the Turkish Cypriot
leadership is committed to physical and geographical
separation of the .conununities as a political goal”-that is,
a political goal of Ankara-“it
is not likely to encourage
activities by Turkish Cypriots which may be interpreted
as demonstrating the merits of an alternative policy. The
result has been a seemingly deliberate policy of selfsegregation by the Turkish Cypriots.

263. I have declared in my statement, and I repeat here,
that there cannot be progress in the solution of the problem
so long as no positive move is made towards giving effect to
the resolutions of the United Nations on Cyprus. Only then
will it be possible to have constructive negotiations leading
to a solution of the problem; only then can there be real
progress, Now, this depends upon the will of the Turkish
Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots. As I said in my statement,
that will exists, but it is thwarted by outside intervention.
264. The representative or agent of the Ankara rkgime, in
trying to cover up the aggressions against Cyprus, pretends
that the Turkish Cypriots’ rights were violated between
1964 and 1974. This, however, is dispr.oved by the reports

-now the important

part-

“The Government contends that tie hardships suffered
by the Turkish Cypriot population are the direct result of
25

the leadership’s self-isolation policy, imposed by force on
the rank and file.” [S/6426 of ID June 1965, para. 106.1

international problems; there is a distinct move in that
direction. It is opposed,no doubt, but I hopeit will prevail,
becauseit will mean the physical survival of mankind.

265. I have here a pile of reports of the Secretary-General
from the years 1964 down to 1974 showingthat there were
deliberate actions of force and violence and restrictions on
the Turkish Cypriots, who suffered becauseof theseactions
imposedon them by their leadershipand by officers from
Ankara sentthere clandestinelyasteachersin order to force
a situation of separationthrough the activities of a Turkish
underground organization against the will of the Turkish
Cypriot rank and file. And, asI pointed out in my original
statement, these reports of the Secretary-Generalspeakof
the desire of the Greek and Turkish Cypriots to live
together.

271. The PRESIDENT: I have been informed that
Mr. Celik, to whom the Council hasextended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure[2012th
meeting], wishesto make a further statement.Therefore, if
there is no objection on the part of any member of the
Council, 1 invite Mr. Celik to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
272. Mr. CELIK: Mr. President, I wish to thank you and
the membersof the Council for allowing me to speakhere
for a secondtime.
273. As the representative of a community on whose
behalf, had it not been for the justified and legitimate
Turkish intervention in Cyprus, I would not be here-1
would not even be alive-I wanted to put the record
straight.

266. This is the situation that has created all these
problems,and for the agent of Ankara to say now that the
Greek Cypriots hate the Turkish Cypriots is ridiculous,
because the contrary is shown in the reports of the
Secretary-Generaland also in a series of letters which
reflect the situation and which have been sent to the
Secretary-Generalin the courseof these 10 years. So I will
not elaboratefurther on thesematters.

274. The representative of Greece has tried twice this
afternoon to present the problem of Cyprus as a conflict
that started in 1974 through either the Turkish intervention
or through what he has tried to present as the mistake of a
junta. The joint Greek aggression in Cyprus goes back as far
as 1955, with the establishment of the terrorist Cypriot
EOKA-U organization, which was set up with the general
assent of Greece. That move took place during the
Caramanlis democratic Government. The second onslaught
on the Turkish Cypriots started in 1963 and continued
until 1967 under the democratic Papandrcou rQ,ime. The
junta came in 1967 and tried to complete the unfinished
job. That is a record about which we feel very strongly and
which I had to repeat here.

267. Here is the arrogance of power-not
of the Turkish
Cypriots, but of the invader country using its agents from
among the Turkish Cypriots. They complain that they
suffer economic war at the hands of the Government of
Cyprus, but what is this economic war? They did not dare
say this before, but now they have been sufficiently
encouraged to declare these things. After having invaded
Cyprus, expelled the or&al
population and usurped the
properties of the inhabitants, now they want to export the
produce of and take the profits from the usurped properties. And because the Government exercises its legitimate
rights by peaceful means, in accordance with international
law, to regulate the ships that, for commercial purposes,
enter its ports, the ports of Cyprus-and those ports are not
recognized as other than “ports of Cyprus” anywhere in the
world-, and by virtue of these international regulations
stops the export of stolen and looted goods, they say this is
economic war, Now, this is nothing else but another
demonstration of the extremes which the arrogance of
power and the resulting irrationality reach.

275. Regarding the allegations of the Greek Cypriot
representative as to my being a puppet, everyone knows
who is a puppet and everyone knows whom each one
represents. I am the representative of a federated State,
democratically elected under a most democratic constitution and I here challenge Mr. Rossides to compare
constitutions
with me as far as his own election is
concerned. I am speaking on behalf of a community as an
elected representative, a fact of which I am proud.

268. I do not want to take up the Council’s time any
longer, but 1 shouldlike to askthe representativeof Turkey
whether he deniesthe obvious actsof aggression
in Cyprus.
Doeshe try to justify them? Can hc justify them under the
Charter or international law? He keepssilent, thinking that
merely by so doing and by having a puppet representative
as the pretended spokesmanof the Turkish Cypriots-who
alsosuffer from this situation-he can avoid the charges.

276. As regardsthe remaining part of his statement,I can
only say that he has answeredhimself and that I have
nothing further to add.
277. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Cyprus in exerciseof the right of reply.
278. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I can understand the
difficult position of the agent of Ankara who spokehere,
but he speaksof things at random that have no substance
and doesnot bring any evidenceto support them. Whatever
I said I supported and substantiatedwith quotations from
reports and elsewhere.I do not throw out wordsat random.
It is very easy-particularly for an agent-to make accusationswithout substantiatingthem.

269. But I say that world opinion knows and realizesthe
fact; and it is for world opinion, in time, to come to the
realization that a lack of morality in the worl?i cannot but
leadto illegality, insecurity and final destruction.
270. But, as I said in my earlier statement, there are
important signson the world scenethat I hope indicate that
there is now a change towards a moral approach to

The meeting roseat 7.55 p.m.
26

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

JUS.

2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-April

1978-2,200
