S/PV.7536

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7536th meeting

Friday, 16 October 2015, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-31810 (E)
*1531810*

S/PV.7536

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Security Council for the opportunity to
brief the Council today on the current situation in the
Middle East, which unfortunately remains extremely
concerning.
Today we witnessed yet another example of the
escalating violence when a large group of Palestinians
set fire to the compound containing the holy site
of Joseph’s Tomb in the West Bank city of Nablus.
Fortunately, there were no reported injuries, but the
site sustained major damage. As with the many deadly
incidents over the past weeks, the Secretary-General
strongly condemns this reprehensible act and calls
on those responsible to be swiftly brought to justice.
The United Nations welcomes President Abbas’
condemnation of the arson attack and his announcement
that a committee has been established to conduct a full
investigation into the crime.
This incident represents a particularly troubling
development in the light of its religious dimension. We
call on all sides to respect the sanctity of all holy sites
and reject the extremist elements that are pursuing a
political agenda and seeking to transform the current

2/18

16/10/2015

situation from a national into a religious struggle. If
they are successful in those efforts, the consequences
could be catastrophic for Palestinians and Israelis alike,
with serious reverberations throughout the region.
This latest incident comes on the heels of a deadly
week in the West Bank, Jerusalem and East Jerusalem.
There were 11 reported attacks against Israelis
and Israeli security forces, leaving 4 Israelis and
9 Palestinians dead and 16 Israelis and 4 Palestinians
wounded. There were also three reported stabbings and
ramming attacks on Israelis in Israel, leaving 10 Israelis
injured and 3 Palestinian suspects wounded. In Gaza,
a seventh Palestinian succumbed to his wounds on
10 October, after clashing with the Israeli Defence
Forces (IDF) near the security barrier the previous
day. On 11 October, and a Palestinian woman and her
4-year-old child died in Gaza after Israeli air strikes
on Hamas sites caused a building to collapse. The air
strikes were in response to rocket-fire on southern
Israel the day before, 10 October.
Palestinian militants fired at least eight rockets
towards Israel during the past week alone, with most
having fallen short and landed within Gazan territory,
and one having been intercepted by Iron Dome. Another
rocket was test-fired at the sea, to which the Israeli
Defence Forces responded with warning shots, injuring
one Palestinian. As of yesterday, a total of 7 Israelis
and 32 Palestinians, including those who allegedly
conducted or attempted attacks, were killed. Some 124
Israelis, including Israeli security force personnel, and
over 1,118 Palestinians have reportedly been injured
since 1 October.
Since those latest attacks, Israel’s Security Cabinet
has passed a broad range of new security measures,
which are already being implemented. The Israeli
Defence Forces have already significantly bolstered
their presence in Israeli city centres, while many
Arab neighbourhoods in East Jerusalem have been
surrounded by security forces, with access roads
having been blocked and checkpoints established.
Following the deterioration that began on 1 October,
the Israeli authorities have also reinstated a number of
movement restrictions in the West Bank, in particular
by restaffing 16 checkpoints that had previously been
left unstaffed. Ad hoc checkpoints have been erected at
over 100 West Bank sites for varying periods of time.
Additional measures are being introduced with the
goal of deterring would-be terrorists from carrying

15-31810

16/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

out attacks. The homes of those accused of carrying
out terror attacks will be demolished within days of
any attack, and their families — if residents of East
Jerusalem and not Israeli citizens — will have their
permanent residency status revoked. Already this
month, two structures have been blown up and a
third one partially sealed. However, those actions
followed attacks that took place in 2014. A total of
30 Palestinians, including 20 children, were displaced
as a result of those demolitions.
The United Nations has maintained a consistent
position on those issues. Collective punishment,
including house demolitions, is counterproductive and
contravenes international law, and we have urged Israel
to cease that damaging practice. What is clear is that
the current crisis cannot be resolved through security
measures alone. The persistence of the occupation
and diminishing prospects for achieving Palestinian
aspirations to statehood have transformed longsimmering Palestinian anger into outright rage. That
stark reality has been compounded by the increasingly
dire economic situation and circumstances, including
the bleak prospects for youth employment. The
continued and expanding settlement activities further
diminish the hope and potential for creating a viable
Palestinian State. Such loss of political perspective is
the single-most damaging factor that contributes to the
anger and frustration driving the violence that we are
seeing today.
Against this backdrop, there are a number of
factors that sparked the current crisis. Tensions at
the holy sites in Jerusalem were the main instigators.
Reckless statements made by Palestinian and Israeli
extremist elements, reinforced by some mainstream
voices as well, have insinuated that Israel is aiming to
change the status quo at the holy sites. This fear has
reverberated widely across the Arab world. Prime
Minister Netanyahu’s repeated assurances that Israel
has no intention of changing the historic status quo
at the holy sites have been welcome, but perceptions
will change only when concrete actions, based on the
agreements between Israel and Jordan, follow those
words.
A second factor feeding the escalation has been
the apparent heavy-handed approach taken by Israeli
security services. Wide dissemination of video footage
of several incidents fueled more attacks and has raised
serious questions as to the appropriate level of force
used by the IDF and police. The Secretary-General has

S/PV.7536

called for a thorough investigation of all such cases.
It is clear that such incidents serve only to exacerbate
the situation, leading to a vicious cycle of needless
bloodshed. We appreciate Israeli efforts to reduce the
lethality of response, particularly in Gaza after the
indefensible killings of protesters behind the separation
fence, and we encourage greater restraint whenever
there is no imminent threat to life or of serious injury.
Finally, we have seen that the impact of social
media and irresponsible rhetoric has played a dramatic
role in the escalation. On this count, both sides have
much to be blamed for, but we welcome the efforts of
leaders in recent days to tone down their statements.
We call on community, religious and political leaders
on all sides to calm the language they use in this regard
and to work together to de-escalate the situation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate the friendly country
of Spain on its accession to the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I should like to thank
you, Sir, for your leadership and skill in the outstanding
accomplishment of your tasks and for your positive
response to the request to convene this urgent meeting
of the Security Council.
I further express our thanks and appreciation to the
friendly Russian Federation for its presidency of the
Council last month.
Lastly, I thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun
for his briefing.
We come to the Security Council today to ask
it intervene on an urgent basis to end the aggression
against the defenceless Palestinian people and its
shrines, which have been violated by the Israeli
military occupation, settlers and extremists. We have
documented this aggression in five letters that we have
sent to the President of the Security Council over the
past 10 days, during which more than 35 martyrs have
fallen, including many children, and more than 1,500
people have been injured by live ammunition, rubber
bullets and other means. Most of the victims have been
minors below the age of 18.

15-318103/18

S/PV.7536

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We have all witnessed through satellite television
and social media the killings and mass arrests of
Palestinian civilians by the Israeli occupation forces,
merely for participating in demonstrations against the
Israeli occupation and its brutal, illegal practices and
for seeking to end the occupation. Islamic holy sites and
the Al-Aqsa Mosque have been subjected to ongoing
aggression by the Israeli authorities and extremists,
who want to impose a change of the current status quo.
This provocation of our people has further escalated
the situation since September and threatens to give
the conflict a sectarian character that will destroy
everything in its wake.
Israel, the occupying Power, is responsible for
bringing us to this dangerous juncture. We must
hold it accountable for its violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. The illegal
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem and its environs, are fertile
ground for the terrorist threat being faced our people.
There will be no hope for a serious political process
without a full, decisive end to settlement activities.
It is high time to put an end to Israel’s actions and to
compel it to honour its commitments under international
law. Israel cannot be allowed to enjoy impunity for its
crimes against our people in the occupied Palestinian
States, including East Jerusalem. Israeli officials
should be held responsible for these crimes, as should
the settlers who have committed such ugly terrorist acts
as the torching of the Dawabsha family in their home in
the middle of the night, which killed an 18-month-old
infant and his parents and burned his 4-year-old brother,
who remains in hospital on the brink of death. Israeli
Minister of Defence Moshe Ya’alon claims to know the
terrorists who committed this act, but they have yet to
be arrested or punished for their terrorist acts. This
would seem to represent a cover-up and collusion on
the part of the Israeli Government.
The occupation maintains its brutality by surrounding
and blockading Palestinian neighbourhoods in East
Jerusalem, which constitutes collective punishment
in violation of the rules of international law. Israel
destroys the homes of Palestinians and permits the
formation of armed Jewish militias, as called for by the
Mayor of West Jerusalem. We believe that such terror
and aggression will not break the will of our people
or weaken our resolve to peacefully resist and end
the occupation and to achieve our independence as a
sovereign State with East Jerusalem as its capital.

4/18

16/10/2015

From this Chamber, we hail our people for its
steadfastness and sacrifices; we pay tribute to the
martyrs and honour the injured. We express our support
for the Palestinian prisoners.
The Security Council must assume its responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, by
condemning this aggression, working to bring it to an
immediate end and forcing Israel to withdraw its armed
formations immediately from the areas of contact with
our people, especially in occupied East Jerusalem and
Al-Aqsa Mosque. Israel must respect the established
status quo in those sacred places in word and deed,
and allow our people — Christians and Muslims — to
practise their religion in peace. We do not trust the
words and promises of the Israeli Government. Its
immoral actions speak louder than its words. Israel has
violated its responsibility as an occupying Power to
protect civilians in accordance with the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. It is the responsibility of the United
Nations and the Security Council to provide protection
for our people in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, until the occupation has
ended in the Palestinian State.
In this respect in 1994, the Security Council adopted
resolution 904 (1994) following the Hebron massacre at
the hands of a terrorist settler. The resolution called for
protection for our people in the occupied territory and a
temporary international presence, including observers.
The resolution called upon the Israeli Government to
remove weapons from the hands of settlers. We call
upon States members once again, not only to implement
that resolution and all other relevant United Nations
resolutions, but also to seriously and urgently address
the issue of providing international protection for our
people. This issue has become more urgent than ever
before and it requires the Council’s immediate attention.
In conclusion, our people, who are under
occupation and who suffer from injustice, oppression
and aggression, have for many decades asked when the
occupation will end and when the Palestinian people
will achieve independence and security. Is the Council
going to answer that question? Is the Council going to
do something about it?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): As we sit here today, Israel is
facing an onslaught of terrorism; men, women and

15-31810

16/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

children are being stabbed to death on the streets on a
daily basis. Yet for them there has been no demand for
an emergency session of the Security Council; no call
for the Palestinian leadership to stop their incitement;
and not even a whisper of condemnation of these acts
could be heard from the Council.
Eitam and Na’ama Henkin were shot to death while
driving in their car. Their four children were in the
vehicle and watched their parents killed — executed — in
front of their eyes.
Chaim Chaviv was shot and killed on a city bus in
Jerusalem on his way home from a visit to his doctor.
Two terrorists boarded the bus, locked the doors so that
no one could escape, and started to shoot and stab the
passenger. Chaim Chaviv was 78 years old. These are
just a few of the silent victims of Palestinian terror.
Over the course of the last month, 24 terror attacks
have claimed the lives of 8 Israelis and injured 70,
including an official from the International Labour
Organization. Fifteen of them are still hospitalized.
This tide of terror has washed over the entire nation
and it spares no one; young and old are being targeted
every day. Israelis do not feel safe walking down the
street, they avoid taking the bus to work and they fear
for the lives of their children every time they walk out
of the door.
We face an enemy who is willing to die in order to
kill. These people, who kill innocent civilians in cold
blood, abide by no rule and have abandoned even the
most basic morality. Israel is taking every necessary
means to defend its citizens and is responding
proportionately to these attacks. I have no doubt that
if, on a daily basis the citizens of member States were
being stabbed in the streets with butcher knives or shot
on buses, their security forces would have reacted in
the same way.
We heard in the Secretariat briefing today the
so-called reason for this campaign of terror. The
real root cause of this wave of terror is clear. It was
inflammatory rhetoric and lies that lit the fuse and it is
incitement that keeps feeding the flames. The violence
that Israel now faces began with lies about the Temple
Mount. President Abbas has continually accused Israel
of trying to change the status quo. Just two days ago he
claimed that “Israel intends to make Al-Aqsa Jewish”.
This is a deliberate and malicious lie. Knowing full well
the consequences of their words, Palestinian leaders

S/PV.7536

have repeated this outlandish conspiracy theory over
and over again and it is utterly baseless.
Prime Minister Netanyahu, as we heard today,
has stated time and time again, including from the
rostrum in the General Assembly, that Israel is firmly
committed to the status quo. We continue to protect the
right of Muslims to pray in the mosque, as well as the
freedom of all people — Muslims, Christians, Jews and
others — to visit the Temple Mount. The facts speak
for themselves. For decades Israel has maintained the
status quo and will keep on doing so. Let me be crystal
clear — Israel will not agree to any international
presence on the Temple Mount. Such a presence would
be a change in the status quo.
Since 1967, Israel has been doing everything in its
power to preserve the sanctity of this site. We do this
out of a deep and abiding respect for the principle of
freedom of religion and the historic connection of the
three monotheistic faiths to the Temple Mount. Yet, it is
clear that this respect is not mutual. Palestinian leaders
are determined to erase Jewish history and deny any
historic connection between the Jewish people and our
holiest site. In a proposal that the Palestinians asked
to submit yesterday to UNESCO, they tried do exactly
that. This proposal calls on UNESCO to include the
Western Wall, HaKotel HaMa’aravi, the site of Jewish
prayer for millennia, as an integral part of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque.
When the Palestinian leadership has so little
respect for places that have been sacred to the Jewish
people throughout their history, it is no surprise that
the Palestinian people treat the Jewish holy site with
such disdain and disregard. Just last night, a mob of
Palestinians set fire to the Tomb of Joseph in Nablus,
a site of prayer and pilgrimage for Jews through the
generations. This is a desecration and a blatant violation
of the freedom of worship. The heinous attack on a
biblical holy site can be explained only by incitement
and a lack of respect for the religion and heritage of
others.
The disrespect for the sanctity of holy sites is also
evident in the actions of Palestinians on the Temple
Mount. Militant Islamist agitators have used the
Al-Aqsa Mosque as a staging ground for a calculated,
violent provocation. On the eve of the Jewish New
Year, Rosh Hashana, radical Islamists stockpiled
rocks, planks, wooden sheets and fireworks, as well as
Molotov firebombs and explosive devices, to prevent

15-318105/18

S/PV.7536

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jews, as well as Christians, from visiting the Temple
Mount.
The Palestinians and the representatives of the
Arab countries speak of the sanctity of their holy sites,
but when Islamist militants desecrated Al-Aqsa, by
using it as a weapons depot, they stood mute. Instead,
President Abbas defended these rioters and lit the spark
that set our region ablaze. He declared,
“We welcome every drop of blood spilled in
Jerusalem ... With the help of Allah, every shaheed
will be in heaven, and every wounded will get his
reward ... Al-Aqsa is ours, and the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre is ours. Everything is ours, all
ours. They have no right to desecrate them with
their filthy feet.”
I repeat, Jews have no right to desecrate it with
their filthy feet. Can anyone imagine what the reaction
would have been if an Israeli leader or any other leader,
for that matter, had uttered such a hateful sentiment?
The Security Council would have quite rightly wasted
no time in convening to condemn it. Yet, when the
President of the Palestinian Authority makes such a
blatantly prejudiced statement, the Council reacts with
complete silence.
Even now, as the violence continues and lives are
lost every day, instead of calming tensions Palestinian
leaders continue to lie and use inflammatory rhetoric.
They are stoking the flames by portraying terrorists
as innocent victims. Just two days ago, in a televised
broadcast to the Palestinian people, President Abbas
accused Israel of killing an innocent 13-year old
Palestinian boy. There are two facts that President
Abbas did not share with his public. First, the boy is
not dead. He is fully conscious and is being treated in
an Israeli hospital. Secondly, he is not innocent. This
13-year old Palestinian brutally attacked a 13-year old
Israeli boy who was riding his bicycle, stabbing him
no fewer than 15 times. No one needs to take my word
for it; there is a video of this on social media. When
a young child is incited to pick up a knife instead of
being encouraged to pick up a basketball or a book,
something is deeply wrong.
As Dr. Yitzhak Kadman, Executive Director of the
Israeli National Council for the Child, wrote, it is very
easy to use children for the needs of adults. It is so easy
to incite children and to drag them into war games. It
is so tempting to turn children into symbols. It is so
easy and, yet, so wrong, so simple and so dangerous.

6/18

16/10/2015

Tragically, this is exactly what the Palestinian
leadership is doing. Such acts of terror do not occur in
a vacuum. They are the product of a deliberate policy
of incitement aimed at filling the minds of Palestinian
children with hatred.
From an early age, Palestinian children are subjected
to propaganda that promotes hatred and incites them
to violence. Young children watch television shows
with friendly hosts that encourage them to kill all Jews
and become martyrs. Schoolchildren in the West Bank
study using official Palestinian Authority textbooks
that legitimize indiscriminate violence against
Israelis. Palestinian teenagers follow Facebook posts
and Twitter feeds that call on them to stab Jews and
that applaud violent acts like the murder of Eitam and
Na’ama Henkin, of blessed memory.
The situation is indeed dire, but there is a way
forward. Just yesterday, Prime Minister Netanyahu
expressed his willingness to meet with the Palestinian
leadership and with President Abbas in order to bring
calm to the region. Two weeks ago, Prime Minister
Netanyahu stood here in the United Nations and
declared that he is ready for direct negotiations with the
Palestinians, without any preconditions. If the Council
is serious about promoting peace, it must join in Prime
Minister Netanyahu’s call and insist that President
Abbas come to the negotiating table. Israel’s historic
agreements with Egypt and with Jordan prove that only
direct negotiations can lead to a real and lasting peace.
Only such negotiations can create a new reality for all
the people of the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to the members of the Security Council.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to express my deep gratitude to the President of the
Council for agreeing to organize this special meeting.
Jordan called for this urgent meeting, in light of
the pressing need to address the latest developments
in the Palestinian territories, and in particular in
occupied Jerusalem. This is the result of the unlawful
and arbitrary practices of Israel against the Palestinian
people, its incursion into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
Haram Al-Sharif, its attempt to impose a situation that
would change the status quo in the city of Jerusalem,
and the provocation of Palestinians by Israeli
extremists in Jerusalem and its holy sites, which have
reached unprecedented and escalated levels that cross
all possible lines. What Israel is doing in occupied

15-31810

16/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7536

Palestinian territories, in systematic violation of the
rights of defenceless Palestinian people, requires the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities, put an end to
these attacks, take adequate and effective measures to
protect the Palestinian people, stop these reprehensible
acts and prevent them from happening again.

provocation. Jordan therefore calls for an immediate
end to the ongoing and escalating aggressions of Israeli
authorities. It also calls for the historic status of the
holy city of Jerusalem to be respected and for an end to
measures aimed at dividing the Haram Al-Shareef into
physical sections and time slots.

The Israeli occupation and the injustice endured by
the Palestinian people held hostage by it have lasted too
long — over seven decades. The rights of the Palestinian
people to life, dignity, security over their land and selfdetermination are being violated. Every day, the Israeli
occupation devises a new set of coercive measures
against the Palestinian people. The Palestinians have
lost hope that the international community will free
them from the yoke of occupation and from daily Israeli
aggressions, which do not spare women, children or the
elderly.

Jordan rejects any attempt to infringe upon cultural
heritage and religious sites, and we support the decision
by President Abbas to investigate the latest torching of
Joseph’s Tomb. We call for self-restraint and the need
to refrain from irresponsible and religiously offensive
acts. We condemn in the strongest terms what Israel
is doing against the Palestinian people. We consider it
fully responsible for the latest escalation.

The security of Israel and its citizens cannot be
achieved with an iron fist, by indulging in various types
of collective and individual punishment, by excessive
use of armed force or by killing the vulnerable and the
innocent. The Israeli authorities should realize that
the lives of the Palestinian people are not cheaper than
those of its own citizens and that shedding Palestinian
blood will not bring about peace and security.
The spiral of violence in the occupied Palestinian
territories will lead to further tensions and extremism
in the Middle East and have a negative impact on
international peace and security. The Council should
therefore spare no effort to put an end to Israeli
violations in Palestinian territory and to stop Israel’s
systematic breaches of its commitments under
international humanitarian law, in particular the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. We call on the Security
Council to explore appropriate options to provide legal
protection to the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territories, commensurate with the serious
nature of the situation, which might pave the way for a
just and comprehensive peace following the end of the
occupation.
The bloody attacks being committed every day by
Israel against the Palestinian people, along with the
violation of the sanctity of holy sites and the incursions
into Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Haram Al-Sharif,
preventing its imams, staff and worshippers from
entering the Mosque, are violations of the rights not
only of the Palestinian people, but of over a 1.5 billion
Muslims throughout the the world, as well as a

Jordan will spare no effort in discharging its
responsibility in terms of supporting the Palestinian
people, putting an end to the Israeli occupation of
Palestine and establishing a viable, free and independent
Palestinian State, based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We stress that Christian
and Muslim holy sites in East Jerusalem, at the forefront
of which is Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Haram Al-Sharif,
are a red line that cannot be crossed. We will not allow
their desecration or profanation.
We therefore reiterate Jordan’s total rejection and
condemnation of the provocative violations committed
by Israel in Al-Aqsa Mosque and on the Haram
Al-Sharif, and our full solidarity with the Palestinian
people and our absolute commitment to their legal and
historic rights in the protection of Al-Aqsa Mosque and
the Haram Al-Sharif. Based on the historic Hashemite
guardianship of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein over Islamic and Christian holy sites in
Jerusalem and Jordan’s right to look after them. We
preserve all possible legal and diplomatic options to
defend those sites.
Ms. Power (United States of America): We
would like to thank Jordan for convening this
emergency session. We are grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun for briefing the Council
today and for his and the United Nations ongoing
efforts in the region.
The United States shares the deep concern of
everyone in the Council today about the current
situation and condemns in the strongest terms the
ongoing violence in Jerusalem, the West Bank, Israel
and the Gaza Strip. We have repeatedly condemned the
violence and made clear that there is no justification

15-318107/18

S/PV.7536

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for any terrorist attack. We continue to stress the
importance of preventing inflammatory rhetoric,
accusations or any actions that can fuel the violence.
The human consequences of the violence have been
grave and continue to mount. Since 1 October, Israelis
have faced 38 attacks in which at least seven Israelis
have been killed and more than 40 injured, some
gravely. During the same period, 18 Palestinians have
been killed and hundreds injured in the West Bank,
Jerusalem and Gaza by live fire or rubber bullets from
Israeli security forces in the course of demonstrations or
clashes. According to Israeli authorities, an additional
14 Palestinians have been killed while carrying out
attacks or while suspected of attempting to carry them
out.
The cycle of violence and mistrust has been
exacerbated by viral images and videos shared on
social media, which further polarize narratives and
foster suspicion and even hatred on both sides. Among
Israelis and Palestinians, there is a growing frustration
as the prospects of reaching a two-State solution appear
to be declining. There is absolutely no justification
for reprehensible acts of violence, including terrorist
attacks against innocent civilians. We understand that
every Government needs to take the necessary steps
to protect its people. We continue to support Israel’s
right to defend its citizens. As always, it is critical that
every possible effort be taken to protect innocents, to
de-escalate tensions and to guard against unnecessary
loss of life. We also reiterate our deep concern about
increased Israeli settler violence against Palestinians
and their property in the West Bank.
We mourn the loss of all life, Israeli and Palestinian,
and continue to stress the importance of both parties
condemning the violence and avoiding provocative
statements that can further inflame tensions. In the face
of this violence, we remain committed to advancing a
two-State solution. Indeed, events right now underscore
just how critical it is to achieve two States living side
by side in peace and security. To that end, the United
States continues to urge all sides publicly and privately
to take affirmative steps to restore calm.
We welcome Israel and Jordan’s commitment to
maintaining the status quo at the Temple Mount and
Haram Al-Sharif, and strongly support efforts to
ensure that the status quo is maintained. We know
Prime Minister Netanyahu’s public commitment on that
point. United States Secretary Kerry has spoken with

8/18

16/10/2015

Prime Minister Netanyahu, President Abbas and King
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein in recent days. He will travel
to the region at the appropriate moment. As the Middle
East Quartet principals meeting on 30 September made
clear in their statement, we are concerned that
“current trends on the ground — including
continued acts of violence against Palestinians and
Israelis, ongoing settlement activity, and the high
rate of demolitions of Palestinian structures — are
dangerously imperilling the viability of a two-State
solution”.
The status quo is not sustainable. The Quartet has
stressed the importance of both sides demonstrating a
genuine commitment to a two-State solution in order to
rebuild trust and avoid a cycle of escalations. As we and
our partners emphasize in the statement of the Quartet,
we strongly support
“concrete and significant steps that will help
stabilize the situation, reverse current trends by
showing meaningful progress towards creating a
two-State reality on the ground and restore hope
among Palestinians and Israelis that a negotiated
peace is possible”.
It is important to emphasize that those steps can
be taken without impacting Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. In fact, they can enhance security for Israelis
and Palestinians alike. We continue to believe that the
best way to ensure the safety of all is to work towards
a political solution — again, two States living side by
side in peace and security. Only through a solution
negotiated by the two sides will true peace and security
be achieved. The harrowing accounts of innocent
civilians injured and killed in the past two weeks on
both sides underscore why we all must redouble our
efforts to diffuse the crisis and find a pathway back
towards a two-State solution.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The ongoing escalation of the situation in the
Palestinian territories, particularly in East Jerusalem,
is a matter of great concern to Moscow. It is causing
increased suffering among peaceful Israelis and
Palestinians, exacerbating the lack of trust between
them and reducing the possibility of a political solution.
Russia firmly rejects any terrorist manifestation and
we again calls on both parties to stop the violence,
cease acts of provocation and take immediate measures
to de-escalate the situation. Any violent act against
peaceful citizens is intolerable and unacceptable.

15-31810

16/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is of key importance to normalize the situation
around the holy sites in East Jerusalem, which are
considered sacred by Jews, Muslims and Christian. At
this stage, we must avoid any step that would disrupt
the status quo or lead to violent action against either
Palestinians or Israelis. A situation that has lasted
for decades nevertheless cannot last indefinitely.
The holy sites in Jerusalem must be dealt with in a
mutually beneficial way. That is possible only through
negotiations on all issues relating to Jerusalem and the
permanent status of the Palestinian territories.
In calling for immediate steps to reduce the
tension, we also note that we need to consider the
root cause of what is taking place in the Palestinian
territories, which goes back to the 1967 occupation of
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. It is
the dangerous decades-long lack of a proper resolution
to the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians that
lies at the root of the current escalation. We cannot turn
a blind eye to that fact. Israel, as the occupying Power
under the norms of international law, has the primary
responsibility for the situation in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. Until we achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian problem in
the context of an internationally accepted basis for a
peaceful settlement, Israel, on the basis of international
conventions, must comply with humanitarian principles
in its dealings with the populations of the occupied
territories.
We are also concerned by the situation in the Gaza
Strip. We welcome the steps taken by Israel to simplify
the access of necessary supplies into the Strip. But it
bears saying that the individual steps taken to attenuate
the blockade have not met the main demands of the
Security Council and the international community,
namely, the complete removal of the blockade and
the restoration of control to the central Palestinian
authorities over the Strip.
We are ready to continue our efforts, including
through the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators, in order to de-escalate the situation in
Palestinian-Israeli relations. The Quartet’s ministerial
statement issued in New York on 30 September
(SG/2220) called for specific steps to restore mutual
trust and a stabilization of the situation so that both
peoples can hope for a two-State solution. An important
continuation of the Quartet’s efforts would have been
the trip to Israel and Palestine that was supposed to
take place a few days from now but was postponed

S/PV.7536

at the request of Israel in connection with the recent
events. We hope that the planned visit by the Quartet
to the region can take place as soon as possible. It
is also important to consider organizing a Security
Council mission to the Middle East, which the Russian
delegation proposed some years ago.
Despite the overall turbulent situation in the
whole region and the growth in regional terrorism,
the Palestinian-Israeli problem remains the epicentre
of the Middle East situation. The fact that it has not
been resolved is one of the main factors for the lack
of stability in the entire region, That fact continues to
shake up the region, which helps extremists to recruit
new members to their cause. A renewal of direct
talks between Israel and Palestine, on the basis of the
two-State solution, would represent a very important
contribution to establishing stability in the region and
security for the people living there.
In July 2014, Mr. Abbas sent to the SecretaryGeneral a request to place the Palestinian State under
the United Nations system of protection. The Security
Council soon received a letter from the SecretaryGeneral saying that the matter was under consideration
in the Secretariat. As we know, the Secretariat has
prepared its study in that regard. We hope that the
Secretary-General will officially convey the results of
that study to the Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Jordan for taking the initiative to convene
this meeting, and I would like to thank Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun for his briefing.
Over the past few months, France has repeatedly
warned of the risks of a new wave of unrest in the
Middle East. That is now upon us. Faced with the
stepped-up construction of illegal settlements, which
daily compromises the viability of a Palestinian State,
and in the absence of a peace process, we have acted to
draw attention to the urgent need for a lasting political
solution to the conflict, which is the only way to avoid a
never-ending repetition of the same cycles of violence.
The explosion has now taken place in the West
Bank, in Jerusalem and in Gaza, but also in Israel,
sowing the fear of a possible third intifada. We have
condemned all the attacks, which both confirm our
concerns and uphold our position. France would like
to renew its appeal for greater mobilization on the part
of the international community to restore a genuine
political vision. The growing number of crises in

15-318109/18

S/PV.7536

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

16/10/2015

the region should not distract us from the urgency of
relaunching the peace process, on the contrary.

than ever to play its part and to work tirelessly with its
partners in the service of peace.

As Minister Laurent Fabius said yesterday in the
French Senate, we must relaunch a credible political
process that makes it possible to move towards a just
and lasting peace, to genuinely move forward. We
cannot continue to let the two-State solution unravel
day after day. That is all the more critical in the light
of the risk that Daesh could one day take control of the
Palestinian cause, with the disastrous consequences
that we can imagine.

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Jordan for convening this meeting on
behalf of the Arab countries, and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun for his briefing.

To that end, we need to work on a number of
fronts. First, to begin with what is most urgent, it is
the responsibility of the Security Council to respond
to the current escalation. France has prepared a draft
statement that it would like to submit to the members
of the Council aimed at appealing to all parties to show
calm and restraint, but also to maintain the status quo
on the esplanade of the mosques.
Thereafter, we need to work to provide a concrete
political vision. The goal is not simply to manage the
crisis, but rather to provide it with a lasting solution.
In that regard, the establishment of an international
support group would be highly relevant. After bringing
the members of the Quartet together here in New York,
expanding its format for the first time to include key
Arab actors in addition to European and international
partners, as France proposed, we believe it is time to
enhance those efforts to restore a political vision in
order to bring pressure to bear on the parties that will
lead them to resume and successfully conclude peace
negotiations.
Such a format would make it possible to work on
three fronts. First, by introducing confidence-building
measures with the effect of immediately easing
tensions. Secondly, by offering our collective support
to Palestinian reconciliation under the authority of
President Mahmoud Abbas. Thirdly, by developing
a set of the guarantees and compensation measures
that each of the parties will need in order to sign an
agreement. France supports the convening of a meeting
of the newly expanded Quartet in the near future.
We cannot simply do nothing. We need to mobilize
all available means to provide a lasting solution to the
conflict. The Security Council has an important role
to play in support of those efforts. We need to assume
our responsibility. As a friend of both the Israeli and
the Palestinian peoples, France is more determined

10/18

Recently, the conflict between Palestine and Israel
has further escalated, leading to a worsening security
situation in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza.
China is deeply worried about that development. We
are concerned about the military crackdowns by Israeli
forces, which have led to Palestinian civilian casualties,
including women and children. The excessive use of
force, which causes casualties among innocent civilians,
is unacceptable. Returning violence for violence does
not help resolve issues; instead, it will only erode
mutual trust and exacerbate conflict and confrontation.
China urges both Palestine and Israel to heed the calls
of the international community to exercise maximum
restraint and to take practical measures to avoid further
escalation of the conflict.
China welcomes the efforts by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon to de-escalate the tensions between
Palestine and Israel. In the present circumstances, the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, should have a stronger sense of urgency. It
should assume its responsibility, actively respond to the
legitimate demands of Palestine and the Arab countries,
take the necessary action and promote efforts by the
parties concerned to immediately cease their clashes
and de-escalate tensions.
Achieving peaceful coexistence between Palestine
and Israel is the right direction to take in order to resolve
the Palestine-Israel question. Peace talks are the only
path forward. We hope that the Israeli Government will
take the lead in taking action in a spirit of good faith.
The legitimate security concerns of the countries
of the region should be taken into account. The
international community should make concerted efforts
to promote the quick resumption of talks by Palestine
and Israel on a broad-based platform, with the direct
participation of all major players, so as to resolve the
deep-rooted issues in bilateral relations.
China has been consistent in its support for the
just cause of the Palestinian people struggling for the
restoration of their legitimate national rights. We are
committed, as always, to the promotion of peace talks.

15-31810

16/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We will continue to maintain contact and coordination
with the parties concerned, to make unremitting efforts
to ease the tensions between Palestine and Israel and to
promote the resumption of their talks.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Jordan for having convened today’s meeting and thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his briefing.
New Zealand is deeply concerned at the recent
violence in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories, of which the attempted arson at Joseph’s
Tomb is the latest example. In the short term, all sides
need to cease the violence, refrain from provocative
actions and rhetoric, and uphold unchanged the historic
status quo at Jerusalem’s holy sites. It is critically
important to stop the violence and lower tensions.
We recognize that every State needs to protect
its citizens. However, we agree with the Assistant
Secretary-General
that
heavy-handed
security
measures will not resolve this growing crisis. Unless
the parties and the international community address the
root causes of the violence, we will see it happen again
and again. For each side to heap blame and allegations
on the other while ignoring or minimizing its own
responsibilities will only make things worse.
In New Zealand’s view, there is an urgent need
for progress towards securing a viable solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and towards the economic
and social stability that such a solution promises. That
is the only way to put an end to the violence. As my
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister said in New
York two weeks ago (see A/70/PV.23), this is a matter
of urgency and a critical issue on which the Security
Council must lead.
We believe that the Security Council has a role
to play to generate conditions on the ground that are
conducive to negotiations towards a two-State solution.
We believe that the Council also has a role to play: to tell
the parties clearly and firmly to get ready to negotiate
and to provide them with a time frame for commencing
negotiations.
We look forward to discussing our ideas and those
of others at the open debate next week, which we think
should focus on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. That
debate should also be used by Council members and
others as an opportunity to advance the conversation on
what the international community can to do bring the
two sides together. The conflict has continued for far

S/PV.7536

too long and resulted in far too many innocent people
being killed.
We are supportive of the idea of a Council statement,
as the representative of France has just suggested, and
we look forward to engaging on the text. A statement
alone, however, does not obviate the need for Council
action through a resolution or another product to move
the peace process forward. New Zealand remains
convinced that the Council must address this bigger
picture, and recent events have demonstrated the
urgency of doing so.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this urgent and
important meeting. I also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun for his briefing.
Malaysia is gravely concerned at the provocations
and escalating violence in and around the holy sites of
the Old City of Jerusalem. We condemn in the strongest
terms any and all attempts to alter the character and
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Such sinister
attempts are in blatant violation of numerous Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. We strongly
condemn all such acts of provocation, incitement and
violence at the holy sites by all sides, which only fuel
tensions and exacerbate the deteriorating security
situation on the ground. We strongly urge all parties to
exercise restraint and uphold respect for the sanctity of
the holy sites.
It should come as no surprise that this unresolved
situation has culminated in the current outbreak of
violence and the resulting death and destruction.
Time and again, the Council has been warned about
the ticking time bomb in occupied Palestine, and the
Palestinian people are growing increasingly desperate
at being dehumanized and suffering often-daily
humiliations, oppression and mistreatment under the
longest occupation in modern history. Yet time and
again, the Council has done nothing.
In the General Assembly, the Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of
the Occupied Territories, as well as the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, have diligently reported on the various atrocities
and grave violations of human rights committed by the
occupying Power year after year for decades, without
any effective measures being taken to address that grave
injustice. This has further emboldened the occupying

15-3181011/18

S/PV.7536

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Power to conduct itself with greater impunity and more
repressive policies.
In the mainstream media, we see only a ludicrously
one-sided, hugely distorted narrative to explain the
current situation: that of Palestinian terrorists trying
to kill and injure as many peace-loving Israelis as
possible. We do not see reports of the arbitrary killings
and the illegal targeting of children and women by the
Israeli forces and the settlers. We do not read about
the daily humiliations and mistreatment suffered by
the Palestinians at the hands of the occupying force.
We do not even hear the words “occupation” or “selfdetermination” mentioned anywhere in the mainstream
media to provide the proper context, and we do not
apply the same standard of human rights in Palestine
and Israel as we preach elsewhere globally.
Is it really surprising, then, that the subjugated
and oppressed choose to fight the illegal occupier for
the legitimate right to freedom and self-determination,
since for far too long, all other legal, economic,
political, diplomatic and media channels have been
systematically and exhaustively blocked?
Each time a cycle of violence erupts, countless
innocent people, including women and children, are
tragically killed, injured or traumatized, and the
international community, particularly the Security
Council, shares the blame for having allowed the
situation to persist with impunity. Enough is enough.
In shouldering its Charter responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, Malaysia wishes to
unequivocally demand United Nations or international
protection for the occupied Palestinian territory. Such
United Nations protection would prevent the continuing
massacres and gross violations of human rights in
occupied Palestinian territory. It would also benefit the
Israelis by addressing their security concerns.
The call for United Nations protection, in line
with international humanitarian law, particularly the
Geneva Conventions, would ensure accountability
for all parties to the conflict and enforce or monitor
adherence to international law, international human
rights law and various General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, so as to maintain peace and
security in the occupied territory. Such protection
has numerous precedents in United Nations history,
including in Kosovo, East Timor, Lebanon, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and even in Palestine itself. The
Council must not delay discussions on the proposal,

12/18

16/10/2015

and Malaysia looks forward to working closely with the
Secretary-General and other Council members in this
regard.
In noting the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation on the
reinvigorated role of the Quartet and its expanded
format, we underscore the importance of its engagement
within the Council.
In calling for United Nations protection to address
the current crisis, we must not lose sight of the longterm need for a final and comprehensive solution to the
conflict. Seventy years after the failure to grant selfdetermination to the Palestinian people, the international
community has lost any pretext for a legitimate excuse
to further perpetuate the Israeli occupation. Delays in
addressing the root causes of the conflict attributed to
looming elections, ineffectual Quartet meetings and
half-hearted bilateral initiatives begin to appear as
façades to prolong the occupation and to deny justice,
dignity and freedom to the Palestinian people.
Meanwhile, illegal Israeli settlements continue to
expand, giving rise to questions about the sincerity
of Israel’s commitment to the two-State solution. In
the first half of this year alone, the number of settler
homes built in the West Bank increased by 54.8 per cent
compared to the same period last year.
Against the backdrop of decades of impunity,
illegal Israeli policies and practices and systematic
dehumanization of Palestinians, we are seeing an
unacceptable increase in terrorist attacks by extremist
Israeli settlers. We cannot deny that the continuing and
unjust occupation of Palestine is a powerful rallying
point worldwide that further fuels radicalism and
extremism due to the obstruction of peaceful legal and
diplomatic means of resistance.
Malaysia stresses the need for the Council to act
urgently in the light of the deteriorating situation on
the ground, address the root causes of the conflict and
finally put an end to the longest occupation in modern
history. If we continue to turn a blind eye to the problem,
there is no doubt that we will pay a much higher price in
the future, which will not be in the long-term interest of
Palestine, Israel and the world.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Jordan for the initiative of calling for this public meeting
and the Spanish presidency for having convened it
immediately afterwards. I also thank Mr. Tayé-Brook

15-31810

16/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7536

Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing.

demolition of housing and the forced displacement of
Palestinians.

Chad is deeply concerned about the outbreak
of violence in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly in East Jerusalem, provoked by the recent
incursions by extremist settler groups on the esplanade
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Indeed, these incursions have
led to a series of legitimate angry protests against the
endless Israeli occupation, the indiscriminate acts of
repression and the constant humiliation of Palestinian
civilians.

In conclusion, we reiterate our firm conviction
that the two-State solution alone is the fairest and most
realistic option and that it could allow Israelis and
Palestinians to live in peace and security.

We strongly condemn all violence from any quarter
against innocent civilians. The increasingly growing
number of reported civilian casualties, including
children and women, since the beginning of October
reflects the extent of violence in the occupied territories,
particularly in the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. These
acts of repression are unacceptable and constitute a
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Given this situation, the international community
and especially the Security Council must assume
their responsibilities without hesitation by taking
appropriate measures to ensure the protection of
Palestinian civilians. The Security Council must act
urgently to end these serious violations and ensure
that the provocations of extremist settlers aggravating
the situation, including recurrent desecrations of holy
places, are not repeated. The international community
must not accept any of the horrors that Palestinians have
to suffer every day. And the occupying Power should
not benefit from total impunity for serious violations
that it continues to commit vis-à-vis innocent civilians.
This new deterioration of the situation underscores
the urgent need to relaunch the political process on new
bases in order to put an end to endless negotiations
that are currently deadlocked and make the two-State
solution a tangible reality. In this regard, the Security
Council must get more involved if the solution of two
States living side by side in peace and mutual respect
is to be saved. The parameters of the two-State solution
are known to all and should in no way be called into
question under any circumstances.
In this context, we call on both parties to work harder
to calm the situation and to put confidence-building
measures in place. Accordingly, Israel must freeze
settlement construction and stop attacks against
civilians, incursions into the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s emergency
meeting, and we thank Jordan for requesting it. We also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his
briefing.
It is vital that the Security Council respond urgently
and effectively to escalating situations such as the one
we are witnessing in Jerusalem and elsewhere. The
British Government is deeply concerned at the terrorist
attacks and violence that we seen so far this month, be
it in Jerusalem, the West Bank, Gaza or Israel, whether
it has been committed by Israelis or Palestinians. The
British Government condemns all acts of terrorism and
all acts of violence.
As others have said, this violence is doing untold
damage to people on both sides. So far this month,
7 Israelis and 32 Palestinians have been killed. Over
4,400 people have been injured, according to the
Palestine Red Crescent Society. These figures should
give us all cause for grave concern. The immediate
priority must be a swift end to the violence and a rapid
de-escalation in tension. I am pleased that Council
members have sent this clear and unambiguous message
today.
The Israeli and Palestinian peoples deserve to live
in peace and security without fear of attack. Those
breaking the law on either side should be subject to
prosecution. Innocent civilians must be protected. Let
us all call on the Israeli and Palestinian leadership
to take immediate steps to de-escalate tensions and
avoid any action that could threaten to exacerbate the
situation.
The current violence began following the
heightened tension we saw last month around Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. This is a sombre reminder
of the delicate balance in Jerusalem and the need to
respect sensitivities over so holy sites. It is vital that
the long-standing status quo in respect of access to
Haram Al-Sharif — the Temple Mount — and other
historic sites is preserved. The British Government
remains in close touch with the Israeli, Palestinian

15-3181013/18

S/PV.7536

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Jordanian authorities on this point, and we value
Jordan’s important role as custodian of the holy sites in
Jerusalem. We have stressed that security restrictions
must be lifted immediately. We will continue with these
calls and hope other Council members will join us.
If we are to find a long-term solution to this crisis,
the Israeli and Palestinian people need to believe,
really believe, that there is an alternative to conflict.
The current cycle of violence points to a much deeper
despair at the lack of prospects for a political end to the
conflict, one that sees two States living side by side in
peace and security. The violence takes us further away
from that goal. The political leaders on all sides — and
the Council — must make clear that the two-State
solution is not desirable but essential. There is a urgent
need for practical improvements on the ground if we
are to sustain the viability of the two-State solution and
deliver peace, prosperity and security for all.
As ever, the United Kingdom stands ready to work
closely with the Council and our other international
partners to address the current crisis, through private
diplomacy, statements, resolutions and any other route
that can help achieve a meaningful, lasting solution.
Such a solution is long overdue. Next week marks the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations. For 68 of
the past 70 years, the United Nations has been trying
to find the answer to the situation in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territories. We must keep striving
to achieve a two-State solution. The alternative is the
violence and despair that we are addressing today.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs for his briefing and the Kingdom of
Jordan for requesting this meeting.
We firmly condemn the series of attacks and
clashes in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip in recent weeks that have killed and wounded both
Israelis and Palestinians. Such acts of extreme violence
testify to a polarized atmosphere whose tension must
be reduced. Chile appeals urgently to the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities to act in ways conducive to
peace. In that regard, we feel it is important to insist
on the importance of respecting the agreements and
established practice concerning the use of and access to
the Temple Mount. The continuing policies of expanding
settlements are helping to undermine every effort to
reach a rapprochement and dialogue, and we are also
concerned about actions on the part of the authorities

14/18

16/10/2015

that violate minimum standards of procedure and the
right to fair and dignified treatment.
We continue to maintain that a two-State solution is
the alternative that has the greatest potential for enabling
the peoples of both countries to live in peace. We
reiterate our conviction that it is impossible to continue
to pursue a negotiating process that rejects Palestine’s
aspiration to exercise its right to self-determination and
denies Israel the necessary safeguards for its people.
If peace is to be achieved, reopening the dialogue is
a challenge that must be tackled. The Council must
contribute to that, and it has a responsibility to help
to create conditions that can foster trust between the
parties.
We believe it is crucial to ensure that the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, sends a signal in support of initiatives that
can pave the way for a peace process based on specific
parameters and a definite timetable. In that regard, we
will support proposals aimed at arriving at a basis for a
consensus that can advance the peace process.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on
the subject of Palestine. We are also grateful for the
briefing by Assistant Secretary-General Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela continues
to be very concerned about and firmly condemns the
violent situation in Palestine. However, we want to
point out that the new cycle of violence affecting the
occupied territories is not the result of Palestinian
attacks on Israelis or of Israelis on Palestinians; it is
the product of a prolonged illegal occupation for nearly
70 years, during which the Palestinian people have
been denied their human rights and their right to selfdetermination.
It is regrettable that the United Nations has been
considering the Palestinian question almost since its
founding without ever reaching a political solution
to that bloody conflict. That fact should weigh on
everyone’s conscience, particularly those entities who
wield decision-making power in the Security Council
and have blocked the way to a political solution,
resulting in thousands of victims, including refugees
in neighbouring countries who are denied the right of
return.

15-31810

16/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel, the occupying Power, pursues its policy
of denying the Palestinian people their right to selfdetermination and a sovereign and independent State.
As long as they are deprived of their rights, we will
continue to see the repeated cycles of violence that only
produce more victims among the civilian population
and increase the bitterness, pain and frustration of
young Palestinians, one of the main elements fuelling
the extremist groups that are currently ravaging several
countries in the region.
Israel’s strategy is clear. It wishes to provoke
Palestinians into launching cycles of violence to which
Israel responds in a brutal and disproportionate way that
continues to oppress the Palestinian people, through
its unending settlement process. For that reason, we
condemn Israel’s aggressions of the past week, which
tragically left 34 people dead, most of them young people
aged between 11 and 22, and more than 1,400 injured.
We also condemn the recent demolitions of houses that
Israel has carried out in the occupied territory of the
West Bank, leaving hundreds of families homeless,
most of them children, who are now refugees. Such
acts are part of a deliberate process of colonization and
expulsion by Israel, an illegal practice that so far no one
has put a stop to.
We echo the recent denunciation by the Palestinian
Red Crescent stating that Israeli forces have deliberately
attacked ambulances and medical and nursing staff more
than 53 times, resulting in many casualties. Such attacks
have also destroyed 20 ambulances, in contravention of
international humanitarian and human rights law. And
the outrage does not end there, for the same report notes
that more than 24 ambulances carrying casualties were
blocked on their way to hospitals, an illustration of
the Israeli Government’s deliberate policy designed to
exacerbate the suffering it has inflicted during the past
seven decades of illegal occupation.
We condemn the attacks on holy places by
settlers and the Israel Defense Forces, such as those
on the Palestinian population attending the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem. These recurring acts violate the
agreement between Israel and the Hashemite King of
Jordan in his capacity as custodian of the holy sites of
East Jerusalem.
The humanitarian crisis in Gaza is also part of this
bleak scenario. The brutal blockade that its inhabitants
are subjected to shrinks its capacity for economic and
social development. The lack of opportunity and the

S/PV.7536

vacuum created by Israel’s relentless policies should be
a matter of concern for the Council and the international
community. Israel’s aim is clear — it wants to divide the
Palestinians and render the existence of a Palestinian
State impossible. The world continues to be shocked
by the devastating effects of Operation Protective
Edge, whose indiscriminate attacks on civilians
killed more than 500 children and left thousands more
injured and some who are still hospitalized, many of
them with a stunted future and no immediate hope of
being able to resume their lives and build a promising
life. Humanitarian organizations in Gaza continue
to report cases of children with severe psychological
trauma that persists despite the attention and care they
receive in health centres. Israel’s brutal campaign
of assassination, persecution and incarceration of
Palestinian children — I am talking about children, not
just men and women — is deplorable and unacceptable,
an act of brutality against innocents that constitutes
an act of State terrorism, a crime of war and a crime
against humanity for which its perpetrators must be
made accountable before an international tribunal.
It is quite paradoxical to note that, as the Quartet
is deploying its good offices to initiate peace talks, the
Israeli Government should unleash this new wave of
repression through generalized violence that hinders
the path towards a fair and lasting peace. We call on the
Security Council to take a position as soon as possible,
that it demand that Israel put an end to this new cycle
of violence and that it place the Palestinian population
under international protection, in accordance with the
Fourth Geneva Convention and resolution 904 (1994).
We must renew our support for the Palestinians’ appeal
that the life of their citizens be protected against the
continuing and systematic violence and attacks by the
occupying Power.
The despair that overwhelms Palestinian youth on
account of no political solution to the illegal occupation
being found is irrefutably demonstrates the need to
achieve a negotiated and inclusive political settlement.
Recurrent actions by Israel form part of a deliberate
strategy to deny the Palestinian population the right
to an independent State, since violence justifies its
objectives of expansion and domination.
Venezuela reaffirms its full support for the
right to self-determination for the nationals of the
State of Palestine, who should be able to live within
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant

15-3181015/18

S/PV.7536

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
The hoisting of the flag of the Palestinian State at the
seventieth session of the General Assembly is evidence
of the commitment of the overwhelming majority of the
States Members of the Organization to upholding the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
In conclusion, we should like to say that we support
all initiatives aimed at finding a permanent solution
to this conflict. It is vital that the Security Council
act promptly and urgently to give a new impetus to
the negotiations, taking into account the fact that the
non-resolution of this problem seriously jeopardizes
peace, security and stability in the Middle East. The
Council should assume its responsibilities. It should
focus on resolving this very serious issue, which is a
threat to international peace and security. We must act
in an honest manner if we, in the Security Council,
really believe in a two-State solution. The Council has
the authority to recommend that Palestine be accepted
within the United Nations as a fully fledged State.
Palestine needs to exist as a fully fledged State, on the
basis of a two-State solution.
The Security Council should issue a presidential
statement condemning the Israeli violence and calling
upon the Israeli Government to stop its violence and
profanation of holy sites, and it should adopt a resolution
calling for a sustained peace process. We are convinced
that the Council can and must take specific and urgent
action to assist Palestine and its people. It must break
the deadlock. By doing so it would be be taking a
courageous step forward— a step towards negotiations
between Israel and Palestine.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this emergency meeting.
I also want to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun for his very sombre briefing.
All peoples and nations of goodwill acknowledge
that the current surge in violence and killings in
Jerusalem has become a potent threat to international
peace and security. What began as clashes around the
holy sites has spilled into residential neighbourhoods
and the West Bank, with a rising death toll. That
carnage is complicating an already difficult situation.
We condemn the killings in unequivocal terms, and
call for calm on both sides. The parties must exercise
restraint, refrain from provocative actions and rhetoric,
and preserve the status quo at the holy sites.

16/18

16/10/2015

The indication at this time is that the root causes
of the violence must be addressed urgently and
comprehensively within the framework of a negotiated
political solution. Genuine efforts must be made to
restart the peace process. Both sides must work to
create the conditions that would facilitate that process.
In that context, we want to urge the Israeli authorities to
put an immediate cessation to settlement construction
in the occupied Palestinian territory. That is not only
illegal under international law, it constitutes a major
impediment to the search for a lasting peace. We call
on regional leaders and other States with influence over
the parties to encourage them to resume negotiations on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Quartet road map, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and relative agreements between them.
In this conflict the two-State solution is inescapable
and, indeed, inevitable. We take this opportunity to
reaffirm our support for a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Jordan for
convening this meeting and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for his briefing on the situation in Israel and
Palestine. In the open debate to take place here next
week, we will address at length the Israeli-Palestinian
issue. Today we want to highlight our extreme alarm at
the escalating situation and loss of civilian life in Israel
and in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
the actions by extremists at religious sites in Jerusalem.
We believe that the current state of affairs is due
to the Palestinian people’s hopelessness and despair
for the historic injustice imposed upon them, as well
as to the Israeli Government and settlers’ harsh and
unacceptable actions and the international community’s
failure to make any meaningful contribution to a
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The current violence is deplorable. We urge
all involved to avoid such actions, which merely
serve the purposes of extremist elements on both
sides. At yesterday’s press conference, Israeli Prime
Minister Netyanahu stated his readiness to engage in
negotiations without preconditions. It is our hope that
such negotiations will take place and that their basis
will be just and acceptable to the Palestinian leadership.
Recent developments in the Middle East are a cause
for great concern. If the surge in violence between
Israelis and Palestinians gets worse, the ramifications

15-31810

16/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

could be disastrous for the whole region. We strongly
appeal to both sides to disown the extremist elements
within their ranks and to reinforce political dialogue.
At this time, it is especially important for religious and
community leaders to increase their interaction with a
view to promoting peace and reconciliation. The main
responsibility of the Security Council should be to set a
course to revive the peace process, and strive to adopt
a resolution that sets parameters for negotiations and a
framework for a final status agreement. It is imperative
that we reinvigorate the peace process in order to end
the occupation and achieve a just and lasting solution
on the basis of two States living side by side in peace
and security, a quest, which, unfortunately, with the
accomplished facts on the ground and the expanding
settlements, seems increasingly to be mere rhetoric.
Finally, we are ready to consider the draft
statement that France will submit to the Council, in the
expectation that it will have some effect on the situation
on the ground.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): The latest dangerous
escalation of the situation in the wider Middle East
region once again shows us the importance of the
Middle East peace process. Lithuania is extremely
concerned about the continuing wave of violence and
killings in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We
strongly condemn the acts of violence committed by
all parties, and express our sincere condolences to all
those who have lost their loved ones in this deadly cycle
of violence.
Respect for international law, including international
human rights and international humanitarian law, is
paramount. It is essential to refrain from provocative
actions and rhetoric and to uphold the historic status
quo at the holy sites, including the Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount. The Israeli and Palestinian authorities
have the responsibility to restrain inflammatory
rhetoric, prevent the spread of hatred, and immediately
take all necessary measures to end the violence and
restart reconciliation between the two communities.
We urge both sides to commit themselves to
the path of negotiation and to seek new incentives
to reinvigorate the peace process without delay.
Incitement and revenge will only bring more revenge,
leading to more grief instead of useful solutions. The
task of the international community is to remain firm in
insisting that both parties commit themselves to peace
and dialogue. Real and concrete actions must be taken

S/PV.7536

now. We call on both, and in particular Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas, to do everything in
their power to stop the violence and take all measures
necessary to protect the civilian population.
During the extended Quartet meeting two weeks
ago, my Minister called on the international community
to help the parties to overcome their mistrust. Step by
step, they should relearn to walk together. It is important
for the parties to accept that an all-or-nothing approach
will achieve neither a solution, nor peace nor security.
The mediation role of the United States remains
crucial. The Quartet can and should contribute actively
to this process. Lithuania remains strongly committed
to a negotiated two-State solution of a sovereign,
independent and contiguous State of Palestine living
side by side with Israel in peace, security and mutual
recognition.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I should like first to thank the delegation of Jordan for
having requested the urgent convening of this meeting. I
also thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his
briefing today.
At the outset, I express Spain’s deepest concern
over the extremely serious situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and Israel. We profoundly regret
the loss of human life and strongly condemn the violence,
including acts of terrorism. In the face of this spiral of
violence, we cannot limit ourselves to considering the
immediate triggers; we need to look into its underlying
causes, undoubtedly including the political vacuum.
It is an urgent priority to maintain the status quo on
the esplanade of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, take measures
to ensure its preservation and enforce compliance with
the agreements establishing the status quo. We cannot
allow extremists to play the lead role. Jerusalem is a
holy city for Muslims, Jews and Christians and should
not be exploited by extremist elements for militant ends.
The international community should issue that
appeal unanimously and clearly. Spain greatly values
the role being played by Jordan to that end, and we trust
that a constructive dialogue with Israel will contribute to
restoring stability in the framework of the management
arrangement agreed decades ago. Jerusalem must serve
as the capital of both States, and it is critical to preserve
the spirit of tolerance that enables coexistence there.

15-3181017/18

S/PV.7536

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

How can the international community and the
Security Council contribute effectively to ending the
violence and averting wider escalation? Very little or
nothing can be done without the necessary commitment
of the interested parties. That is why the role of political
and community leaders in restoring calm and containing
animosity is essential. We therefore hope to see a greater
effort of moderation on the part of political leaders of
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to prevent a further
exacerbation of the situation. Cooperation on security
issues must be maintained.
Alongside the appeal for moderation, we must
avoid acts of incitement and the excessive use of force
in response so that the repression of violence does not
aggravate it. The international community should also
seek to protect lives and promote security. To that end,
we must consider the formulas or goals that could serve
objective — obviously, with the support of the parties
and help them to meet their responsibilities. It would be
a good idea for the Security Council to receive the legal
report being drafted by the Office of Legal Affairs to
explain the options available for the adequate protection
of the Palestinians.
However, no appeal to calm, no strategy of
moderation and no attempt to maintain the status
quo will halt the current or any future escalation of
violence in the region unless the parties are committed
towards a political endgame. That is an orientation
for which the support of the Security Council and the
international community is essential. The situation is
critical; we would not be meeting here today if it were
not. The Security Council cannot limit itself merely to
listening to responses and making yet further appeals
for non-violence and restraint.

18/18

16/10/2015

The time has come for the major issues that have
remained outstanding since the Oslo agreements to
be put on the table once again and for the Council to
promote the relaunching of a true peace process in the
Middle East. We are all aware that Spain’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation will preside next
week over an open debate of the Council on the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. Spain has
always believed that this issue must be debated at the
highest possible level, and has therefore encouraged
participation in the debate at the ministerial level. We
do so again today. The serious events of the past few
weeks fully justify the need for such a debate.
Spain feels that the Quartet must remain active.
Together with France and Malaysia, we believe that
another meeting in a broader format would provide
valuable elements for the debate on 22 October. Perhaps
the expanded Quartet could be preceded by a meeting
of the regular Quartet, as requested by the Russian
Federation. We need to consider creating political
prospects that will allow us to make significant
progress towards the two-State solution, which appears
increasingly fragile. Without a prospect of peace;
without the possibility of moving towards the existence
of two sovereign living side by side in peace; without a
path leading to an end to the occupation and to regional
normalization, it will be difficult to stop the violence
and to establish peaceful coexistence.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. I invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

15-31810
