United Nations

S/PV.6382

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6382nd meeting
Monday, 13 September 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Apakan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (S/2010/446)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-53060 (E)

*1053060*

S/PV.6382

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Peter Schwaiger.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2010/446)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Haiti, Norway, Peru and Uruguay, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mérorès
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti and head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mulet to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 8 September 2010 from His
Excellency Mr. Peter Schwaiger in which he requests
to be invited, in his capacity as deputy head of the
delegation of the European Union, to the United
Nations to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda.

2

I invite Mr. Schwaiger to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/446, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Edmond Mulet, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I have the honour
today to introduce the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/446) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), issued on 1 September.
Since the last such report was issued on 22 April
(S/2010/200), progress has been made in moving the
political process forward, maintaining the security
gains of recent years, and supporting humanitarian and
recovery efforts.
In spite of a fragile political context and a
difficult humanitarian situation, I welcome the decision
of the Government of Haiti to call its citizens to the
polls on 28 November. The elections represent a
significant phase in the process of consolidating
democracy and re-establishing the State since the
earthquake. The elections are also extremely important
because they will lead to the election of those who will
guide the State during the rebuilding effort over the
coming five years. It is therefore critical that they be
credible and legitimate, leading to the formation of a
Government and National Assembly that will enjoy
clear and unchallenged mandates.
It is also critical to encourage as wide a national
participation as possible. I have already asked the
competent authorities to launch a public education
campaign to inform and mobilize the electorate.
Through its good offices, MINUSTAH has contributed
to the emergence of a political consensus on the

10-53060

S/PV.6382

elections, and I commend the 66 parties and coalitions
that will participate in the legislative and presidential
ballots. That figure includes political parties that
initially sought the early departure of President Préval
but have now joined in the constitutional electoral
process.
In collaboration with the Organization of
American States, the United Nations Development
Programme and other partners on the ground,
MINUSTAH will do its part by providing logistical and
security support and coordinating international
electoral assistance in order to ensure smooth elections.
However, I would underscore the importance of
Haitian leadership in this area, and have already called
on the Haitian political actors and authorities — in
particular the Provisional Electoral Council — to work
in transparency and in compliance with Haitian law
and democratic principles.
The security situation in Haiti remains generally
calm but fragile. Despite an upsurge in crime since
12 January, the number of incidents is comparable to
that of 2009. However, weak institutions, the presence
of camps for internally displaced persons, an increase
in gang activity and the instability that characterizes
electoral periods in Haiti contribute to creating a
volatile security environment. I remain concerned by
the situation in the camps, where vulnerable groups —
particularly women and children — are liable to be
victimized by sexual and gender-based violence.
MINUSTAH
has
therefore
established
a
multidisciplinary Internally Displaced Person Camp
Unit that will act in support of the Haitian National
Police in maintaining security in the camps.
I should like to note, however, that it is impossible
to guarantee complete security coverage in the 1,300
camps by the staff available to the National Police and
MINUSTAH. The Haitian States estimates the number
of displaced persons to be 1.3 million. The Ministry of
Public Works, Transport and Communications and the
United Nations Office for Project Services undertook a
structural assessment of 230,000 buildings that revealed
that half are structurally sound and one quarter need
some repair work, while another quarter are
recommended for demolition.
In spite of these results, the return of displaced
persons remains slow, and reconstruction is being
impeded by the presence of debris and the lack of a
land register. With respect to the latter, decisive

10-53060

national leadership will be necessary in addressing the
problem of property titles and right-to-housing law. A
balance will have to be struck between emergency
services to the population and the need to encourage
their return to the communities or neighbourhoods they
came from. That will require, inter alia, the provision
of adequate shelter and basic services, particularly in
health and education, to motivate returns. At the same
time, forced evictions of displaced persons are of
concern. The Protection Cluster Working Group has
called for an official moratorium on forced evictions in
order to protect the rights of the most vulnerable
victims of the quake.
Since 12 January, the immediate humanitarian
needs of displaced persons have largely been met. In
addition to significant distribution of essential
humanitarian goods, more than 150,000 persons have
been employed in various cash- and food-for-work
projects. The humanitarian community has begun to
build sound temporary shelters. The United Nations
and its partners hope to build 139,000 such shelters by
mid-2011.
The vulnerability to hurricanes of displaced
persons and the population in general is of concern.
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team have
taken measures in support of the Haitian authorities to
prepare a response to the hurricane season, in
particular by creating logistical centres, prepositioning
emergency food rations, and assessing the vulnerability
of camps. The MINUSTAH military component has
also launched exercises to prepare for new disasters
and to update its contingency plans.
The Government of Haiti has developed its own
capacity with respect to the coordination of
humanitarian and recovery activities. The President has
created the Presidential Commission on Resettlement,
which he co-chairs with my Deputy, Mr. Nigel Fisher.
The Commission is working with the humanitarian
community on the development of a strategy and
operational plans to guide the relocation of displaced
persons living in camps. The United Nations country
team and the Prime Minister’s Office are working to
further integrate the existing humanitarian structures
into the national coordination architecture, led by the
Ministry of Planning. The Government has also
reactivated sectoral coordination groups (Tables
sectorielles), based on the priorities identified in the
Action Plan for National Recovery and Development.
Moreover, the leadership of the majority of

3

S/PV.6382

humanitarian clusters has
counterparts in ministries.

been

transferred

to

The Interim Haiti Recovery Commission,
co-chaired by Prime Minister Bellerive and former
United States President Clinton, was established on
21 April. At its most recent meeting on 17 August, the
Commission approved 29 projects totalling $1.66
billion. Eight of these have been presented by the
United Nations system, which must now mobilize more
than $200 million to implement them. At present,
excluding debt forgiveness, $506 million, or 18.9 per
cent of the pledges for 2010, have been spent.
I would like to remind Council members that the
co-Chairs of the Commission have let indicated that
efforts to speed up its work are limited by the slowness
of the financing promised at the New York conference
on 31 March. Now that several projects await
financing, I call on the donors to disburse the promised
funds rapidly.
In resolution 1927 (2010), the Security Council
called on MINUSTAH to provide the Government of
Haiti with logistical support and technical assistance.
MINUSTAH intends to provide this support selectively
in order to allow for the arrival of donors’ funding. A
plan has thus been developed to provide temporary
space and basic office equipment to the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security, to the judicial and
correctional institutions, to the National Police and to
local administrations so that they can maintain
operations. The cost of this logistical support is
estimated at $7.9 million for the current budget period.
That represents less than 1 per cent of MINUSTAH’s
budget proposal, which will be presented to the
General Assembly in the autumn. At the same time,
MINUSTAH and the country team will assist these
governmental institutions in preparing to submit their
projects to the Commission.
After this short survey, I would like to inform the
Council of the most recent developments since the
Secretary-General’s report was drafted in mid-August,
in order to give Council members as up-to-date an
overview as possible of the situation.
In the area of elections, MINUSTAH’s support
for the Provisional Electoral Council has allowed us to
stick to the current electoral timetable. Nonetheless, it
is a very tight schedule and the Council must continue
to comply with it to ensure that elections will indeed be
held on 28 November. The next important stages will

4

be the launching of the electoral campaign on
27 September and the posting of the electoral list on
29 October. I wish to draw the Council’s attention to
the complexity of the process of registering voters who
have lost their national identity cards, a significant
fraction of the displaced population. I have asked the
Office national d’identification and its partners to
redouble their efforts to allow the earthquake victims
to exercise their constitutional rights. The evaluation of
security has been completed in almost all the voting
centres. The National Police and MINUSTAH have
completed an integrated security and logistics plan, but
even if all the pledged fund contributions materialize,
we will still have a $2-million shortfall.
In the area of humanitarian issues, the
International Organization for Migration has registered
about 1.25 million displaced persons. Twelve thousand
temporary shelters have been built. A contingency plan
for the hurricane season has been prepared, including
pre-positioning supplies and food for about 600,000
people.
In regard to policing, I welcome the fact that the
National Police Academy’s twenty-second class has
begun training. When it graduates in seven months, the
900 recruits will join the ranks of the Haitian National
Police — 500 as police officers, 300 as corrections
officers and 100 as coastguards. Furthermore, in the
context of our efforts to arrest prison fugitives and
gang members, United Nations police officers
(UNPOL) are supporting the Haitian National Police in
sweeps about three times a week.
Since the issuance of the report, the United
Nations in Haiti has established an operational plan to
address problems of sexual and gender-based violence.
Training in this area has begun in recent weeks for
personnel in the Haitian National Police, UNPOL and
the military component, who are often the first
responders. Measures have also been taken to allow
personnel to refer victims to available medical
services. We have also begun a public information
campaign on prevention and what to do in case of rape.
At the same time, the Internally Displaced Persons
Camp Unit, staffed by 200 UNPOL officers, continues
to provide a permanent presence in six high-risk camps
housing 135,000 people, and to conduct daily patrols
of 70 other camps identified as priorities. An initial
sub-commission of the National Police is now
operating in the Jean-Marie Vincent camp — one of the
camps posing the greatest number of public security

10-53060

S/PV.6382

problems. Moreover, the military component is
mobilizing between 350 and 500 soldiers a day in order
to protect displaced persons.
Some modest progress has been made in the area
of justice in the last few weeks. The Court of Appeals
in Port-au-Prince is in session again after an
interruption of more than seven months. In addition,
26 lawyers have been enrolled in magistrate training in
France. I am concerned, however, about the continuing
absence of the Conseil supérieur du pouvoir judiciaire,
which, given its monitoring role, is a fundamental
element of judicial reform. I have requested the
Government of Haiti to formalize its establishment and
to name the President of the Cour de Cassation, which
oversees both the Conseil supérieur and the National
Magistrates’ School. It is important to emphasize that,
in the absence of meaningful progress in the area of the
rule of law in Haiti, MINUSTAH’s efforts to
implement its mandate will be in vain.
The MINUSTAH programme for reducing
community violence has begun to focus on the issue of
violence in displaced persons camps, especially those
adjacent to neighbourhoods that are priority areas for
violence reduction and those that have a particular
problem with gang activity. The Community Violence
Reduction Section is also partnering with the military
component to study a model for the relocation of some
of these zones.
In regard to support for State institutions, from
15 to 20 August the Civil Affairs Section facilitated an
inter-parliamentary visit of high-level parliamentary
administrators to the Dominican Republic to observe a
training course on the modernization programme of the
Dominican Congress. MINUSTAH has also evaluated
the needs of the delegations and vice-delegations in the
departments. I am expecting a report on that evaluation
in the next few days. Additionally, several United
Nations agencies have made technical staff available to
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission.
In spite of the devastation created by the
earthquake of 12 January, Haiti has not experienced a
second wave of epidemics or social unrest. This
relative success is nonetheless precarious. The Haitian
Government faces short- and long-term challenges,
such as organizing elections, maintaining order in the
camps, reconstruction and the issue of dealing with
rubble and debris, and relocating displaced persons,
which is largely dependent on the availability of

10-53060

temporary and permanent shelters. If it is to meet these
challenges, Haiti must be able to count on the decisive
leadership of its Government and the ongoing support
of the international community. Elections with results
that all Haitians can accept represent an important step
in that direction.
The President: I thank Mr. Mulet for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Mérorès (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for organizing this debate,
which demonstrates once again the Council’s interest
in Haiti. Allow me to also thank Mr. Mulet for his very
comprehensive briefing, which gave an overview of the
situation as seen from his privileged position in Haiti.
Mr. Mulet’s briefing was so comprehensive that it
is difficult for me to add anything. Indeed, the
challenges facing the Government have been clearly
described by Mr. Mulet. I will mention two: the issue
of the legislative and presidential elections scheduled,
as noted, for 28 November this year, and the
reconstruction work in the country following the
earthquake of 12 January.
Regarding the first challenge, the elections, on
behalf of the Government I can assure the Council that
everything will be done to organize credible and
transparent elections whose results are accepted by the
population.
It is obvious that the second challenge — the
recovery work — will necessarily require the next
Government to enjoy the necessary legitimacy to lead
the reconstruction process to a successful conclusion.
Regarding the reconstruction work, as has also
been stressed, the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission
is now functional. At its most recent meeting, several
projects were approved, as Mr. Mulet noted, although
we lack the funds to launch them. It is therefore clear
once again that the international community’s
contribution, in particular the fulfilment of the pledges
and the effective availability of the funds promised to
my Government at the 31 March conference, is
extremely urgent in order to ensure that the
population’s expectations are not disappointed.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/446), as
noted by Mr. Mulet, highlights the fragility of the

5

S/PV.6382

security situation. As there are 1.3 million people
displaced or otherwise affected by the 12 January
earthquake, the reconstruction work has become
increasingly urgent and necessary, and its impact on
the security situation cannot be underestimated. That is
why it is so important for the Government and the
international community to ensure that the amounts
pledged are made available to the Commission in order
to avoid any delay in the reconstruction work and to
ensure that there is no outbreak of violence due to a
failure to meet the population’s legitimate expectations
of better conditions.
As Mr. Mulet has said, much work remains to be
done. This will, of course, be a long-term effort. I
would like to assure you, Sir, and the members of the
Council that the Government is committed to ensuring
that this work takes place in good conditions. We know
that, there will be a new administration at the
beginning of next year, but the current administration
will nonetheless want to lay the foundations for the
new administration to be able to continue the work
already begun.
Regarding financing, as noted, only 18 per cent
of the pledges have been delivered thus far, and I know
that the co-chairs of the Interim Commission — former
President Bill Clinton and Prime Minister Bellerive —
have called on our international partners to increase
that percentage so that the projects that have been
approved can be implemented. In this regard, all I can
do is thank the countries that have already delivered
and, on behalf of my Government, call on those who
have not yet or have only partially done so to do so,
and assure them that the Government has done
everything possible to ensure a transparent and
peaceful management of these funds.
To conclude, please allow me once again, on
behalf of my Government, to express our appreciation
for the assistance we have received thus far for the
electoral process and for the reconstruction of the
country. I thank the international community as a
whole. I do not want to name names, but I cannot help
but mention the contributions provided by our
neighbouring regional and subregional communities.
That is what I have to add to the very
comprehensive briefing of Mr. Mulet, whom I would
again like to thank, along with the members of the
Council and you, Sir.

6

The President: I now give the floor to the
members of the Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his latest detailed
report on the situation in Haiti (S/2010/446). I would
also like to thank Special Representative Mulet for his
skilled and dedicated leadership and for his thorough
briefing today. I also thank Ambassador Mérorès for
his summary of the situation from the perspective of
the Haitian Government.
The United States expresses our strongest support
and deepest thanks to all the staff and personnel of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for their extraordinary work under very
difficult conditions. We share the view that the political
situation in Haiti remains fragile, but the progress
being made towards holding elections in November is
positive. We recognize the hard work of MINUSTAH
to push this prospect towards reality and to provide
broad support to the upcoming elections. Peaceful and
credible elections and the transfer of power to a new
Government will be key milestones in Haiti’s progress.
We also welcome the efforts by MINUSTAH to
assist the Haitian National Police and others in
providing a secure and stable environment, and we
commend their work to maintain general stability
throughout this very challenging period. The United
States is deeply concerned about vulnerable
populations in the internally displaced person (IDP)
camps and neighbouring communities, and especially
about the extent of sexual and gender-based violence.
Although we understand the difficulties regarding the
lack of reliable and comprehensive data, any level of
sexual or gender-based violence is unacceptable, and
we appreciate the ongoing efforts of MINUSTAH to
address this situation. We applaud the plan to utilize
the military component in a more community-based
approach, which, we agree, should have an impact on
sexual and gender-based violence in and around the
IDP camps.
Addressing the critical issue of sexual and
gender-based violence must be part of a wider effort to
empower women throughout the reconstruction
process, and we encourage MINUSTAH to expand its
efforts beyond the IDP camps and their vicinity to
other areas both in and outside Port-au-Prince. The
United States agrees that the increased flow of
weapons and drugs into Haiti is a destabilizing factor,

10-53060

S/PV.6382

and we encourage MINUSTAH to look at ways to
leverage its existing capabilities, wherever possible, to
help interdict this flow.

personnel allowed for the expansion of United Nations
police tasks, which is critical at this stage. In our view,
the level of authorized contingents must be maintained.

We understand that the deployment of military
forces, based on the increases authorized in resolution
1908 (2010), seems to be proceeding well. We look
forward to seeing their contributions to stability and
security.

It is reassuring that several measures have been
taken, and others are being planned, to ensure the
security of Haitians living in camps for internally
displaced persons (IDPs), in particular women and
children. That is of the utmost importance. We
encourage MINUSTAH to continue to focus on the
safety of IDPs, with special attention to protection
from sexual and gender-based violence. That task will
be made easier through enhanced community violence
reduction programmes and quick-impact projects.

The Secretary-General’s report mentions the
discussion of force drawdown. We recognize that this
increase is indeed temporary in nature. That said, we
believe that any discussion of drawdown must be based
on the security conditions on the ground in Haiti, on
the achievement of security benchmarks and, after the
hurricane season, on the completion of the elections
and the peaceful transition of power early next year.
The deployment of police forces has been
sometimes challenging, but it is largely on track. We
encourage nations to support resolutions 1908 (2010)
and 1927 (2010) and to deploy police in support of this
critical mission. The United States has 45 police
personnel in Haiti, and we are working to double the
size of our individual police contingent in the coming
months. We welcome contributions from other Member
States.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and, more important, for his dedication and
able stewardship of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) under very challenging
circumstances. I also thank Ambassador Léo Mérorès
for his remarks today.
The Secretary-General’s report before us
(S/2010/446) justifies renewed hope about the future of
Haiti. Despite immense human and material losses,
stability was maintained, the country is making
important strides in its recovery and key political
processes were resumed. The Haitian people are to be
commended for such accomplishments. Consolidating
these achievements and facing the challenges ahead
require strong leadership from the Government and
sustained international support in three priority areas:
security, recovery and reconstruction and elections.
The fact that the security situation has remained
stable is encouraging. We were also glad to learn that
the deployment of the additional troops authorized by
the Council is near completion. The surge in police

10-53060

Two other important areas merit the Mission’s
attention: the increase in the circulation of weapons
and the transshipment of certain drugs. The latter is
especially worrisome in the light of its potential for
undermining institutions upon which Haiti’s future
depends. In the long term, those problems can only be
solved through capacity-building and the strengthening
of Haitian institutions. We were therefore pleased that
900 new recruits began training at the Haitian National
Police Academy earlier this month. Efforts must be
redoubled to make up for the quantity and expertise of
personnel lost in the earthquake. We urge the
international community to further support the Haitian
National Police. I am glad to report that the Brazilian
Federal Police has been providing specialized training
to Haitian agents in several areas.
Eight months after the tragedy, it is reassuring
that the most urgent and basic humanitarian needs of
the Haitian population are being met. We are deeply
grateful to all those who worked selflessly and
generously for that to happen. Nevertheless, recovery
is far from finished, and reconstruction remains an
immense challenge. The most pressing need is ensuring
the best protection possible against hurricanes and
flooding. We note that several steps have been taken in
that regard, and we urge the Government and
MINUSTAH to stay focused on this matter.
For recovery to move forward and reconstruction
to gain speed, three measures seem to be of particular
importance: the removal of debris, the identification
and preparation of land for resettlement and the
immediate implementation of reconstruction projects.
Those aspects are interrelated and equally important,
but today I wish to briefly comment on the last one.

7

S/PV.6382

The setting up of the constitution of the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission and the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund were very important steps, and
we commend all those who made them possible. The
approval of the first batch of projects by the
Commission, surpassing $1 billion, testifies to the
Commission’s relevance. What is urgent now is to fund
them, and do so in a way that breaks a pattern of
international assistance that has not so far contributed
to strengthening the Haitian State. In that regard, it is
worrisome that, as reported, less than 10 per cent of the
assistance pledged so far is expected to be channelled
through the Haiti Reconstruction Fund. Brazil has
given $55 million to the Fund, including $15 million in
direct budgetary support. It is important that pledged
resources be disbursed quickly and that they be
channelled in a way that supports Haitian priorities and
institution-building.
While the operational capacity of the Government
is being restored, MINUSTAH’s provision of logistical
support and technical expertise to the Haitian
authorities as per resolution 1927 (2010) is of
particular importance. We were pleased to learn of the
steps taken in that regard and of measures now being
planned. In Brazil’s view, it is absolutely essential that
all efforts be made to provide such assistance as
efficiently and expeditiously as possible.
The November elections will be very significant.
They will further consolidate the notion of the regular
constitutional transfer of power and allow for the full
restoration of legislative mechanisms and the
completion of urgent constitutional reforms, thereby
helping to create a more favourable environment for
economic growth and investment. For those gains to be
fully realized, the vote must be free, credible and
transparent and held in a calm and secure environment.
We hope and expect that all political parties in Haiti
will act in that spirit.
MINUSTAH, the Organization of American
States and bilateral partners are already working
closely with the Haitian authorities to support their
preparations for the poll. Brazil has donated $500,000.
More financial contributions and constant political
support are needed. We urge all donors to be as
generous and flexible as possible.
Eight months after the earthquake, much has been
achieved and much more remains to be done. The
international community has a unique chance to assist

8

the people and the Government of Haiti in building an
effective State and further strengthening their nation.
We should seize this opportunity with determination
and from the long-term perspective of our common
interests.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to pay tribute to Special Representative
Edmond Mulet, to whose briefing I listened with great
interest. I commend his commitment at the head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). MINUSTAH, whose personnel work
tirelessly under conditions that continue to be very
difficult, plays a crucial role in Haiti. Mr. Mulet enjoys
the respect and trust of Haitians, and he should have
the full support of the Security Council.
I also listened with interest to the statement made
by Ambassador Mérorès, Permanent Representative of
Haiti. I assure him of France’s commitment to continue
its support for Haiti.
An electoral process has begun in Haiti since our
last meeting on this subject. As the Secretary-General
points out in his report (S/2010/446), it is essential that
the presidential and legislative elections be carried out
in the best conditions possible, so as to provide strong
governance for the country and enable Haitian leaders
to carry out the reconstruction effort. MINUSTAH is
already contributing to the ongoing effort by providing
technical, security and logistical support. We call on
the Haitian authorities to support the smooth conduct
of this process.
In that regard, MINUSTAH continues to play a
crucial role in various areas, including good offices,
maintaining public order, promoting human rights and
strengthening the rule of law, which, more than ever
before, should be at the centre of the Mission’s
mandate. This United Nations Mission demonstrates
the complexity of the mandates entrusted to
peacekeeping operations. However, in order to
continue to effectively perform its tasks, MINUSTAH
will need sufficient resources. In particular, we should
ensure that there are always enough police personnel.
That is vital to ensure the safety and security of
vulnerable groups; I am thinking in particular of
women, whose security must be a priority.
In Haiti, perhaps more than elsewhere given the
circumstances, the success of the United Nations
depends on good coordination of the various actors on
the ground. It is vital that the agencies, funds and

10-53060

S/PV.6382

programmes work in a coordinated way in their various
areas, whether they concern democratization,
development or security.
The New York conference in March opened up
prospects. The international community strongly
mobilized and commitments were made. We welcome
the establishment and the work of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission, thanks to which clear priorities
can be defined. As the Secretary-General underscores
in his report, it is extremely important that all
commitments be met. The donors, for their part, should
be kept informed of the needs and priorities that have
been identified. We must also continue to give our full
attention to assisting the hundreds of thousands of
displaced persons, who will have to live in camps for
an as yet undetermined time. The more time passes, the
more urgent it becomes to meet their needs, especially
for security reasons.
France is providing Haiti considerable assistance,
with $326 million for the period 2010-2011 and further
technical cooperation efforts in various areas, in
particular education, governance and the police. We are
also committed to strengthening the rule of law,
including by helping to train judges. Moreover, we are
making a large contribution to the aid given by the
European Union, whose representative will shortly
give the details; France associates itself, in advance,
with the statement that he will make.
France is also deeply committed within
MINUSTAH, including through the deployment of
nearly 140 gendarme and police officers, which makes
our country one of the largest contributors of police to
the Mission. We have also provided direct support to
the Haitian National Police and the firefighters, in
particular by sending 110 vehicles. Lastly, we have
deployed, in coordination with MINUSTAH, military
engineering capacity to help with clearing Port-auPrince and other urgent activities in that area.
France will continue its commitment to the
Haitian people and Government, in close coordination
with the United Nations. It will do so as part of a
comprehensive effort involving the State, and also
local communities including the French Caribbean
departments, non-governmental organizations and the
Haitian diaspora living in France.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the initiative to convene this debate on the

10-53060

development of the political, security and humanitarian
situation in Haiti. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his detailed report on those
issues (S/2010/446), and, lastly, to express my
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Haiti
for the particularly enlightening information and
analysis that he has shared with us.
Members will recall that at a number of
international conferences held on Haiti, including the
donor conference of 31 March 2010 and the conference
held in the Dominican Republic on 2 June 2010, the
Haitian
Government
committed,
before
the
international community, to organizing general
elections on 28 November 2010. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the steps taken to date by the
Haitian Government to create conditions conducive to
organizing that vote.
Thus, Gabon urges the Government and the
parties engaged in meeting this timeline to become
fully involved in completing the constitutional reform
process under way. Given the impact that the holding
of these elections will have on the recovery and
reconstruction process of Haiti, Gabon supports the
current coordination among the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the
Government and civil society in preparing those
elections.
Likewise, my country appreciates the efforts
made in that area by the international community. In
particular, we welcome the significant $390 million
contribution of the European Union and the
announcement of $200 million in financial assistance
made by the Union of South American Nations.
In terms of security, we are pleased that the
situation remains generally calm. However, my
delegation continues to be concerned about the sexual
and gender-based violence against women and children
and the resurgence of crime by organized gangs, linked
in part to the escape of prisoners. That is why we
support keeping MINUSTAH military and police
troops at their current level so as to ensure support for
the Haitian security and defence forces.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, in
particular that of displaced persons, we support the
Secretary-General’s appeal for the establishment of a
comprehensive strategy to resettle the earthquake
victims.

9

S/PV.6382

With regard to the recovery and reconstruction of
Haiti, my delegation encourages donors to meet their
commitments. The development of a stable and
prosperous Haiti will depend to a large extent on
keeping the promises made by donors.
Without doubt, the reconstruction of this country
is a challenge for the international community. From
that standpoint, Gabon supports efforts seeking aimed
at the Government’s effective implementation of the
Action Plan for National Recovery and Development
of Haiti.
Lastly, my delegation renews its support for the
action of the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
President Bill Clinton, and that of MINUSTAH and its
head, Special Representative Edmond Mulet.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Like
previous speakers, I would like to begin by thanking
Mr. Edmund Mulet for his very comprehensive briefing
and the commendable work that he has undertaken as
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). I also hail the presence of
Ambassador Mérorès at this Security Council meeting,
which we believe not only important, but welcome. I
would also like to point out that my delegation fully
adheres to the statement that will be made later by the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti; I will thus be able to limit
my comments in my national capacity.
Nine months after the tragic earthquake in Haiti,
the United Nations capacity to mobilize international
efforts and assistance to respond to the humanitarian
emergency and to assist with the recovery of Haiti has
been more than demonstrated, despite that country
having suffered, as we all know, great human and
material losses.
It is right to praise the Security Council’s resolute
response to immediately strengthen MINUSTAH’s
capacity with additional personnel, to expand its
activities within the current mandate and to give
greater technical, operational and logistical assistance
to the Haitian Government.
Even when, as we have just heard, the
Government of Haiti has redoubled its efforts to take
on a leadership role in coordinating the humanitarian
and recovery activities, as well as with regard to
measures to tackle unforeseen and natural disasters, it
is still necessary to strengthen the State’s capacity so

10

that it can shoulder all its responsibilities. Fortunately,
we have MINUSTAH’s support in creating the
political,
security,
protection
and
recovery
opportunities that will enable Haiti to move towards an
environment conducive to its reconstruction and
development.
Without doubt, MINUSTAH has been vital in
maintaining stability, promoting reconstruction,
ensuring the survival of the national institutions and
supporting the country’s population under tragic
conditions. However, Haiti will face many challenges
in the coming months, as we have heard the Special
Representative and Ambassador Mérorès mention.
Thus, we believe that the United Nations and the
international community will have to step up their
support and assistance to that country’s people and
Government so that those challenges can become
opportunities in order to help overcome Haiti’s
structural problems in the sphere of economic and
social development and its institutional fragility.
My delegation welcomes the political agreements
reached and the Government’s resolve to organize and
hold elections on 28 November. These will be decisive
to guaranteeing political stability, the rule of law and
the democratic process in that country. These essential
elements will contribute to the recovery and the socioeconomic development of the country. We agree with
the Secretary-General that it is essential to guarantee a
credible and legitimate electoral process, upon which
political stability largely depends. There is no doubt
that MINUSTAH has an essential role to play in this
process in coordinating international electoral
assistance; providing technical, logistical and security
support for the Provisional Electoral Council, in
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme, the Organization of American States and
other relevant international actors; and contributing to
generating the necessary trust in the process.
My delegation also supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that the current level of
MINUSTAH staff be maintained in order to guarantee
security and stability after the elections in 2011 and
until a new evaluation of the security situation can be
made. That will provide us with specific parametres
that take into account the post-election political
environment, the capacities of the National Haitian
Police, especially in protecting displaced persons, and
support needs related to assistance activities.

10-53060

S/PV.6382

The Mexican delegation has widely acknowledged
the need to restore the confidence of the Haitian people
in their institutions and to establish specific measures to
foster dialogue and national reconciliation in order to
create conditions in which Haitian society can achieve
its common future.

play in supporting the electoral process, particularly in
providing logistical and technical assistance for the
conduct of the election. The mediatory role played by
the Special
Representative in
re-establishing
confidence among Haiti’s major political actors and the
electoral process is commended.

Mexico encourages MINUSTAH to maintain its
support for the Government in capacity-building and
its advisory capacity to the Haitian National Police and
the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, as well as
to the main judicial and corrections institutions, in
order to move ahead in police reform; support essential
judicial services; manage controversies related to land
law, property disputes, disappeared persons, custody
and inheritance; and support Government efforts to
deter and combat organized crime and illegal drug
trafficking.

On security, we are pleased to note that the
security situation in Haiti improved during the
reporting period. The MINUSTAH troop increase
authorized by resolution 1908 (2010) and enhanced
operational activities contributed substantially to this
development. However, the continued existence of a
large number of camps of internally displaced persons
and rampant cases of sexual and gender-based violence
in these camps constitute security threats that should be
addressed urgently. Women and girls should be
protected and sexual offenders held accountable.

In conclusion, my delegation agrees with the
Secretary-General that Haiti’s reconstruction is a longterm project that will require the sustained support and
commitment of the international community and the
leadership of the Haitian Government. MINUSTAH’s
success and its drawdown will also depend on the
progress and feasibility of reconstruction, as well as
the establishment of institutional structures to support
the country’s capacities.

Illicit drug trafficking through Haiti’s borders is
having a negative effect on general development in the
country and should be effectively tackled. Sustained
international support is necessary to build the capacity
of local law enforcement agencies to enable them to
perform their constitutional duties, especially with
regard to effective internal checks, border management
and tackling the illegal weapons flow.

Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet for his comprehensive briefing and
remarkable work in a difficult and challenging
environment.
I
also
thank
the
Permanent
Representative of Haiti for the additional comments he
provided to the Council.
I will focus my remarks on elections,
humanitarian challenges and security issues. With
respect to elections, the positive atmosphere in Haiti
since the adoption of resolution 1927 (2010) and the
successful hosting of several donor conferences has
helped to create conditions favourable to the holding of
presidential, legislative and municipal elections in the
country before the end of 2010. There is, however, a
disturbing disquiet within the polity about the
modalities for the conduct of the election that must not
be allowed to derail either the electoral process or the
peace and stability achieved so far.
All stakeholders are encouraged to work towards
free and fair elections and a negotiated settlement of
their differences. The United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has a critical role to

10-53060

On humanitarian issues, as observed by the InterAgency Standing Committee in its July report on the
response to the humanitarian crisis in Haiti, although
Haiti’s relief operations have achieved many of the
objectives, humanitarian needs, particularly for shelter,
remain immense. A more comprehensive strategy is
therefore needed to address the plight of internally
displaced persons, provide humanitarian protection and
shelter, and meet their basic needs, including health
care, energy and education. Priority should be given to
women and children.
We welcome MINUSTAH’s collaborative efforts
with the United Nations country team and international
partners in working to strengthen the Government of
Haiti’s capacity to govern. We commend the cash- and
food-for-work projects, which have empowered over
150,000 people since the beginning of the year.
We also commend the important role played by
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission, under the
co-chairmanship of Prime Minister Bellerive and
former United States President Bill Clinton, in
channelling needed resources to the country. The
timely disbursement of funds donated at the March

11

S/PV.6382

2010 international conference will not only enable the
Government to implement its Action Plan towards
Haiti’s full recovery, but will also facilitate full
ownership of the reconstruction process by the
Government. In this connection, Nigeria will, in the
coming days, be presenting a check for $5 million in
fulfilment of its pledge made during the March donor
conference.
Considering the crucial role MINUSTAH
continues to play in Haiti, we support the renewal of its
mandate for one more year.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his briefing.
The massive earthquake that hit Haiti in January
this year dealt a heavy blow to the common efforts
being made by Haiti, the United Nations and the
broader international community. It is heartening to
see, however, that eight months after the earthquake,
the security situation in Haiti has remained generally
calm, recovery and reconstruction efforts continue to
be carried out smoothly, and the national Government
is gradually coming back to life. In addition,
presidential and parliamentary elections will be held in
November.
We note with concern that the country is still
facing multiple challenges and difficulties in the areas
of security, national reconstruction and economic and
social development. What is worth noting is the slow
progress in restoring national capabilities, especially in
the police, judicial and correctional systems. Indeed, in
some areas, crime is on the rise.
The period between now, through the November
elections to the transfer of power next year will be a
rather sensitive time for Haiti. We hope that the
Government of Haiti, with the support of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and regional organizations, will accelerate its
strengthening of police and judicial capacities and
remove hidden dangers in order to ensure that free,
credible and fair elections can be held in a secure and
stable environment.
Protracted abject poverty and the lack of
economic and social progress are the root causes of
Haiti’s difficulty in achieving long-term security. The
key to achieving long-term security in Haiti lies in

12

making substantial progress in reconstruction and
attaining the Millennium Development Goals.
In China, we say that one man’s distress is a
rallying cry for others to come to help. China, together
with the international community, has provided
assistance to the Government and the people of Haiti in
the aftermath of the earthquake. Reconstruction is a
long-term, complex and arduous process. Therefore,
the reconstruction plan needs the continued support
and assistance of the international community.
Accordingly, we expect the parties to fully respect the
need for the Government and people of Haiti to take
ownership of and bear the primary responsibility for
the process and to take fully into account the country’s
current conditions and requirements.
The United Nations should, on the basis of the
distribution of responsibilities, bring into full play the
roles of the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council and the United Nations Development
Programme; strengthen its cooperation with relevant
regional organizations; and, at the appropriate time,
consider the involvement of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission.
Over the past six years, MINUSTAH has played
an important role in the maintenance of stability in
Haiti. We appreciate the efforts made by Mr. Mulet,
MINUSTAH and the rest of the United Nations
personnel in very difficult conditions. While the
situation in that country remains fragile, we support the
continued presence of MINUSTAH. In turn,
MINUSTAH should focus on fulfilling its mandate,
which is the maintenance of security in Haiti, so as to
ensure that its limited resources will achieve maximum
results.
We agree with the ideas outlined in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/446) and hope that, in
connection with the security situation following the
transfer of power next year, the Secretariat and
MINUSTAH will carry out an assessment of the
strength, composition, resources and requirements of
the Mission.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his
thorough briefing on recent developments in Haiti and
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) (S/2010/446). We welcome the

10-53060

S/PV.6382

statement of the Permanent Representative of Haiti,
Mr. Mérorès.
We share the major conclusions and assessments
of the report. The political and socio-economic
situation in Haiti after the earthquake remains unstable.
The security situation, although calm on the outside,
remains fragile. Serious challenges also remain, such
as the presence of a large number of internally
displaced persons, difficult living conditions, an
increase in the activities of criminal gangs, and the
weakness of law enforcement agencies. The
preconditions exist for the emergence of social unrest,
particularly in the context of the upcoming electoral
campaign.
However, thanks to the efforts of the leadership
of the country and of the international community, the
Haitians have managed to avoid the post-earthquake
emergence of large-scale unrest and epidemics. Some
progress has been achieved in preparing the
parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled for
28 November. It is our view that MINUSTAH will play
an important role in ensuring security at the upcoming
elections and providing technical assistance in their
conduct. Moreover, the Mission should coordinate
external assistance in organizing the vote, together
with international and regional partners.
We are pleased to note that the urgent
humanitarian needs of the internally displaced citizens
of Haiti have generally been met. However, it is still a
subject of particular concern that about 1.3 million
Haitians remain in camps for internally displaced
persons.
The major responsibility for the recovery of Haiti
lies with the people of Haiti. In this regard, we
welcome the fact that the Haitian Government has
begun more actively to assume the lead functions in
coordinating humanitarian and recovery work. The
proof of this development was the establishment of the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and the ad hoc
Presidential Commission on Resettlement.
We appreciate the efforts of MINUSTAH and its
head, Mr. Mulet, in discharging the Mission’s tasks. A
significant increase in the size of the military and
police components of the Mission has allowed it more
reliably to provide security in camps for temporarily
displaced persons and to protect the most vulnerable
segments of the population.

10-53060

A serious destabilizing factor in Haiti is the drug
trade. Unfortunately, after the earthquake, the drug
transit routes were quickly restored. In this regard, we
support the measures of the Mission to help the Haitians
strengthen the guarding and patrolling of their borders.
We welcome the comprehensive support given to
Haiti by the countries of the region. We note the efforts
of the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
President Bill Clinton, to mobilize donor support for
the country. We expect the Mission and the United
Nations country team to soon prepare a comprehensive
strategic framework programme as a basis for
designing subsequent activities for the United Nations
system to provide assistance to Haiti. We agree with
the view expressed in the report that, following the
elections in Haiti and the arrival of a new president and
Government, a comprehensive assessment of the
security situation will be necessary for the purposes of
developing a plan to draw down the additional military
and police personnel deployed to the Mission.
Bearing in mind the scope of the tragedy that has
hit Haiti, we support the Secretary-General’s call on
the international community to continue to give
comprehensive support to that State until full
restoration of Haiti’s national potential.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to extend my appreciation to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mulet, head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
for his informative and comprehensive briefing. I also
would like to express my respect for the men and
women of MINUSTAH and the commitment and
fortitude they have demonstrated in the difficult
situation following the earthquake. I would also like to
state Japan’s appreciation for the statement made by
the Representative of Haiti.
In addition, I welcome the appointment of the
Governor-General of Canada, Ms. Michaëlle Jean, as
Special Envoy for Haiti for UNESCO, and the fact that
she will start her work in that role soon.
I welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
MINUSTAH issued this month (S/2010/446). As the
report mentions, the most immediate challenge in Haiti
is the organization of the presidential and legislative
elections scheduled to take place on 28 November.
Political stability is an essential component of the
overall stabilization in Haiti, and these elections are a
prerequisite for the achievement of political stability.

13

S/PV.6382

In this regard, the elections must be implemented in a
fair, transparent and secure manner and ensure the
broad participation of the Haitian people.
From that point of view, we encourage
MINUSTAH, in collaboration with the international
community, to provide the necessary technical, logistic
and security assistance to the Government of Haiti for
the smooth implementation of the elections. Japan
would also like to cooperate with the Government of
Haiti, MINUSTAH and the other international
organizations towards the success of the elections.
Japan commends MINUSTAH and the troop- and
police-contributing countries on their success in
maintaining relative calm in the security situation in
Haiti. At the same time, we wish to express our
concern regarding the occurrence of sexual violence
and violent forced evictions in camps for internally
displaced persons, the presence of escaped inmates
from collapsed prisons, and the increased incidence of
drug transshipment and kidnappings.
In that connection, we welcome the fact that
cooperation between Dominican and Haitian police has
been improved under the auspices of MINUSTAH.
Haiti cannot be reconstructed in the absence of a stable
security situation. We therefore urge MINUSTAH to
exert every effort to maintain a secure environment and
to provide sufficient capacity-building support for the
Haitian National Police. Japan also takes note of the
ongoing activities for the provision by MINUSTAH of
logistical support and technical expertise to rule of law
institutions of the Haitian Government, in accordance
with resolution 1927 (2010).
We acknowledge as well the opinion of the
Secretary-General that current troop and police levels
should be maintained until the assessment of the
security environment takes place after the installation
of the new Government. The mandate of MINUSTAH
will be considered for renewal in mid-October. Japan
will support the extension of the mandate and will
participate in the Security Council discussion on the
matter in a constructive manner.
The Government of Japan has dispatched
approximately 330 personnel, comprising a Japan
Ground Self-Defence Force (SDF) engineer squadron,
and this SDF contingent has made a contribution to the
reconstruction of Haiti by carrying out tasks such as
removal of debris, dismantling of damaged buildings,
repair of facilities in IDP camps and repair of roads on

14

the border with the Dominican Republic. In addition,
the Government of Japan has continued to fulfil its
commitment to the people of Haiti through the
provision of temporary housing, implementation of
counter-infection measures, food distribution and the
dispatch of disaster protection experts. The
Government of Japan also recently decided to support
border control capacity in Haiti by providing necessary
equipment to police stations. I strongly believe that
these activities will contribute to accelerating Haiti’s
reconstruction process.
More than eight months have passed since the
catastrophe occurred, and we recognize that
reconstruction efforts should be further accelerated,
ensuring
continuous
provision
of
necessary
humanitarian support to the Haitian people. There are
high expectations of MINUSTAH in this regard, and we
call on MINUSTAH to continue to utilize its maximum
capacity, within its mandate, for Haiti’s reconstruction.
We welcome the fact that the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission was established in April and
that it has begun its work to play a role in coordinating
the long-term reconstruction efforts. To realize Haiti’s
reconstruction, continuous international involvement is
essential. From that point of view, the Government of
Japan, in close cooperation with the Government of
Haiti, the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission,
MINUSTAH and the international community, will
continue to provide support for the reconstruction of
Haiti, drawing on its experience and knowledge as an
earthquake-prone country and placing particular
importance on the fields of education, medical care,
employment and rule of law.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive
briefing,
and
the
Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his additional comments
before the Council.
Bosnia and Herzegovina takes positive note of
the efforts of the Government of Haiti, which, with the
steady assistance of the international community, is
largely overcoming the immediate humanitarian and
security challenges that Haiti has faced in the period
after the earthquake. We commend the international
community on its efforts and commitment to address
the remaining challenges and help the people of Haiti
to build a prosperous future.

10-53060

S/PV.6382

However, much more has to be done in order to
address the fundamental consequences of the
earthquake. Haiti still faces a grim reality, with
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced (IDPs)
and a fragile political, social and economic situation.
In the coming period, which will be marked by
extensive reconstruction efforts and presidential and
legislative elections, it will be critical to ensure
stability and security within the country.
With regard to the forthcoming elections, both
presidential and legislative, which, according to the
calendar established by the Government, will be held
on 28 November 2010, we urge the Government to do
use all means at its disposal to ensure that the elections
are free and fair. Only credible and legitimate elections
will guarantee political stability in this critical period
for the country. The United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has an important role
to play in providing assistance to the Government of
Haiti in organizing elections in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1927 (2010). It is essential
that MINUSTAH, in collaboration with the United
Nations Development Programme, continue to provide
technical support to the Provisional Electoral Council.
Bearing in mind that the elections also constitute
a potential security challenge, the cooperation between
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police in the
preparation of an integrated electoral logistics and
security plan is commendable. The coordination role of
MINUSTAH in the context of international assistance
for the preparation of elections with other international
stakeholders will be essential.
Taking into account pre-existing conditions in
Haiti and the magnitude of the earthquake, it is
fundamental to ensure that the rebuilding of State
institutions takes place. Rebuilding and strengthening
the security sector and the judicial and penal system is
a basic precondition for stable and secure environment.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that without a
secure environment there can be no substantial
recovery and development. MINUSTAH’s assistance to
the Haitian National Police has played an important
role in providing security and is of utmost importance.
The cooperation between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police in providing the widest possible
coverage for camps for internally displaced persons
and in addressing violence against women and children
is commendable. With regard to the judicial and penal
system we support MINUSTAH’s efforts to provide

10-53060

assistance to the Government of Haiti with respect to
those institutions, which are crucial for the rule of law.
We share the Secretary-General’s view that a
major challenge to the Government of Haiti is the
sustainable resettlement of displaced persons. A
decisive commitment by the Government and
assistance of the international community in this regard
will be crucial in order to find a solution for this very
complex and delicate problem, which has an impact on
many other issues and could generate serious problems
if it remains unresolved.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
welcomes
the
establishment of the Interim Haiti Reconstruction
Commission (IHRC) which will coordinate mediumand long-term reconstruction in Haiti. It is crucial that
donors continue their commitment to Haiti. In this
context, we would like to express our sincere gratitude
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, former
United States President Clinton, for his efforts in that
regard.
In these challenging times, the United Nations and
MINUSTAH have played a central role in Haiti. It is
vital that the partnership between Haitian people and the
United Nations be further foster in order to preserve
positive developments and to meet the remaining
challenges. Only joint and timely efforts by the United
Nations and the Government of Haiti will bring tangible
results and secure a better future for this proud nation.
Let me in conclusion, on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, commend Special Representative Mulet
and United Nations and MINUSTAH personnel for
their tireless efforts and the important work they have
carried out to date.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2010/446). My
thanks go also to the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.
We are pleased that the Haitian Government has
decided to hold elections on 28 November, and we note
that the organization of these elections is possible from
a technical standpoint. We welcome the measures
undertaken by the Government, including appropriate
organizational decrees, the registration of parties
wishing to stand in the elections, and other relevant
steps.
15

S/PV.6382

We also welcome the role of MINUSTAH in
providing security assistance to Haiti, participating in
recovery efforts following the earthquake pursuant to
resolution 1908 (2010), and providing electoral
assistance in accordance with resolution 1927 (2010).
We thank the donor countries for covering the
$29-million cost of the elections and the countries
contributing troops to the Mission, and call for the
strengthening of its police contingent, which now
numbers some 3,000 officers, although resolution 1927
(2010) authorizes 4,300. A strengthened police force
will enhance the Mission’s ability to protect refugees
and displaced persons and to assist the Haitian
National Police.
We welcome the stabilization of the security
situation following the earthquake, which could have
unleashed social upheaval. However, security remains
fragile owing to the increase in mafia-type activities
following the escape of prisoners after the earthquake;
in violence, including armed aggressions, sexual
violence and others; and in drug trafficking, which
does not seem to have been affected by the earthquake.
We call for the strengthening of the rule of law and the
reform and promotion of justice.
We are alarmed by the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, especially in the refugee camps, where
1.3 million people are living in 1,300 camps. What
makes their situation even more tragic is the lack of a
plan for building permanent shelters in the near future.
We call on donors to honour the pledges they made at
the March donors conference as soon as possible. Haiti
has to date received only $506 million — barely 19 per
cent of the funds pledged.
We reaffirm the importance of the ownership of
the Haitian Government and people, and hope that
Haiti will be able to play a lead role in the recovery
process.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Edmond Mulet,
for his excellent briefing on the Secretary-General’s
semi-annual report (S/2010/466) and for all his untiring
efforts at the head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I should also like to
thank all the United Nations staff in Haiti for their
outstanding work in very difficult conditions. We owe
them all the support they require.

16

I also wish to thank the Permanent Representative
of Haiti for his presence here today. We welcome the
efforts of his Government to ensure political, economic
and social stability in his country.
Austria associates itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the representative of the European
Union. I wish to add the following points on behalf of
my delegation.
Since our last debate on Haiti in the Council (see
S/PV.6303), much progress has been made on the
ground. We knew that the current period was going to
be one of high risk, in which the objectives of security
and protection would have to be pursued as vigorously
as the organization of the elections and the
reconstruction of the country. I dare say that these twin
objectives have met with success so far.
Austria wishes to emphasize in particular the
importance of the efforts of MINUSTAH in the areas
of the rule of law and the protection of civilians,
especially women and children. Austria welcomes the
measures taken by MINUSTAH, in close cooperation
with the Haitian National Police, to protect internally
displaced persons in the camps. The increase in police
staffing authorized by the Council in resolution 1927
(2010) has had the desired outcome. All of
MINUSTAH’s operating procedures have been
reviewed in order to make them more effective in
addressing sexual violence, which we welcome.
Austria also recognizes MINUSTAH’s important
activities to assist the Government of Haiti in preparing
for and holding the presidential and legislative
elections, and in coordinating electoral assistance.
We recognize that, despite the significant
progress that has been made to date, much remains to
be done. We endorse the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the police and military contingents of
MINUSTAH will need to be maintained at their current
level until an evaluation of the security situation can be
made following the inauguration of the new President
and Government. The elections must be conducted
credibly, fairly and legitimately in order to ensure the
further stabilization and reconstruction of the country.
Austria reiterates the importance of the
participation of Haitian women in the electoral process,
and hopes that it will continue to be encouraged and
promoted.

10-53060

S/PV.6382

With respect to measures to protect the most
vulnerable, efforts must be pursued tirelessly and even
strengthened. We share the Secretary-General’s opinion
that a solid protective environment must be established
in Haiti, and we hope that the needs of displaced
children and the fight against their exploitation and
trafficking will continue to be given special attention in
protection activities. In that respect, we should like to
know more about the protection of civilians strategy,
which we understand is being updated by MINUSTAH.
We would be grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for providing further information
on the activities he foresees for that strategy.
It will be important, in addition to the measures
already undertaken to combat sexual violence, to finetune a comprehensive strategy to prevent sexual
violence and a package of support measures for the
victims. We therefore support the Secretary-General’s
proposal that the Ministry of Justice and Public
Security be assisted in establishing police substations
assigned to assist the victims of sexual violence. It is
equally urgent to improve current conditions in Haitian
prisons in order to reduce the prison population and to
limit excessive pre-trial detention.
For its part, Austria has mobilized almost
$17 million in contributions and humanitarian
assistance for immediate aid and reconstruction. A
portion of that sum has been made available to the
United Nations family, the International Committee of
the Red Cross and humanitarian non-governmental
organizations in Austria. Our citizens have also
donated almost $45 million to the victims in Haiti. I
wish to conclude by assuring the Government and
people of Haiti that the international community will
remain with them in their effort to build the new Haiti
that is beginning to take shape.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate, and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his comprehensive and helpful
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.
We commend the Special Envoy, President
Clinton, the Special Representative to the SecretaryGeneral and the staff of MINUSTAH for their efforts in
supporting the Government and the people of Haiti in
the delivery of basic services, disaster recovery and

10-53060

harmonizing critically needed international support in
the aftermath of the devastating earthquake.
We salute the Government and the people of Haiti
for their remarkable resilience. We are encouraged to
note that the immediate humanitarian needs of the
displaced population in Port-au-Prince and in the
regions have been largely addressed. We commend the
international community for the generous support
given and pledged to assist Haiti. However, we
recognize that significant challenges still remain. For
example, the country still faces the challenge of
resettling an estimated 1.3 million displaced people
and rebuilding infrastructure. It is therefore important
that the pledges made be honoured in order to help the
Government of Haiti bridge the gaps. In this regard, we
welcome the establishment of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission, which will play a central role
in coordinating medium- and long-term reconstruction
efforts. At this critical phase of recovery and
reconstruction, we would like to emphasize the
importance of effective coordination among the United
Nations agencies and international actors. The role of
the Government remains central, and it is important
that all concerned work closely with it.
The presidential and legislative elections
scheduled for 28 November will be a significant
milestone for Haiti’s stability. It is important to ensure
that they are peaceful and credible. In this regard, we
welcome the support extended by international partners
and the collaboration between MINUSTAH and the
United Nations Development Programme in providing
technical support and assistance to the Provisional
Electoral Commission.
One of the most pressing needs at this time
remains the provision of shelter and housing, and the
sustainable resettlement of displaced persons to
permanent accommodation. This is a multifaceted
challenge that will require adequate planning and a
comprehensive strategy.
We note that, although the security situation in
the country has remained generally calm, significant
threats still prevail, including from former gang leaders
who escaped from prison. We are also concerned with
the underlying problem of drug transshipment through
Haiti, which, if unchecked, will negatively affect
stability in the country. The strengthening of security
and of rule-of-law institutions must be supported in
order to tackle these threats. We commend

17

S/PV.6382

MINUSTAH for its support of Government efforts to
address drug trafficking through increased land and
maritime patrols, air surveillance and border
management.
Finally, we salute the men and women of
MINUSTAH, who, despite the difficulties and the
tragedy that befell them, have continued to play an
indispensable role in maintaining a secure and stable
environment.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing our gratitude to Mr. Mulet and the
personnel of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their ongoing efforts in
Haiti. The Mission continues to make an outstanding
contribution to alleviating the hardships Haiti has
suffered since the earthquake of January this year. As
we look to the Mission’s immediate future, we
welcome the preparatory measures currently being
taken ahead of November’s presidential and legislative
elections, noting in particular the importance of the
integrated logistics and security plan being devised by
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police. Haitian
involvement is, of course, central to this process; above
all, we underline the need for all Haitian parties to
continue to demonstrate their commitment to holding
free, fair and transparent elections.
The view of the United Kingdom is that the
primary focus of all United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including MINUSTAH, should remain the
provision and maintenance of a peaceful and secure
environment. As a consequence, peacekeepers and
peacekeeping missions should not make a lasting, longterm commitment to undertaking reconstruction work.
The Security Council has adjusted the Mission’s
strength to include additional engineering contingents.
This should be on the understanding that those
personnel actively pursue local capacity-building
initiatives in tandem with their recovery work.
MINUSTAH’s personnel must work alongside the
Haitian people and help build their capacity to
eventually take on this reconstruction work.
We note with concern the threat that the current
hurricane season poses for the many Haitians still
living in substandard accommodation. In this regard,
MINUSTAH’s disaster contingency planning is of vital
importance. We hope that this contingency planning is
developed, where possible, alongside the Haitian
authorities, and that provision is made for future

18

Haitian ownership, due to the unfortunate fact that
severe weather risks will be a regular threat to Haiti.
We are pleased to hear of the recent recruitment
of 900 Haitian National Police (HNP) trainees and look
forward to continuing HNP recruitment. The HNP’s
current lack of capacity is having a worrying impact on
the safety and security of vulnerable Haitians,
including women and children. In this regard, we
welcome the increased capacity of the United Nations
police to focus on protecting internally displaced
persons, and the efforts of the United Nations and the
Government of Haiti in producing a comprehensive
sexual and gender-based violence operations plan. The
HNP must get to a position where MINUSTAH’s
troops are no longer relied on as the main providers of
security in Haiti. MINUSTAH, for its part, must
continue to do its utmost to aid the development of
local policing capabilities.
The rehabilitation of the Haitian corrections
system has also rightly been identified as a key element
in the recovery process, and we are pleased to see that
donors have channelled some of their efforts into
making valuable contributions and progress in this
important area.
This serves to underline the continuing
importance of the role of the international donor
community in helping to re-establish Haiti’s
institutions and to invigorate its economy. In this
regard, we commend the ongoing work of Prime
Minister Bellerive and former President Clinton as coChairs of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission. The
maintenance of peace and security, as carried out by
MINUSTAH’s very capable peacekeeping troops, is
only one of the many strands that contribute to the
conditions necessary for successful recovery in Haiti.
Once MINUSTAH’s surge period has reached its
conclusion, in the next 12 months or so, we would
envisage the longer-term reconstruction work shifting
from a military peacekeeping operation to a mainly
civilian effort. The United Kingdom will continue to
give MINUSTAH its full backing during this crucial
phase.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Turkey.
I would first like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/446), and his Special
Representative, Edmond Mulet, and Ambassador
Mérorès for their comprehensive briefings. Let me also

10-53060

S/PV.6382

add our sincere gratitude for the strong leadership
Mr. Mulet displays at the helm of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Indeed,
Mr. Mulet and his staff are doing a most commendable
job in support of the Haitian people and Government.
Nine months have passed since tragedy struck
Haiti once again, but the enormous suffering it has
caused in Haiti is still vividly remembered in our
minds and hearts. Indeed, the magnitude of the
earthquake and the loss of human life and
infrastructural damage it caused are neither forgettable
nor easily surmountable.
Hence, we are glad to learn that the immediate
humanitarian needs of the displaced population have
been addressed to a large extent, although there
remains much more to be done. In particular, the
number of displaced persons is quite high, and a
sustainable resettlement plan has to be implemented to
protect this vulnerable group, especially women and
children.
That having been said, it is quite admirable that
the security situation has remained relatively calm,
although there seems to be a slight increase in criminal
activities such as drug trafficking. Haitians continue to
teach us important lessons of humility and humanity.
However, due to the high number of displaced persons
living in precarious conditions, we have to remain
vigilant so that the security situation does not
deteriorate in a way that would endanger the ongoing
humanitarian assistance and stabilization efforts.
In this context, MINUSTAH certainly has an
important role to play, and there is still room to
increase the number of troops and police officers
serving within the Mission to reach the levels
authorized by resolutions 1908 (2010) and 1927
(2010).
MINUSTAH should also keep on building the
capacity of the Haitian National Police, but no matter
who has the primary responsibility, we cannot expect
security to be maintained through military and police
means alone. Political and institutional stability are
equally important, if not more so.
Hence, the presidential and parliamentary
elections scheduled for 28 November will be crucial
for the future of the country. Haitians cannot live
forever in transitional periods where uncertainty
prevails and short-term actions are taken to meet

10-53060

urgent needs. They need and deserve a strong
Government and a functioning parliament that will
provide long-term stability. Thus, MINUSTAH should
continue to help the Haitian authorities in the
preparation of the elections and provide technical,
security and logistical support to the Government and
the Provisional Electoral Council.
Along with political and institutional stability, we
should also not forget long-term recovery and
development activities. The international community
has responded quickly and quite effectively to the
emergency situation in Haiti, but we have to do even
better in coordinating financial assistance from donors,
technical support from United Nations agencies and
MINUSTAH and the reconstruction plans of the
Government. Also, the pledges made at the donor’s
conference should be made readily available whenever
and wherever they are needed, with a long-term
commitment.
In conclusion, the international community,
including MINUSTAH and the Haitian authorities, has
so far responded well to the challenges compounded by
the earthquake. But there is a need — and there is
room — to do better. Turkey remains ready to support
all efforts in that direction.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, comprising
Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, France, Mexico,
Peru, the United States and my country, Uruguay, my
delegation would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Turkey for having
taken the initiative to organize this timely debate on
the situation in Haiti, as laid out in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/446) on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). This debate highlights, once again, the
continued strong commitment of the Security Council
and the international community as a whole to the
stabilization process in Haiti.
As coordinator of the Group of Friends of Haiti, I
would like to convey the Group’s greetings to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Edmond Mulet, and to thank him for his

19

S/PV.6382

comprehensive and informative briefing today. I would
make particular mention of his extraordinary service in
leading United Nations efforts in Haiti since the tragic
earthquake of 12 January. I want to thank him and all
the personnel of MINUSTAH for their dedication and
selfless sacrifice. Allow me also to thank the
Permanent Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Léo
Mérorès, for his valuable briefing this morning.
Before sharing with the members of the Security
Council the Group’s views on the issues underlined by
the Secretary-General in his most recent report, let me
reaffirm, once again, the Group’s continued support to
the Government and people of Haiti as they rebuild
their country, build peace and stability and promote
recovery and sustainable development.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General,
dated 1 September 2010, highlights the progress made
in the implementation of MINUSTAH’s mandate, as set
out in Security Council resolutions 1892 (2009), 1908
(2010) and 1927 (2010). It also provides a framework
for the evolution of the Mission over the coming year,
including through the identification of milestones with
respect to the fulfilment of the mandate of
MINUSTAH.
As regards political issues, our Group shares the
Secretary-General’s assessment that Haiti is now
entering a period of change that will be critical to its
future political stability. The Group of Friends of Haiti
stresses the importance of holding peaceful and
credible presidential and legislative elections leading
to the election of a President and Government with a
clear and firm mandate to effectively lead the country’s
reconstruction process.
The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes the
activities in support of Haiti’s recovery and
development undertaken by MINUSTAH in close
cooperation with the United Nations country team
during the reporting period.
The Group also welcomes the establishment of
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission to coordinate
and oversee recovery and reconstruction efforts in the
country. As the report points out, to date, of the total
funds pledged for 2010, 18.9 per cent, or
approximately $506 million, has been disbursed, and
an additional 19.5 per cent, or $523 million, has been
committed.

20

In spite of some progress in the disbursement of
pledges made at the international donors conference
held in March, the Group of Friends of Haiti urges
donors to fulfil their pledges in a timely manner in
order to allow Haiti to meet its immediate needs and
lay the foundations for sustainable economic and social
development. The Group of Friends of Haiti also urges
donors to continue to help the Haitian Government to
strengthen its capacity to implement its Action Plan
and thereby take ownership of the reconstruction
process, including through the support of the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission and the Haiti
Reconstruction Fund.
The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates the
importance of MINUSTAH’s role in providing
logistical support and technical expertise to assist the
Government of Haiti to build the capacity of its rule of
law institutions and to contribute to the implementation
of its strategy for the resettlement of displaced persons.
At the same time, the Group notes the importance of
the swift implementation of those measures, given their
temporary nature and the fact that they will be phased
out gradually as the country’s national capacity grows.
Finally, the Group of Friends of Haiti stresses the
need to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH in order to
enable that stabilization Mission to continue to
discharge its responsibilities within the current
environment. The Group of Friends of Haiti also shares
the Secretary-General’s view that current troop and
police levels need to be maintained until an assessment
of the security environment is conducted following the
installation of a new President and Government. In that
regard, in the coming days the Group will submit a
new draft resolution on the renewal of MINUSTAH’s
mandate for the consideration of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Peter
Schwaiger, deputy head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Schwaiger (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the European
Union to participate in today’s debate.
I welcome the important statements made this
morning by His Excellency Mr. Léo Mérorès,
Permanent Representative of Haiti, and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mulet.
The candidate country of Turkey; the countries
members of the Stabilization and Association Process

10-53060

S/PV.6382

and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
I shall now read out an abridged version of the
European Union’s statement. The full statement will be
distributed in hard copy.
I should like to emphasize three elements that
seem to me to be crucial: first, the future of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH);
secondly, the contribution of the European Union and
its commitment in the long-term; and, thirdly,
coordination among contributors. Before I turn to those
three points, allow me to commend Mr. Mulet and his
team for the quality of the report before us
(S/2010/446) and for the outstanding work done to date
by MINUSTAH. On behalf of the European Union, I
should like to pay sincere and heartfelt tribute to all
United Nations staff who have worked tirelessly since
the tragedy in Haiti.
Haiti is entering a decisive stage towards its
future stability and the success of its reconstruction.
Without stability, all of our reconstruction efforts will
be in vain. The greatest challenge in the short term will
be the holding of free and transparent elections. A
proper transfer of power to the new authorities and the
strengthening of institutions to implement and enforce
the rule of law and provide greater protection to
displaced persons and vulnerable groups are also
urgent priorities. MINUSTAH continues to have a
major role to play in that regard.
The European Union strongly welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General with regard
to extending the Mission’s mandate and maintaining
the current force level of military and security
personnel. Only after elections are held and a full
report of needs is made will we be able to reassess the
situation with regard to staffing levels and to
reconsider MINUSTAH’s tasks in order to ensure a
gradual and realistic transfer of responsibilities.
Likewise, the European Union fully endorses the
strategy put forward with regard to protecting
displaced persons, especially women and children. In
that regard, the European Union underscores the
importance of the steps taken by MINUSTAH, in close
cooperation with the Haitian National Police, to
address sexual and gender-based violence and the
grave violations of the rights of children.

10-53060

Short- and long-term reconstruction will be a
determining factor in the country’s social stability. At
the international donors conference held in New York,
the European Union and its member States committed
themselves to contributing €1.235 billion to Haiti’s
Action Plan, of which €460 million will come directly
from the European Union’s budget. I have the pleasure
to announce to the Council today that the latter figure
has been reviewed and increased to €522 million,
making the European Union one of the largest donors.
Of that amount, the European Commission has already
mobilized €307 million and is working tirelessly to
mobilize the entire amount, while keeping in mind our
Haitian partners’ capacity to absorb it.
We are also providing budgetary support in the
amount of almost €60 million to cover current
expenditures in the areas of health, education and
security, as well as to restore the Government’s
capacities in the wake of the disaster.
In addition, we are prepared to provide financial
support for the holding of elections with about
€5 million from the European Union’s budget, as well
as to contribute to a secure environment by
maintaining the police forces we have already
deployed, in particular Italian carabinieri forces and
French gendarmes. Only if elections are carried out
legitimately and in a transparent manner will the
results be acknowledged and accepted by all and the
country’s social and political stability maintained.
On the humanitarian front, the European Union
will also remain committed to responding to the urgent
needs of victims throughout 2011.
Lastly, the European Union is currently preparing
a new strategic cooperation document, in close
coordination with the Haitian Government, with a view
to establishing a good example of effectiveness for our
assistance, based on a clear division of labour, and to
resolutely making a contribution to the country’s
future.
Allow me to finish with a third element that is
equally central to us: the need for coordination among
donors. In that regard, the European Union welcomes
the establishment of the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission and commits itself to full participation in
its work. The idea is clearly not to create an extra
administrative and bureaucratic layer, but to truly
strengthen local capacities and gain quick results,

21

S/PV.6382

while ensuring monitoring and follow-up by the
relevant ministries.
In that context, the European Union advocates
closer coordination between the Commission and the
Haitian ministries, with a view to better aligning
reconstruction with State sectoral strategies and the
Haitian people’s ownership of the reconstruction. That
link should also help strengthen the capacities of the
Haitian administration, which was severely struck by
the earthquake.
In conclusion, our role, as the international
community, is to help the country rebuild its future for
the better on the basis of the action plan that was
submitted to us on 31 March. Four months later, the
European Union has begun to translate its promises
into tangible reality, working closely with the Haitian
Government and the United Nations family.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking the
initiative to organize this meeting. I would also like to
acknowledge
the
presence
of
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mulet,
and to thank him and his team for their extraordinary
work in Haiti. Canada would also like to thank the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the funds and programmes of the
Organization for the exceptional work they are doing.
Haiti continues to be one of Canada’s top foreign
policy priorities. Our engagement in Haiti emphasizes
prosperity, security and democratic governance. Haiti
is the leading recipient of Canadian development
assistance in the Americas and the second worldwide.
This support was greatly strengthened in the aftermath
of the January 2010 earthquake. In that context,
Canada announced a contribution of $400 million for
reconstruction at the New York conference in March
and deployed additional personnel to MINUSTAH.
Canada continues to work together with the
Haitian Government and the international community.
The principles guiding that work are those of the
Montreal
Conference
on
Haiti:
ownership,
coordination, sustainability, effectiveness, inclusiveness
and accountability.
One of the major challenge Haitians will soon
have to face is that of the upcoming presidential and

22

legislative elections, to be held on 28 November.
Canada supports the Haitian people, who want
transparent and inclusive elections. Strong democratic
institutions and good governance, guided by capable
leaders who have the trust of the people, are essential
in order to ensure the success of reconstruction in
Haiti.
Canada also supports the electoral observation
missions of the Organization of American States and
the Caribbean Community, which demonstrate
unparalleled hemispheric solidarity with Haiti — a
solidarity that serves as a true lever of change by
helping the Haitian people in their development.
Although living conditions for many Haitians are
still precarious, it is important to underscore that, in
large part, most of the immediate humanitarian needs
were met. Reconstruction and development efforts are
also moving ahead. But the Government of Haiti and
its international partners will have to deal with some
considerable challenges, such as land issues, in order to
continue on that path.
We are pleased, however, to be able to count on
the leadership of the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission, co-chaired by the Prime Minister and the
United Nations Special Envoy. Canada encourages
donors to align their efforts with the Interim
Commission so as to facilitate coordination, avoid
duplication and ensure that the capacity exists to
absorb funds on the ground. But as the SecretaryGeneral underscores in his latest report on
MINUSTAH (S/2010/446), consolidating these gains
will depend, in large part, on sustained support from
the international community, including through
MINUSTAH.
In the light of the Secretary-General’s most
recent report and in anticipation of the renewal of the
Mission’s mandate in October, Canada stresses to the
Council that we support the Secretary-General’s
cautious approach of maintaining Mission personnel at
their current level until the security environment has
been assessed following the inauguration of the new
President and the new Government. We will be
especially interested in the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on any eventual need to make
changes to the composition of surge resources.
The Secretary-General also underscores the
authority given to MINUSTAH to provide direct
logistical support and technical expertise to Haitian

10-53060

S/PV.6382

officials, although this is temporary. Because the
earthquake dealt a serious blow to the country’s
bureaucracy and State infrastructure, it will be
important to allow MINUSTAH to continue to play that
role until other support mechanisms can take over. This
temporary direct support to Haitian authorities must be
part of a process of constructive cooperation with the
host Government that seeks, through training and
mentoring, to build that Government’s capacity to
maintain stability and deliver services to its citizens.
(spoke in English)
Canada would also like to stress the importance it
places on the continuation of MINUSTAH’s work to
strengthen Haiti’s justice and security systems in the
areas of the police, penitentiary, border and correction
services. For example, we must revisit efforts to reform
the national police. We recall that the SecretaryGeneral presented a consolidation plan in his report
last year (S/2009/439). It is important that MINUSTAH
be able to continue to identify and pursue objectives in
those areas based on that plan, in cooperation with
Haitian partners.
In a post-quake context, we must re-examine
challenges such as the reform of the Haitian National
Police. Any progress in the legal and security realms
will help reconstruction and development in Haiti and
is a necessary framework in which to hold the
upcoming elections.
In that regard, Canada is pleased to have
significantly increased its personnel deployed to
MINUSTAH, in addition to having increased by
$10 million funds that will be used to rebuild key
infrastructure of the judicial system and the National
Police.
To conclude, Canada will continue to work with
our partners to ensure that MINUSTAH continues to
assist Haiti on the path to reconstruction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes your initiative to convene this
open debate today, as well as the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/446) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Colombia
reaffirms its commitment to the international efforts to
assist Haiti both in the recovery and reconstruction
phases. The Government of Colombia is aware that the

10-53060

magnitude of the tragedy that affected Haitian society
requires long-term coordinated action beyond the
emergency humanitarian assistance stage.
I wish to highlight the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 1927 (2010), which stresses the
leading role of Haiti’s Government in the recovery,
reconstruction and stabilization process, and underlines
the need for the increased coordination of the efforts of
all United Nations entities and, in general, all other
organizations committed to assisting Haiti’s recovery.
Colombia welcomes the Council’s decision to
give MINUSTAH a leading role in coordinating
international electoral assistance to support the Haitian
Government in conducting the presidential and
legislative elections that will take place on
28 November. My country supports efforts to ensure
that this democratic process will be held in a free,
impartial and inclusive manner.
Despite progress made in delivering emergency
humanitarian assistance and early recovery activities,
the fundamental consequences of the earthquake will
require sustained international commitment. My
Government congratulates the Office of the Special
Envoy for its work to ensure coherence across United
Nations operations in Haiti and to persuade donors and
non-governmental organizations channel resources for
direct budget support for the Government of Haiti.
For its part, Colombia has been coordinating
efforts with the Haitian Government and community
and with other States and organizations working on the
island. The deployment of the Government of
Colombia, with the support of civil society and the
private sector, to provide humanitarian aid to Haiti was
very broad. For Colombia, complementing emergency
and stabilization actions with cooperation and technical
assistance is of the utmost importance in strengthening
and developing the institutional capacities of the
country.
My country continues to move towards the
materialization of its proposal to conduct a pilot
intervention in the town of Cabaret, adjacent to Portau-Prince. Based on previous experience in managing
natural disasters, the proposal would implement an
integrated multisectoral development model that would
not only rebuild affected infrastructure, but at the same
time target economic and social development and
strengthen governance, peace and security with the
participation of the affected population and authorities.

23

S/PV.6382

Strengthening institutional architecture in Haiti is
as important as contributing to its physical
reconstruction. Strengthening the Haitian National
Police is a step in the right direction and a response to
current challenges, in particular those of protecting
displaced persons and vulnerable groups, fighting
crime and managing the borders. Colombia recently
expanded the number of police officers participating in
MINUSTAH, including 34 police specialists in the
fight against transnational organized crime who are
currently in the field.
Along those same lines, holding credible and
legitimate presidential and legislative elections will
grant the new Government a clear and uncontested
mandate to lead the reconstruction process, and
contribute to the political stability necessary for
recovery and renewed economic and social
development. The international community must
honour its commitment to supporting the electoral
process. The reconstruction of Haiti is a long-term
project that will require strong leadership from the
Government and sustained support from the
international community. The success of MINUSTAH
and its subsequent withdrawal will depend on progress
in the reconstruction and restoration of infrastructure
and the State’s capacities to ensure lasting stability.
My delegation wishes to send a message of
solidarity to the Government and people of Haiti and to
express its recognition of their ability to overcome this
devastating disaster and to advance in the
implementation of the Action Plan for National
Recovery and Development, which identifies priority
areas for progress in the recovery and development of
the country. Our task is to welcome the Action Plan as
the road map to guide all actions in the field.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
the Uruguayan representative on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, and congratulates the Security
Council for the timely organization of this open debate
on the situation in Haiti, especially as we prepare to
debate the need to renew the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We also welcome the report of the Secretary-General in
document S/2010/446 and the very comprehensive
briefing of the Special Representative of the Secretary-

24

General for Haiti, Mr. Edmond Mulet, whom we
welcome and thank for his magnificent work in Haiti.
As noted by the Uruguayan delegation, this
debate demonstrates the commitment of the Council
and the international community to the reconstruction
process in Haiti, and gives us an opportunity to
exchange opinions on the report and on how to
evaluate the Mission and our participation in it.
In the light of the observations of the SecretaryGeneral in his report, my delegation would like to
stress two aspects of the report in particular that we
consider essential. Despite the progress made in Haiti’s
reconstruction through the efforts of MINUSTAH, the
Government of Haiti and other United Nations
agencies, serious challenges and difficulties remain
that could threaten the progress made so far in the
political, socio-economic and security sectors. We are
facing an extremely fragile situation that must be
addressed comprehensively through development and
the strengthening of national capacities and security.
The Secretary-General has stressed the problem
of resettling displaced persons and those living in
camps, highlighting underlying social and economic
problems that cannot and must not be underestimated.
Any effort to address the various problems should be
coordinated and aligned with national strategies and
national priorities, as established in the Action Plan for
National Recovery and Development of Haiti. In that
context and without neglecting security concerns,
complementary efforts to establish a solid basis for
Haiti’s economic recovery and growth and sustainable
development must be increased.
Accordingly, the work undertaken to engage and
include all local public and private stakeholders is
highly important, and we congratulate the Government
of Haiti for its efforts. My delegation has expressed its
conviction of the importance of establishing a strategic
alliance between the public and private sectors in Haiti
that could contribute to strengthening institutions in
that sister nation while guaranteeing its stability,
security and sustainable development.
It is also clear from the report of the SecretaryGeneral that it is crucial that cooperation be continued
if the institutional capacity of the Government of Haiti
is to be restored, improved and strengthened
throughout the country. It is therefore essential to
encourage and support constitutional reform and the

10-53060

S/PV.6382

electoral process as indispensable bases for solid
governability.
In order to respond to these challenges in the best
way possible, it is necessary for MINUSTAH to pursue
its work. We thus consider that its mandate should be
renewed and that the greatest support possible given
for its activities by the international community. Along
these lines, Peru, aware of the need to strengthen the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, has
increased its troop contribution by another 150 soldiers
to cooperate in MINUSTAH’s work.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that Peru is
firmly and steadfastly committed to strengthening the
recovery, stability and development of Haiti.
The President: I call on the representative of
Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you first of all for
convening this debate on the situation in Haiti, a
brother country that in recent months has had to
respond to the great challenges posed by the
devastating earthquake it suffered in January.
I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his
comprehensive briefing and for the huge work he and
his team have been carrying out in Haiti. I thank him
very much. We would also like to thank Ambassador
Mérorès of Haiti for outlining his Government’s view
on the main challenges that it faces.
With special gratitude, Chile associates itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
and takes this opportunity to reaffirm our ties with
Haiti and its efforts at reconstruction, peacebuilding
and long-term development.
Chile’s participation in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
constitutes an expression of our resolute commitment
to multilateralism in a concerted response of the
international community represented in the major
forum of the United Nations. It is also an expression of
the importance of that region to our foreign policy.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/446), one of the main challenges facing Haiti
will be the holding of presidential and legislative
elections in November. We trust that peaceful elections

10-53060

will contribute to the consolidation of an atmosphere of
political stability. The full validity of the democratic
system and the strengthening of the rule of law will no
doubt constitute essential elements in the success of the
recovery and long-term development efforts being
carried out in the country.
We take this opportunity to recognize the
important work of MINUSTAH in such areas as the
protection of vulnerable groups, including women and
children, community violence reduction and enhanced
support for State institutions, inter alia. We also voice
our support for the renewal of MINUSTAH’s mandate.
We believe that attention should be paid to the
link between security and development because the
consolidation of sustainable security conditions will
depend in no small measure on the existence of
opportunities and better living conditions for the
population. We value the contributions that the
Economic and Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti can offer on this matter.
All international efforts must be aligned with
definitions set forth by the Government of Haiti in line
with the principle of national ownership of the
country’s reconstruction and long-term development.
We take this opportunity to acknowledge the leadership
of the Haitian Government in its response in long-term
reconstruction and development processes.
Chile favours direct action to support Haitian
women, whose ability to play a central role will make a
huge contribution to the reconstruction process. We
support the work carried out by MINUSTAH with the
Ministry of Women’s Affairs and Rights and local
authorities, including the provision of legal assistance
to women and young people who are victims of
violence. In accordance with our national plan for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), we reiterate the importance of developing
sustainable initiatives that will reinforce and promote
the involvement of women in MINUSTAH’s activities.
The President: I call on the representative of
Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September, and to express my thanks for
the opportunity to participate in this meeting on the
current situation in Haiti and the challenges facing the

25

S/PV.6382

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in the light of the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/446). I would also like to
thank his intermediary, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his
briefing and, above all, for his ongoing laudable work
as head of MINUSTAH. I also thank Ambassador Léo
Mérorès for his briefing this morning.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of the Eastern
Republic of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, so I would only like to add a few additional
comments.
In that regard, let me reiterate the firm
commitment of Argentina to Haiti — a commitment
that has endured for 16 years and is expressed today by
our continued participation in MINUSTAH. Following
the earthquake in January, we have deployed to the
Mission an additional infantry company of 150 military
personnel to assist in the distribution of humanitarian
aid to the Haitian population.
We endorse the terms of the reconfiguration of
the mandate of the Mission authorized by this Council
in resolutions 1908 (2010) and 1927 (2010), and share
the view expressed by the Secretary-General in his
report that the best time to assess the advisability of
modifying the current mandate and troop level of the
Mission will be after the legislative and presidential
elections in November and the installation of the new
president and Government.
Similarly, my delegation also shares the view of
the Secretary-General that Haiti, under the leadership
of the Haitian Government and with international
support, has successfully avoided a second-wave
disaster of epidemics or social unrest. We believe that
MINUSTAH’s presence was a decisive stabilization
factor in that regard.
The political and economic situation in Haiti
remains complex as a result of the physical destruction
and great loss of institutional capacity caused by the
earthquake. The tragedy undid the progress that has
been made in many areas in Haiti. It has resulted in the
renewed commitment of the international community
to rebuilding and strengthening the Republic of Haiti.
In these circumstances and in order contribute to
reconstruction efforts, we are working with Peru to
provide MINUSTAH with the José de San Martín
combined engineering company.

26

Let me also recall that, out of its concern for the
development of State institutional capacity in Haiti,
Argentina actively engaged in regional police
cooperation so that Haiti could take full responsibility
for internal security in the not-too-distant future.
Following a number of preparatory meetings, in 2009
Argentina and Chile issued an assessment report and
plan of action on police cooperation with Haiti, with a
view to coordinating, institutionalizing and assessing
the educational and professional training to be offered
to the Haitian National Police. This cooperation was
suspended owing to earthquakes in both Haiti and
Chile, but the initiative will resume when the Haitian
Government completes an updated a report setting out
priorities and needs in this area.
I note that, as a participant in the donors’
conference that took place on 31 March, Argentina
pledged $16 million as its share of the $100 million
contribution pledged by the countries of the Union of
South American Nations (UNASUR). These funds have
already been made available to the UNASUR Secretary
General to carry out cooperation projects to be
identified at Port-au-Prince through the UNASUR
technical secretariat; they will relate to food security,
risk-prevention and averting natural disasters and
building Haitian State capacity. We pledged a further
$1 million for cooperation activities and programmes
that Argentina caries out in Haiti through the United
Nations Development Programme, principally on food
security and institution-building.
My delegation believes that MINUSTAH remains
a decisive factor in sustainably establishing a secure
and stable environment in Haiti, as the SecretaryGeneral observes in his report. That is why we believe
it is essential that the Mission’s mandate be extended.
I conclude by recalling that in Haiti we are
working in the hope that the day will come when the
MINUSTAH mandate has been fulfilled and that the
presence of the United Nations and the international
community will no longer be needed because Haitians
are able to shoulder full responsibility for their
economic and social development. To attain that goal,
it is important to continue to work to build the
institutional capacity of the Haitian Government, in
accordance with national priorities and in a framework
of appropriate United Nations coordination of
international assistance.

10-53060

S/PV.6382

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.

channelled through the Fund, thus supporting the
Government’s own reconstruction efforts.

Mrs. Smith (Norway): First, I should like to
thank Mr. Mulet for his comprehensive briefing today.

While there are positive developments in relation
to the preparations for presidential and legislative
elections, we are concerned about shortcomings in the
voter registration process. This may have a negative
impact on the elections and their legitimacy.

As a sign of Norway’s commitment, we are
nominating a team of five police officers with expertise
in sexual and gender-based violence to serve in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). This is our first specialized team to a
United Nations mission, reflecting the great importance
that Norway places on contributing to the concrete
work of United Nations missions against sexual
violence. We commend MINUSTAH’s support to the
Haitian authorities in setting up community police
substations that can assist victims of sexual and
gender-based violence in camps for internally
displaced persons and in crime-prone areas.
The potential for social unrest prevails. One must
look for solutions that permit the United Nations to
engage in areas of Port-au-Prince that are rated as not
secure. Norway commends the work done by the
community violence reduction programme and
recommends the extension of the programme.
Norway clearly supports MINUSTAH’s measures
to address sexual and gender-based violence, including
training and the establishment of a referral system and
mechanisms for reporting and data collection. The InterAgency Standing Committee’s Guidelines for Genderbased Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings
should inform the implementation of these measures.
Norway encourages MINUSTAH and other
relevant international bodies, including the Interim
Haiti Recovery Commission, to take fully into account
the
recommendations
issued
by
the
High
Commissioner for Human Rights in her statement to
the Human Rights Council on 11 June 2010. We join
the High Commissioner in calling for all reconstruction
programmes and projects to adopt a human-rightsbased approach, including during tender processes. A
gender-based approach must be applied to all relief and
reconstruction efforts.
Norway has channelled a substantial part of our
support through the Multi-donor Trust Fund, including
as budgetary support. The Norwegian contribution to
the Fund of $33 million has been disbursed. We
endorse the Secretary-General’s call for more of the
international support and for budgetary support to be

10-53060

The challenge is now to achieve a gradual
transition from relief to recovery mode, keeping in
mind that the humanitarian situation is volatile. We
expect the United Nations to play a leading role in the
longer-term recovery process, including by supporting
capacity-building, enhancing the legitimacy of the
Haitian institutions and engaging civil society.
The President: The representative of Haiti has
asked to make a further statement, and I give him the
floor.
Mr. Mérorès (Haiti) (spoke in French): I
apologize for taking the floor again, but I could not fail
to do so, even if just once more to thank Council
members and all others who spoke this morning. On
behalf of my Government, I thank them for their very
positive comments; the Government will be duly
informed of those comments. I am certain that the
Government will follow up on the recommendations
made as my country moves towards stability.
A number of speakers made reference to the
problem of sexual violence arising from certain
deplorable incidents in certain camps for the displaced.
I assure the Council that the Government is well aware
of these incidents and that, together with the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the Haitian National Police, it is taking appropriate
measures to remedy the situation and ensure better
protection of women and children.
Finally, I want to convey the gratitude of the
Government and the people of Haiti to Mr. Mulet and
to MINUSTAH. We all know that they are working in
extremely difficult conditions and that they have
nonetheless made it possible for the Government and
the country to make progress towards stabilization.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

27
