United Nations

S/PV.6765

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6765th meeting
Friday, 4 May 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aliyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Li Baodong
Ms. Londoño
Mr. Briens
Mr. Westerwelle
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Amrani
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zmeevsky
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Ohin
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Strengthening international cooperation in the implementation of counterterrorism obligations
Letter dated 1 May 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/281)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-32940 (E)

*1232940*

S/PV.6765

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
Her Excellency Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent
Representative of the United States, for her service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
April 2012. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Rice and her delegation for the great diplomatic skill
with which they conducted the Council’s business last
month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Strengthening international cooperation in the
implementation of counter-terrorism obligations
Letter dated 1 May 2012 from the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2012/281)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/281, which contains a letter dated
1 May 2012 from the Permanent Representative of
Azerbaijan addressed to the Secretary-General, containing
a concept paper on the item under consideration.
I wish to welcome the presence at this meeting of
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
participants. Their presence today is an affirmation of
the importance of the subject that is to be discussed.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency President Ilham Aliyev of
Azerbaijan.
I thank the Security Council presidency of
Azerbaijan for having convened this timely debate.
Next month, the General Assembly will conduct the
third review of the United Nations Global Counter-

2

Terrorism Strategy, adopted six years ago. The issues
that we will discuss today can contribute to a good
outcome of that review.
Terrorism is a significant threat to peace and
security, prosperity and people. The international
community continues to pursue a robust and
comprehensive response.
Collective efforts have disrupted attacks and
disabled terrorist networks. But recent attacks in
Afghanistan, Iraq, Nigeria and Yemen have
demonstrated that the threat is still formidable. Terrorist
organizations continue to look for new havens, adopt
new tactics and seek new targets.
Today I would like to make three points.
First, we need to focus special attention on
conditions that are conducive to spreading terrorism. In
the Sahel region, for example, instability and violence
have recently increased, in part as fallout from
developments in Libya. The fact-finding mission I sent
last December has provided a valuable assessment of
the situation in the Sahel and the impact of the crisis in
Libya on the region, along with recommendations for
mobilizing international support, building capacity and
improving coordination among key stakeholders.
Secondly, we must pursue the integrated approach
to terrorism and violent extremism embodied in the
Global Strategy. That means countering the appeal of
terrorism,
strengthening
capacity-building
and
protecting human rights as a central part of our
response. It means resolving differences peacefully,
providing education and job opportunities, promoting
development and intercultural dialogue, and addressing
the grievances that terrorists exploit.
It also means promoting respect for human rights
and respect for the rule of law, which are integral to
any sustainable counter-terrorism approach. The
Council and the General Assembly both have endorsed
this principle. Countering terrorism also means
recognizing and alleviating the suffering of victims.
My third point is actually a request. I urge
Member States to make full use of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force. The bodies
created by the Council have played a critical role in the
Task Force; these include the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the Monitoring
Team of the 1267 Committee and the expert staff of the
1540 Committee. The Task Force is a valuable tool for

12-32940

S/PV.6765

creating an integrated response for capacity-building
and for sharing best practices.
In combating terrorism, the international
community must also work as one. That is why I hope
that Member States will decide to create the position of
a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator to
promote better coordination, collaboration and
cooperation among all players.
The newly established United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre, within the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force Office, serves a critical
role in supporting Member States in all areas under the
four pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I am grateful for the contribution of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia for the creation of the CounterTerrorism Centre, and I would like to encourage all
participants to contribute to our efforts.
I will be participating in the Advisory Board
meeting of the Centre early in June.
By working together in undertakings ranging
from strengthening law enforcement to tackling the
underlying drivers of extremism, we can greatly reduce
this major threat to peace and security.
I wish the Council a productive debate.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Westerwelle (Germany): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
Republic of Azerbaijan on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. Let
me also thank you for having convened today’s debate
on threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.
Over the past decade, the Security Council has
shown remarkable resolve in countering terrorism.
Significant resolutions have been adopted. Member
States have adopted effective countermeasures. Our
sanctions regimes have weakened terrorists’ resources.
As Chair of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
Germany remains committed to working with all
Member States to confront the threats posed.
Although we have been successful in disrupting
terrorist structures, we must not relent in our efforts.

12-32940

Recent attacks in Afghanistan, Nigeria and Iraq are
evidence of terrorists’ persistence. Terrorism cannot be
associated with a certain ideology, religion or ethnic
affiliation. The threat of international terrorism is
evolving, and we must adapt our responses to the new
patterns.
Consequently, Germany strongly advocates a
further strengthening of international cooperation and
capacity-building. We thus welcome the most recent
report (A/66/762) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Let me make three points.
First, strategies and measures to counter terrorism
must always be based on the respect of human rights
and the principles of the rule of law. These are the core
values of the United Nations. Our measures need to be
effective, but they are self-defeating when they
jeopardize the very principles they aim to protect. We
cannot protect our values by sacrificing them in the
same effort.
Secondly, the sanctions regimes of the United
Nations need to be a leading example of fair and
transparent procedures. The countering of terrorism
and adherence to the rule of law are mutually
reinforcing goals. For several years, Germany has been
advocating improvements in this area. We attach great
importance to the Office of the Ombudsperson which,
in the framework of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, is
mandated to receive de-listing requests from individuals.
We commend the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberley Prost,
and the Council for the work done so far. We
encourage the Council to continue on this route and to
consider options for further enhancing fair and clear
procedures when implementing counter-terrorism
measures.
Thirdly, the face and methods of international
terrorism are changing. The internet is increasingly
abused by terrorist groups for incitement and
recruitment. In Germany, a terrorist group went
unnoticed for many years as it used the Internet to plan
vicious attacks and recruit supporters. In response, we
need to reduce virtual hiding places for terrorists, and
we need to counter incitement. Identifying effective
measures while ensuring full respect for fundamental
freedoms is a challenge for all of us. We support the
pilot projects of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. More needs to be done in

3

S/PV.6765

this field. We will succeed only if the whole
international community works together.

critical challenges linked to the fight against poverty
and inequality.

Let us take advantage of today’s debate to send a
strong message of our determination. We will counter
the threat of international terrorism collectively. We
will adapt our instruments to address the evolving
nature and the root causes of terrorism. Only enhanced
civil liberties, economic prosperity and a chance for
political participation can counter the appeal of
terrorism in the long run. The basis for all our actions
is the rule of law and respect for human rights.

Africa, like the other continents, has known and
lived with terrorism. It has paid a heavy price for
criminal acts, such as those increasingly perpetrated in
Nigeria and the Sahel region by the Islamic sects of
Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and other
criminal groups. The same applies to the terrorist acts
being committed in Somalia, Kenya and Tanzania — in
a word, everywhere where fundamentalist groups have
chosen this way of making themselves heard.

Mr. Ohin (Togo) (spoke in French): I should like
to begin by wishing you, Sir, a cordial welcome to New
York and conveying to you the warm greetings of your
counterpart in Togo, President Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbé. Your presence at the United Nations today
reflects your interest in the issue of counter-terrorism,
which remains an ongoing concern and a major
challenge to all States. I should therefore like to thank
your country, Azerbaijan, for having chosen the theme
of today’s debate and to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.

It is important to note that terrorism in Africa is
often fuelled by religious fundamentalism and ethnicity.
Based on beliefs and dogmas, on the one hand, and on
a sense of common ancestry, on the other, it is in every
case the violent expression of intransigence and
intolerance towards citizens on a continent that is
otherwise characterized more markedly than anywhere
else by religious and cultural syncretism.

I should also like to reiterate our warmest thanks
to the United States delegation for its outstanding work
in the very busy month of April. Lastly, I thank the
Secretary-General not only for his briefing on the issue
at hand, but also for the various actions that have been
undertaken under United Nations auspices to promote
the fight against terrorism.
Terrorism remains one of the greatest threats to
the peace and security of peoples and nations. The
attacks, abductions, hostage-taking, hijackings of
aircraft and killings committed and claimed by
terrorists are serious violations of human rights,
including the rights to life and to live free from fear.
The declared desire of terrorists to acquire weapons of
mass destruction heightens the gravity of the threat
posed by a scourge to which all continents and
countries are exposed.
Terrorists adapt to measures adopted by States to
counter them and to that end use new technologies not
only as tools for training, recruitment and the financing
and planning of attacks, but also as propaganda media
to broadcast and justify their actions. These threats
have grown increasingly complex and compelled our
States to devote significant resources to fighting
terrorism at a time when they are already facing many

4

In Africa, terrorist groups increasingly exploit
one of the continent’s vulnerabilities — its immense
State territories, where a lack of control favours the
establishment of training camps. Given that reality and
the rise in such actions, in the course of its presidency
of the Security Council in February Togo drew the
international community’s attention to the threats that
continue to be posed by the transnational organized
crime that is clearly linked to terrorism in West Africa
and the Sahel region (see S/PV.6717).
We cannot overemphasize that, regardless of the
reasons offered by the authors of such acts, there can
be no justification for terrorist acts perpetrated against
people and public and private property. We must
therefore combat the scourge by all legal means.
Aware of the threat looming over our countries,
Togo has made counter-terrorism a major priority of its
security policy, which is fully aligned with the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Important measures have
been taken to strengthen existing legal institutional
mechanisms. For instance, on 6 July 2007 we enacted a
law against money-laundering, and another on
7 September 2009 against the financing of terrorism,
allowing my country to join relevant international
conventions. However, the key measure was our
establishment on March 2008 of a national cell for the
processing of financial information, whose role
consists, inter alia, of detecting and halting money-

12-32940

S/PV.6765

laundering activities and of coordinating national
counter-terrorism mechanisms.
At the subregional level, Togo participates in the
legal apparatus adopted by the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to coordinate the
fight against this scourge. These include the Protocol
for the Establishment of a Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, Peace and
Security, aimed at strengthening subregional cooperation
in several fields, including international terrorism; the
Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa, which was created in 1999
and whose mandate was revised in 2006 to incorporate
counter-terrorism financing; the Conflict Prevention
Framework adopted in January 2008 to help the
subregion to address the interrelated challenges of
cross-border crime, the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, and political, security and economic
governance; and the first Regional Action Plan of 2009
on drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse.
These subregional structures, which reflect the
commitment of the leaders of West Africa to tackling
terrorism, have complemented and strengthened the
many legal instruments and mechanisms that the
African Union has adopted to facilitate and promote
concerted and effective action against terrorism. These
measures include the adoption of the 1999 Algiers
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism and its 2004 Protocol Additional, and the
establishment of the African Centre for the Study and
Research on Terrorism, which form a framework for
promoting interaction and cooperation among African
States and regional mechanisms.
The fight against terrorism calls for hard work
based on, among other things, collective action and
intelligence sharing to find and identify the
perpetrators of the threat, to pinpoint their locations
and to understand their strategies and goals. That work,
which requires numerous skills and significant funding,
cannot be carried out without cooperation. National
initiatives must therefore complement those of other
nations and fall within a framework of bilateral,
regional and international cooperation and sharing of
lessons learned.
Fortunately, the international community has at
its disposal many legal mechanisms and instruments
for the maintenance of peace and security that can for
the most part be used in the fight against terrorism. The

12-32940

adoption of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004); the 16 global United Nations conventions
to combat specific forms of terrorism around the
world; and the 2006 United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy — all of which call for international
actions to prevent and punish terrorist acts — speak for
the resolute international will to fight terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations.
Through the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy —
on which all counter-terrorism initiatives are founded —
the international community has strengthened its
capacities in surveillance, cooperation, coordination
and harmonization of policies and practices for the
prevention and suppression of terrorism.
Today, the greatest challenge for the international
community is not to adopt a judicial framework for the
fight against terrorism. Rather, it lies in our ability to
enact in a coordinated, efficient and effective way the
many regional, continental and global instruments
already in place. We must demonstrate a greater and
unwavering resolve to prevent and combat terrorism,
because when it takes root it can strike any and every
country.
In that regard, the report of the High-level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565, annex),
convened by former Secretary-General Kofi Annan in
2003, states that what threatens the security of any
nation threatens the security of all nations, weak or
strong. No State, no matter how powerful, can face
alone the border-defying threat of terrorism.
Cooperation must be our guiding principle in our fight
to safeguard domestic and international security.
Ongoing cooperation offers the advantages of sharing
information about types of terrorist attacks and of
finding ways to cut off its funding and weakening its
networks. Synergy and information-sharing among the
various institutions engaged in the fight, as well as
technical and financial aid, are essential in the short
and medium terms to eradicating this relentless threat
to all nations and all peoples.
The most vulnerable countries, and those with the
most limited resources, require capacity-building in
surveillance, effective monitoring of the movement of
people and goods across their borders, detecting
prohibited items, confiscating dangerous materials and
depriving terrorists of safe havens.
It is sad to note that one of the assets terrorists
enjoy is their networks actively cooperate within one

5

S/PV.6765

another, whereas States are often slow to find their way
to mutually beneficial cooperation. Togo believes that
only joint initiatives at the bilateral, regional and
international levels — all the while respecting the
principles of independence and territorial integrity —
offer hope for an effective fight against terrorism.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening and chairing this
important meeting, and for focusing our attention on
the threat to international peace and security caused by
terrorism.
Today’s meeting could not be more timely. We
meet today one year after the death of Osama bin
Laden. His death was an important milestone in the
fight against Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups, but it
did not remove the scourge of terrorism from our world.
The resilience of terrorist networks means that our
collective fight against terrorism must continue.
Today’s meeting underscores the Security Council’s
unwavering commitment to countering terrorism and
reminds us of the work we have left to do.

significant challenges to the international community
in the years ahead.
To counter the ongoing threat posed by terrorists,
President
Obama
has
adopted
a
strategic,
comprehensive approach that combines every tool of
American power — civilian, military and economic,
together with the power of our values — with the
concerted effort of allies, partners and multilateral
institutions. Only by addressing the drivers of
radicalization, and doing so together, can we prevent
local threats from becoming regional and global ones
requiring a much more costly response. Therefore we
are taking determined action worldwide to stop
material support for terrorists, counter violent
extremism, reduce recruitment and radicalization, and
empower our partners to do so as well.

Last week, the United States chaired a thematic
debate in this Chamber on securing borders against
illicit trafficking and movement (see S/PV.6760). The
Council adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2012/16,
requesting the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive assessment of the various United
Though Al-Qaida has experienced major setbacks,
Nations structures and activities, and to consider how
its affiliates and other violent extremist groups
the United Nations system can respond more
continue to operate and pose significant threats.
effectively to Member States’ requests for assistance.
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula has expanded its
The United States seeks to help countries build
reach in Yemen and looks to launch attacks abroad.
enduring civilian institutions, underpinned by human
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) is exploiting
rights and the rule of law, which can effectively combat
and sowing instability in the Sahel, particularly in Mali.
terrorism as well as the drivers of violent extremism.
Al-Shabaab, which publicly pledged allegiance to
The recently launched Global Counter-Terrorism
Al-Qaida early this year, continues to destabilize the
Forum, aimed at promoting the implementation of the
Horn of Africa and deny vital humanitarian relief to
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, is
those in need.
catalysing those efforts. The United States is
In Nigeria, elements of Boko Haram have committed to strengthening partnerships at the United
perpetrated widespread attacks, including against Nations and other multilateral organizations to combat
United Nations personnel. In New Delhi, Tblisi and terrorism. The development of the United Nations
elsewhere, we have seen new and recurring acts of counter-terrorism framework over the past decade has
violence against diplomats. Terrorist threats continue to been significant. The United Nations has played an
emanate from and affect every region of the world. The important role in building consensus around a global
United States joins others in condemning terrorist acts counter-terrorism strategy and delivering technical
everywhere they occur.
assistance to bolster civilian counter-terrorism
capacities worldwide.
Terrorist groups continue to evolve and adapt.
Some have also become criminal enterprises in their
We encourage the United Nations to build upon
own right. AQIM, for example, has created an its valuable contributions, which include the recent
environment of fear and instability by adopting establishment of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
kidnapping for ransom to finance its terrorist Centre within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
operations. Kidnapping for ransom is a growing threat Task Force. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
to international peace and security and will pose initiative to appoint a United Nations counter-terrorism
coordinator and further unify the United Nations

6

12-32940

S/PV.6765

counter-terrorism architecture to ensure that expertise
and resources are deployed as efficiently as possible.
Civil society, particularly victims and victims
associations, has played a powerful role in counterterrorism prevention efforts. We encourage relevant
parts of the United Nations system, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, to intensify their
engagement with and support for civil society
worldwide in the coming years.
The United States strongly supports all of these
United Nations efforts and looks forward to continuing
to work together in common cause within the Council
and the broader international community to prevent
and combat terrorism wherever and in whatever form it
occurs.
Mr. Armani (Morocco): I would like to express
our deep appreciation to the Republic of Azerbaijan for
convening this important and timely meeting. The
initiative demonstrates the importance that your
country attaches to strengthening international
cooperation against terrorism.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and commend him for his personal
commitment to strengthen United Nations leadership in
combating
terrorism.
The
Secretary-General’s
Symposium on International Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation, held in September 2011, produced
concrete recommendations that were a welcome
development.
We are now looking forward to engaging
constructively in the upcoming discussions on new
proposals that seek to further enhance coherence and
effectiveness of United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts, including the establishment of a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator.
Our debate today is taking place in an
international context marked by clear progress in many
counter-terrorism fields. We are encouraged by the
results achieved so far in many areas. However,
terrorist acts continue to occur, and a significant
number of terrorist plots are foiled each year in various
regions. That provides clear evidence that the terrorist
threat persists and our mobilization and cooperation
should be sustained in that connection.
Indeed, despite all our efforts, terrorism remains
a pressing challenge and one of the most serious threats

12-32940

to international peace and security. The international
efforts to combat terrorism are essential, and they must
maintain the same determination and commitment. In
that regard, the United Nations remains the appropriate
and legitimate framework for Member States to adopt
multilateral responses to terrorism.
The Security Council, within its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security, has taken
important steps against terrorism and continues to
strengthen the work of its counter-terrorism bodies
through a number of additional resolutions.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted by the General Assembly in 2006,
represents the most comprehensive and effective
decision taken by the international community to
eliminate that dangerous threat and to improve United
Nations action to that end. We are now looking forward
to its third review, which will provide an additional
opportunity to consider an improved and more
effective translation of its four pillars into concrete
actions and measures.
The role of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in implementing the
Strategy must be further strengthened. The United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre was established
during the current session of the General Assembly,
thanks to initial funding from the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, and it constitutes an important mechanism
allowing the Task Force to further develop its capacitybuilding
activities
and
enhance
international
coordination in the field of counter-terrorism.
The establishment of the Centre in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia provides an important tool, and we are
committed to working together with the King of Saudi
Arabia and other members of the Centre’s Advisory
Board to achieve its important objectives.
Morocco fully shares the resolute determination
of the international community to stand firm and united
in the fight against terrorism. On that basis, Morocco
has established a comprehensive and multidimensional
counter-terrorism approach that converges with the
United Nations strategy and complies with the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as with other relevant
United Nations resolutions and international legal
instruments to which Morocco is party.
The
proactive
Moroccan
approach
was
successfully translated into firm and preventive law-

7

S/PV.6765

enforcement measures, as well as national initiatives
aimed at addressing the numerous social, economic and
cultural factors that are at the root of violent and
extremist ideologies.
Our approach is based on a number of factors.
The total rejection of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations by all Moroccan citizens has been of
vital importance. Morocco’s long-standing commitment
to the values of tolerance and peaceful coexistence has
remained strong and has also played a key role within
our society. Above all, it is Morocco’s firm determination
to pursue its irreversible democratic path — paved
with genuine reforms with human development as the
driving force — which has provided the best protection
against the spread of extremist and violent ideologies.
Yet no matter how successful, actions pursued by
individual States cannot manage to face alone the
scope, diversity and continuous sophistication of the
terrorist threat. Despite all our efforts, terrorism
remains a real cross-border threat that can strike any
region and any nation, regardless of its religion, culture
or level of development. For that reason, nothing can
replace an effective and coordinated international
commitment to cooperate against terrorism.
Morocco has consistently expressed its deep
concern with regard to the spread of terrorist activities
in the neighbouring subregions, namely West Africa
and the Sahel region, but also in the Gulf of Guinea
and in the Horn of Africa. Our continent has in recent
years witnessed an increase not only in the frequency
but also in the degree of sophistication of violent acts
committed by terrorist networks, often striking in areas
already faced with many difficulties and socio-economic
problems, especially environmental and food security
challenges, and unresolved conflicts. Thus, these
terrorist activities have dramatically increased the
number of innocent victims, undermined the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
threatened regional stability as a whole.
Recent developments have also confirmed that
there is an established interconnection between
terrorist groups, separatist movements and criminal
networks involved in arms, drugs and human
trafficking, as well as piracy and kidnapping activities.
This interconnection has allowed terrorist networks to
tap into the financial resources arising from illicit cross
border flows, and consequently to enhance their

8

operational capabilities and even expand their control,
in some instances, over territories of sovereign States.
The Council has repeatedly expressed its concern
and condemnation of the presence of and attacks
perpetrated by terrorist groups in these regions. Today,
there is an urgent need to establish a sustainable
framework for dialogue, cooperation and solidarity that
encompasses all States concerned with the security and
stability in the region in order to address in a holistic
manner the political, security and human development
dimensions of the region. Priority should also be given
to development. Narrow political calculations must
give way to shared responsibility and constructive
partnership, particularly in the case of West Africa and
the Sahel. Without partnership and shared
responsibility, we cannot move forward.
Consistent with its long-standing commitment to
peace and security in Africa, Morocco has been an
active partner in assisting other African countries in
enhancing their individual and collective capacities to
face terrorist groups, as well as the numerous
transnational organized crime networks with which
they are affiliated. In this regard, the Conference of
Justice Ministers of Francophone African Countries for
the implementation of universal instruments against
terrorism and the Ministerial Conference of AfricanAtlantic States represent key initiatives to which
Morocco actively contributes. Morocco will also host
the second edition of the Regional Ministerial
Conference on Border Security, following the first
meeting held in Tripoli last March, which comprises a
number of States of North Africa and the Sahel region.
In line with this commitment, Morocco will spare
no effort in continuing to support all initiatives aiming
at building genuine partnership and mutual confidence
conducive to effective regional and international
cooperation. Within these parameters, we are equally
committed to contributing to the activities of the
Global Counter-terrorism Forum in a manner that
complements and reinforces existing multilateral
counter-terrorism efforts, in particular those conducted
by the United Nations.
In conclusion, we are deeply convinced that the
United Nations should remain the universal framework
to reinforce our clear and strong message that the
international community stands united in expressing
our rejection of all violent ideologies and in working
together to promote dialogue among our civilizations

12-32940

S/PV.6765

and to prevent the stigmatization and indiscriminate
targeting of particular religious groups in the ongoing
fight against terrorism.
Mr. Zmeevsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I should like to thank you, Sir,
and the Azerbaijani presidency for your initiative to
convene this high-level meeting of the Security
Council on the very urgent theme of strengthening
international cooperation in combating the global
threat of terrorism.
Terrorism knows no borders. On the eve of this
meeting, we have received reports of terrorist acts in
the Russian Federation and Nigeria, as a result of
which once again dozens of innocent people have
suffered. We offer our condolences to the victims and
their family members, and our solidarity with them.
Terrorism has no justification, no matter how you
seek to embellish it. It is a universal plague that should
be condemned and recognized everywhere as a
criminally punishable act, while those who participate
in terrorist acts must be recognized as criminals and
receive their just punishment. That unshirkable
responsibility is a fundamental principle of international
cooperation in effectively combating terrorism,
enshrined in the basic United Nations counter-terrorism
conventions.
The Russian Federation views today’s meeting as
yet another development in the strengthening the
central coordinated role of the United Nations in our
systemic counter-terrorism work. Over the past few
years, we have established under United Nations
leadership a broad infrastructure of global cooperation
in this area that incorporates dozens of international
organizations and regional associations. We have
significantly strengthened the international legal basis
for combating terrorism, and active work continues
towards the establishment and promotion of norms and
standards in this field. The new level cooperation
among law enforcement agencies has allowed us
significantly to damage terrorist infrastructure and to
shut down many of its financing channels.
Unfortunately, not only has the terrorist threat not
abated, but it has recently acquired a new dimension
and gravity. Against the backdrop of highly
inconsistent and incomplete processes in North Africa,
the Middle East and the Horn of Africa, we have seen a
notable escalation of terrorist threats and a more
regional focus on the part of Al-Qaida and related

12-32940

groups. Terrorist partnerships with criminal groups
have grown stronger, with aim of establishing crossborder criminal channels for the drug trade, illegal
migration, human trafficking and weapons smuggling.
It has become clear that this will lead not only to a
substantial strengthening of terrorist cells, but also to a
dangerously broad transmission of a new ideology that
intensifies violence and extremism and exacerbates
interreligious and interethnic conflict. There is also
still real potential for growth in the terrorist threat in
the Afghanistan/Pakistan region, thanks to the stimulus
provided by the illegal trade in opiates.
In such conditions, we are increasingly dependent
on the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy adopted by the General Assembly, which has
flexibly combined traditional methods of law
enforcement and prevention and has attacked the socioeconomic roots of terrorism, and in so doing has
strengthened the legal framework and observance of
human rights.
The Security Council now faces the challenge of
responding in a timely and appropriate manner to the
shifting challenges of terrorism. Our response must be
strengthened by effective and comprehensive steps to
ensure the implementation by Member States of the
Council’s decisions, develop a dialogue among them,
and provide them with the necessary assistance. We
believe that serious attention should be focused on the
following areas.
First, we must do out utmost to strengthen the
legal basis of counter-terrorism, broaden the circle of
participants in counter-terrorist conventions, and ensure
the strict implementation of all their undertakings and
their nationalization through legislation. One urgent
priorities is the conclusion under United Nations
auspices of a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism.
Secondly, we must undertake counter-terrorist
cooperation on a pre-emptive basis, focusing on the
prevention of terrorism. In the context of the theme of
today’s meeting, the greatest threat posed to
international peace and security is that posed by
terrorism based on mass destruction. Steps to prevent
nuclear terrorism are extremely critical in that regard.
It is necessary to ensure the greater participation of
States in the core conventions of the United Nations
and the International Atomic Energy Agency in a
global initiative to combat acts of nuclear terrorism and

9

S/PV.6765

compliance with the decisions of the Seoul Nuclear
Security Summit. In meeting those challenges, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) must play an important role.
To deprive terrorists of social support, we must
make additional efforts that include an economic factor,
through law enforcement bodies. Such contributions to
job creation could be carried out not only by States, but
by United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, such as
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), together with organizations that are
specialized in economic assistance, including the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization, the Economic
Commission for Europe; and regional associations such
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.
Such synergy would turn a new page in the
efforts of the international donor community, through
combining development assistance with efforts to
counter-terrorism and fight criminals. No less
important are the continued efforts to halt the financial
flows that fuel terrorism, including those resulting
from the participation by heads of narco businesses and
other types of organized crime in such activities.
A remaining issue of great urgency found in
resolution 1624 (2005), is the challenge to counter the
ideology of terrorism and establish an atmosphere
within the international community conducive to its
total rejection. The struggle for the hearts and minds of
people must be carried out through strengthened
intercultural dialogue and mutual understanding among
civilizations and religions and by firmly curbing
incitement to terrorism in all its aspects.
We must establish effective cooperation with civil
society in order to neutralize at the earliest stages any
manifestation of violent extremism or terrorism. The
prohibition of any form of assistance to terrorists,
including military, technical and financial is an
international imperative. States that ignore that
obligation will see their actions backfire in the end, at
the cost of lives of their own civilians.
Effectively countering terrorism is impossible
without strengthening the potential of the forces to
fight it. The continued assistance of international
agencies to interested States is important in developing
and improving counter-terrorism legislation and

10

training staff. Crucial support to counter-terrorism
efforts results from skilled analyses of the phenomenon,
including its strengthening ties with organized crime,
narco-trafficking and piracy, as well as newly
developing trends such as individualized terrorism or
self-radicalization.
We need to strengthen the scientific analytical
capability of the relevant United Nations agencies by
providing them with a more practical orientation. A
successful such example is the UNODC’s survey on
terrorism.
Thirdly, it is extremely important to develop a
consolidated response to new terrorist challenges,
including in cyberspace. Practical actions to implement
the Security Council requirement on closing down
terrorism propaganda websites, for example the
Caucasus Centre website of the terrorist organization
known as the Caucasus Emirate, must be supplemented
by developing a global treaty to counter the use of
cyberspace for terrorism and other criminal purposes.
Adopting reliable international criteria is crucial
in defending tourists from terrorists and other criminal
assaults. Motivation for that has been provided by the
recently concluded Vienna session of the United
Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice. We look forward to the involvement
of many States and leading agencies of the United
Nations, regional organizations and the business
community.
As part of the public-private partnership, another
project is being drawn up by the UNODC and the
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute to cut off the flows of precious
metals into the hands of terrorists and other criminals.
A partnership with business is useful also for
developing effective measures to ensure the rights of
the victims of terrorism, including compensatory
payments based on transnational systems for insurance
and reinsurance relating to mega-terrorist acts.
Fourthly, we must not overlook improving the
work and the working methods of the United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies. We must continue to
strengthen the capability of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), which
monitors implementation by Member States of the

12-32940

S/PV.6765

basic text on counter-terrorism activities, namely,
resolution 1373 (2001).
The Russian Federation supports the work of the
CTC in improving assessment mechanisms, preparing a
global review on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and resolution 1624 (2005), broadening
the international counter-terrorism agenda by
countering the incitement of terrorist acts and
strengthening dialogue among civilizations.
The continuing practice of country visits by the
CTC remains one of the key instruments of monitoring
the achievements and prospective work of States to
strengthen national anti-terrorism capabilities and to
analyse best practices. The Russian Federation is
planning to host a visit of the CTED in October.

Fifthly, the United Nations deserves great credit
for the increased level of cooperation at the regional
level through the establishment of feedback
mechanisms in cooperation with operational counterterrorist agencies. We highly appreciate the efforts in
the fight against terrorism of the Council of Europe,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the NATO-Russia Council, the Organization of
American States, the Latin American Reserve Fund, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and others.
Together we will work with partners to increase our
contribution to counter-terrorism efforts under the
aegis of the CSTO, SCO and the Commonwealth of
Independent States.

We welcome the presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of today’s meeting. It is aimed at
We need further steps in order to improve the developing counter-terrorism cooperation under the
effectiveness and capacities of the Council’s sanctions auspices of the United Nations. The Russian Federation
regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. As a result of vigorously condemns terrorism in all its aspects and
the reform in June 2011, we have been able to ensure will continue to contribute to that work through
greater transparency and adopt procedures with greater strengthening international cooperation based on trust
flexibility with respect to de-listing, which should not and strict adherence to the principles of international
weaken the capabilities of the counter-terrorism regime, law.
which could in turn cause some States to depart from
Ms. Londoño (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
compliance with their sanctions obligations.
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
Given the increased activity by regional terrorist country, Azerbaijan, which I had the privilege of
groups of Al-Qaida, especially in North Africa, and visiting a few months ago. I would like to congratulate
their broadening ties with other criminal organizations, you for presiding over the Security Council and
measures are necessary to spread the counter-terrorism convening this important debate on a subject of
important relevance worldwide. I would also like to
sanctions regime to new individuals and entities.
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
The urgent challenges include the full
statement on the issue.
implementation of resolution 2017 (2011), adopted on
Terrorism is a threat to international peace and
the initiative of the Russian Federation to counter the
uncontrolled spread of Libyan weapons. The Russian security. It affects society as a whole, including the
delegation has, on many occasions, drawn the rule of law and the enjoyment of human rights. The
Council’s attention to that significant threat, possibly human costs of terrorism are felt throughout the world.
including man-portable air defence systems and other Therefore, the international community must address
dangerous weapons falling into the hands of terrorists. that many-faceted threat through coordinated action
The paths of those weapons have turned from veins aimed at all levels and aspects of terrorism.
into arteries joining terrorist groups with criminal
Over the course of decades, the international
organizations and separatist movements and thus
community has developed a body of law that includes
strengthening their destructive capacities.
14 international treaties and four modifying protocols
The most vigorous measures are necessary in that address specific aspects and acts of terrorism. In
order to implement resolution 2017 (2011) with the addition, the resolutions of the General Assembly and
support of the Sahel Saharan States and further work in the Security Council provide a comprehensive
various international forums, including the Rome-Lyon framework that addresses terrorism in all its forms and
Group of Eight and the Global Counter-Terrorism manifestations.
Forum.

12-32940

11

S/PV.6765

Although we have not agreed on a definition of
terrorism, we have made progress in identifying the
key elements of acts that the international community
considers to be terroristic and condemns as
unjustifiable in any circumstances, be they of a
political, ideological, racial, religious or any other
nature.
Terrorism and other threats to international peace
and security have several phases, dimensions and
complexities that we must address through
international consensus and cooperation, as highlighted
in the concept note prepared by the Azerbaijani
delegation (S/2012/281, annex). Since this is a
phenomenon with global implications, the United
Nations and especially the General Assembly, as its
universal organ, should be the focal point for
discussing policy agreements and cooperation. In turn,
the Security Council, operating within own purview,
has adopted measures that contribute to and
complement international action against terrorism.
There are other forums for dialogue and the
identification of best practices that should work closely
with the United Nations. Among them, the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum has identified specific areas
of cooperation and best practices that have great value
to all States in their fight against terrorism.
Among the various existing mechanisms that
address the threat in a coordinated way, I stress the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as
an effective tool for preventing, punishing and
eradicating the scourge of terrorism. While recognizing
capacity-building as an essential element of global
action against terrorism, the Strategy is dedicated to
adopting decisive measures to enhance coordination
and coherence within the United Nations system in
order to promote international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism.
In that context, the development and strengthening
of national legislation and the consolidation of
mechanisms for cooperation and capacity-building are
crucial complements to the Global Strategy. The
Organization should take further steps to provide
technical assistance in order to facilitate the
strengthening of national capacities.
States should guarantee that the counter-terrorism
measures they adopt comply with all their obligations
under international law and in particular with human
rights. That includes the adoption of measures to

12

protect the rights of victims and compensation for their
suffering, which should be seen as a crucial aspect of
the fight against terrorism. In that regard, we note the
emphasis accorded to human rights in resolutions 1624
(2005) and 1963 (2010).
Terrorism does not exist in isolation from
transnational organized crime. There are networks
whose funds derive in large measure from the activities
of organized crime, including drug trafficking, illicit
arms trafficking, illegal mining, extortion, kidnapping
or piracy.
By its very nature, the financing of terrorist acts
is a matter on which the international community
should take more effective measures. In order to
prevent terrorist networks from accumulating the
financial and logistical resources necessary to operate,
we need to develop comprehensive measures that
incorporate elements of the legal instruments that
address transnational organized crime. Funding derived
from various crimes creates new scenarios that require
States to join forces in order to design comprehensive
strategies to address both the problem and its solution.
My country believes that the adoption,
implementation and promotion of cooperation
frameworks offer an effective response to terrorism.
Colombia is an active participant in new and varied
mechanisms of regional and multilateral cooperation.
In addition to the United Nations, the Organization of
American States and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum, we have worked with countries of Central
America, the Caribbean and, more recently, Africa to
share experiences and build capacities to combat
transnational crimes that are linked in one way or
another to terrorism.
We believe that the international community has
an obligation to continue its head-on struggle against
terrorism.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
congratulate Azerbaijan on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May. I appreciate
Azerbaijan’s initiative in convening this high-level
briefing on counter-terrorism. I welcome President
Aliyev’s leadership of today’s meeting.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
Azerbaijan’s accession to United Nations membership.
Azerbaijan is also serving as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council this year. Over the past 20

12-32940

S/PV.6765

years, Azerbaijan has made tremendous efforts and
scored
tremendous
achievements
in
national
development, and it is playing an increasingly
important role in United Nations affairs. It has
contributed positively to the realization of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter. China
would like to express its warm appreciation. I also
welcome today’s briefing by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.
Terrorism is a common threat to the international
community. China condemns terrorism and resolutely
supports efforts to combat it in all its forms and
manifestations. The international community has made
tremendous efforts in combating terrorism, but
terrorism is far from having been eradicated. It still
seriously threatens international peace and security and
it has evolved in form and means. With regard to
strengthening
international
counter-terrorism
cooperation, I would like to stress four points.
First, Member States should uphold unified
standards on the issue of counter-terrorism. Terrorist
acts, regardless of their motives, wherever and by
whomever they are committed, should be unequivocally
opposed and addressed with firm measures. Double
standards must be rejected in the effort to combat
terrorism. The international community should oppose
any form of incitation to or support for terrorism.
Adopting inconsistent positions on the basis of one’s
own interest will serve only to shield or connive with
terrorism, defeating the purpose of counter-terrorism
and undermining international cooperation in that
regard.
Secondly, we must address both the symptoms
and the root causes of terrorism through integrated
measures. Terrorism emanates from a complicated set
of political, economic and social factors. Measures to
combat it should focus on promoting development,
eliminating polarization and social injustice, and
appropriately resolving regional conflicts. Terrorism is
often accompanied by the spread of separatism,
extremism, violent hatred and intolerance. It should
therefore be addressed in a holistic manner. Relying
solely on military means may very well prove to be
counter-productive.
Thirdly, to strengthen international cooperation
on counter-terrorism, the United Nations and the
Security Council should play a leading role. In the
effort to combat terrorism, we must abide by the

12-32940

United Nations Charter and the basic norms of
international law and respect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States. China
supports the full and effective implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as
well as relevant Security Council resolutions and
presidential statements. Coordination among various
United Nations counter-terrorism bodies should also be
strengthened. Counter-terrorism assistance to Member
States should be based on respect for the will and
choices of those States. China welcomes the
establishment of the United Nations Centre for
Counter-Terrorism and hopes that it will provide
important assistance to Member States in terms of
capacity-building and technical assistance.
Fourthly, counter-terrorism efforts must be based
on dialogue among civilizations and on the promotion
of mutual understanding and tolerance. International
cooperation on counter-terrorism should serve to
promote dialogue and exchange among various
civilizations, religions and ethnicities, as well as
mutual respect and harmonious coexistence. We must
not draw ideological lines in our counter-terrorism
efforts, and we oppose linking terrorism with certain
States, Governments, ethnicities or religions. We also
oppose shielding or conniving with terrorism on the
basis of any political, ethnic or religious pretexts.
China is the victim of terrorism and is facing
various terrorist threats, primarily from elements of the
East Turkistan Islamic Movement at home and abroad,
as well as from other international terrorist groups and
individuals. China is ready to participate actively in
cooperation on counter-terrorism within the framework
of the United Nations, and we will work untiringly to
that end.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We would like to extend a
warm welcome to you, Mr. President. Your presence in
presiding over this meeting testifies to your strong
commitment to the work of the Security Council and
the importance that we collectively attach to
strengthening international cooperation on counterterrorism. Let me therefore congratulate you and the
delegation of Azerbaijan on your initiative of holding
this meeting and on your sterling stewardship of the
Council. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
as

No country has suffered as much from terrorism
Pakistan. Pakistan unequivocally condemns

13

S/PV.6765

terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whoever
commits it and wherever and against whomever it is
committed. We also condemn the killing of civilians
anywhere in the world, whether through terrorist
activity or the use of unlawful or disproportionate force.
All efforts to combat terrorism must respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
comply fully with international law. All of us also
agree that terrorism and extremism cannot and should
not be associated with any religion, race, ethnicity,
faith, value system, culture or society. No religious
tradition or doctrine encourages or inspires acts of
terrorism.
Pakistan reaffirms its commitment to strengthen
mutual cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
Coherence and coordination are necessary to the
international community to succeed in its fight against
terrorism. Towards that end, Pakistan supports a
comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy and its
balanced implementation. The international community
must address the root causes of terrorism, which
include prolonged, unresolved conflicts, aggression,
foreign occupation, denial of the right of peoples living
under foreign occupation to self-determination, social
and economic injustice, and political marginalization
and alienation. Continuing to remain in denial about
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism will
only be to our collective detriment. It is necessary to
eschew policies that alienate people and make them
vulnerable to extremism; it also necessary to tackle
unemployment and promote economic and social
development, particularly in regions challenged by
extremism.
Pakistan fully supports the observance of legal
principles
in
implementing
counter-terrorism
resolutions. We support reform of the procedures of the
counter-terrorism-related committees of the Security
Council in order to ensure due process. We welcome
the recent efforts the Council has made in this regard
through its appointment of an Ombudsperson to the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and expect that the
process of reform will continue in order to further
improve procedures.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy has broadened the scope of counter-terrorism
to include the larger endeavour of countering
extremism through intercultural dialogue. It would help

14

implementation of the Strategy if there were greater
commitment to addressing the problem of defamation
of certain religions, as well as to combating intolerance,
negative stereotyping and discrimination based on
religion or belief. In this increasingly globalized world,
more than ever before we need better understanding,
harmony and bridge-building among all cultures and
peoples.
The United Nations has a special role to play in
promoting international cooperation in the field of
counter-terrorism. The Organization and its counterterrorism bodies need coherent policies and better
inter-agency coordination. We note that the SecretaryGeneral, in his latest report on the activities of the
United Nations system in implementing the Global
Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
(A/66/762),
has
recommended that Member States consider appointing
a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator. We are
ready and willing to analyse that recommendation in
the framework of the General Assembly during the
forthcoming review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. While we support the institutional coherence
of the United Nations, we also emphasize the
importance of respecting the mandates of the
Organization’s various organs, as outlined in the
Charter.
We appreciate the positive contribution of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF)
in improving the coordination of United Nations
activities in the field of counter-terrorism. We hope that
the United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism,
established through an initiative of Saudi Arabia, will
help the CTITF enhance its coordination efforts.
The promotion of international cooperation in the
field of counter-terrorism is indeed a noble goal.
Pakistan
fulfils
its
international
obligations,
particularly its commitment to implementing the
various counter-terrorism conventions, with great
responsibility. We have ratified 10 of 13 United
Nations conventions relating to terrorism, and are also
a signatory to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, adopted in 2000.
Pakistan is party to the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, and has
enacted a landmark anti-money-laundering bill. A
financial monitoring unit has been established in the
State Bank of Pakistan to monitor suspicious financial
transactions. Sixty-four bank accounts valued at
750 million Pakistani rupees have recently been frozen.

12-32940

S/PV.6765

The international community has acknowledged
Pakistan’s role and sacrifice in the struggle against
terrorism — a problem that has grown in intensity over
the years due to the decades-long conflict and
instability in Afghanistan. We need continued
cooperation and support for our counter-terrorism
efforts. Pakistan has deployed 160,000 troops on its
border with Afghanistan and set up 822 border posts to
interdict Al-Qaida and Taliban members. The
international community has an obligation to remain
committed to helping Afghanistan restore durable
peace and stability.
To conclude, countering terrorism is a collective
responsibility that should be discharged in a spirit of
cooperation, understanding and an unwavering sense of
our common humanity.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
congratulate Azerbaijan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and you, Mr. President, for convening and
presiding over today’s meeting. Your presence here
sends an important signal regarding the priority your
country attaches to United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts. It is a priority that the United Kingdom shares.
The United Nations is at the forefront of the work
to counter terrorism across the globe. We applaud those
efforts, and the commitment to tackling terrorism
shown by the United Nations and its Member States.
Terrorism is a global phenomenon and requires a
global response, which the United Nations is uniquely
placed to lead. We welcome ongoing efforts to build on
the legal framework for countering terrorism,
addressing the conditions that can give rise to violent
extremism and taking practical measures to prevent
terrorist attacks.
I want to make two main points in today’s debate.
First, sanctions are a key instrument in the response of
the United Nations to international terrorism, and the
work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities is
fundamental to that. The United Kingdom welcomes
the further improvements adopted to ensure that the
procedures in the Al-Qaida sanctions regime continue
to be fair and clear. The Al-Qaida sanctions
Ombudsperson plays a particularly important role in
that regard, and I take this opportunity to reiterate the

12-32940

United Kingdom’s full support for the Office of the
Ombudsperson. At the same time, sanctions must be
implemented effectively and robustly. We therefore
welcome all initiatives to reinforce Member States’
capacity to that end.
Secondly, I want to highlight the importance of
coordination — what the Secretary-General earlier
called “working as one”. There are a large number of
international bodies involved in the global counterterrorism effort. With such a level of activity, effective
coordination is key.
Resources are necessarily limited, and we must
make certain that we are getting the most out of all our
good work. The Secretary-General’s call for a counterterrorism coordinator provides an excellent opportunity
to shape the United Nations response to terrorism. It is
an important step forward that the United Kingdom
strongly supports. We must ensure that that position
has the right mandate to bring cohesion and coherence
to the United Nations counter-terrorism work. We need
to think carefully how best to manage the resources in
order to achieve that result.
In addition, we must maintain focus in our efforts.
To that end, we welcome the review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We hope
that the themes covered in the review will help guide
the strategic direction of the United Nations in its
counter-terrorism efforts. I would like to take this
opportunity to extend our thanks to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia for its contribution towards establishing
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
The United Nations has a unique and vital role in
countering terrorism. Let me affirm that the United
Kingdom will continue to work closely with all
partners to ensure that the United Nations is properly
equipped to deliver.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
allow me to extend to you, Mr. President, a very warm
welcome to the Security Council. Your presence in the
Council is indeed a defining moment as Azerbaijan
assumes the presidency of the Security Council for the
first time in its history. I would also like to express our
deep appreciation to you, Sir, and to your delegation
for organizing today’s meeting on this important
subject of threats to peace and security caused by
terrorist acts, and for chairing the meeting.

15

S/PV.6765

I would also like to acknowledge the participation
of ministers and high officials of Germany, Togo,
Colombia, Morocco and the Russian Federation in
today’s meeting. Their participation and valuable
statements underscore the importance of the subject for
the international community. Our thanks are also due to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
insightful briefing.
Today, terrorism constitutes the most serious
challenge to international peace and security. Over the
years, the visible landscape of international terrorism
has changed vastly. In our globalized world, terrorists
are also globalized in their reach and activities and are
able to wage asymmetric warfare against the
international community. Terrorists have established
linkages with transnational organized crime, and their
veritable nexus with drug, human and arms trafficking
is now well established. Terrorist financing, illicit
money-laundering, drug trafficking and the illicit arms
trade remain intertwined in a complex web of toxic
relationships.
There is also a growing risk of weapons of mass
destruction of different kinds falling into the hands of
terrorists, which will only exacerbate the existing grave
security challenge to the international community. In
today’s Internet-based age, there is also increasing
misuse of cyberspace and related technologies by
terrorists and their supporters for the purposes of
recruitment and training and the financing, planning,
preparation and incitement of their activities.
An effective counter-terrorism strategy therefore
requires greater international and regional cooperation
than the international community has so far been able
to achieve. International cooperation and concerted
action against terrorists and their sponsors, including
the complete dismantling of terrorist safe havens,
sanctuaries, training grounds and financial and
ideological support structures, are the critical
imperatives to defeat the scourge.
My own country, India, has faced the scourge of
terrorism for several decades. Indeed, our entire region,
South Asia, has been wracked by the activities of the
biggest terrorist actors in the world, be they Al-Qaida,
Lashkar-e-Toiba, Jamaat-ud-Dawa, elements of the
Taliban or others. Terrorism, extremism and
radicalization continue to pose a serious challenge to
peace, progress and prosperity in the region.

16

India condemns all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of the motivation that may be invoked to
justify them. We have been at the forefront of global
counter-terrorism efforts. India is part of the major
global initiatives against international terrorism,
including the Financial Action Task Force. We fully
support all efforts that strengthen international and
regional cooperation and that, most important, help to
ensure the effective implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, including 1373 (2001)
and 1624 (2005), and a comprehensive and integrated
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
We also endorse the two consensus benchmarks
that are reflected in the outcome document adopted on
28 September 2011 by the special meeting of the
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee, which
has been chaired by India since January 2011. The
outcome document (S/2011/689, annex) is a major
landmark in providing a strategic direction to the work
of the Committee aimed at strengthening the capacity
of States in their counter-terrorism efforts. It raises the
benchmark in the fight against terrorism to a higher
level, and urges all Member States to ensure zero
tolerance towards terrorism and to take urgent action to
prevent and combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations through the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant international instruments. We urge all United
Nations Member States to strive to implement that
approach in their counter-terrorism efforts.
We believe that terrorism cannot be countered by
law enforcement means alone. Prevention is also
critical. Effective responses will necessarily include
other aspects of legal and social policy, among which
some of the key components are development,
education, social integration, tolerance, the rule of law
and respect for human rights. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly
resolution 60/288) is a wholesome document that
incorporates various aspects in its four pillars and
provides guidance to Member States in implementing a
global strategy in a balanced and integrated manner.
Despite the various daunting challenges in the
fight against terrorism, significant progress has been
made over the past decade by strengthening
cooperation, enhancing solidarity and facilitating
dialogue among Member States in their efforts to

12-32940

S/PV.6765

counter the terrorist threat. The United Nations has
played a seminal role in the capacity-building of
Member States. States need assistance to fulfil their
obligations under the United Nations anti-terrorism
conventions to which they are a party, as well as the
Security Council counter-terrorism and other relevant
resolutions. We commend the efforts and commitment
of the relevant United Nations agencies, including the
Security Council’s subsidiary bodies, in developing the
capacities of countries in that regard.
While the Security Council has remained
steadfast in its fight against international terrorism, it
must further enhance the level of international
cooperation to counter the threat decisively. We
encourage the subsidiary bodies of the Council with
counter-terrorism mandates to continue to enhance
their ongoing dialogue with Member States, donors and
beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical assistance
for capacity-building at the national, subregional and
regional levels. We also welcome the recent initiative
of the Secretary-General for Member States to consider
the creation of a United Nations counter-terrorism
coordinator, and express our willingness to fully
engage in all deliberations aimed at further improving
the cross-institutional coherence and effectiveness of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
India has long held the belief that the United
Nations also needs to strengthen its counter-terrorism
normative framework through the adoption of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. I
can only echo the call of the Secretary-General that the
time has come for such a convention to be adopted.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Your personal
presence here today, President Aliyev, is an expression
of the importance your nation attaches to the global
fight against the scourge of terrorism. My delegation
welcomes you to the Council today and thanks you for
presiding over this meeting. We also wish to
acknowledge the presence of the various high-level
delegations around the table today. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
Terrorism remains a perennial threat to the world,
and we believe it is apt for the Council continually to
reassess the wide array of counter-terrorism measures
at its disposal. South Africa condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. The killing of innocent
civilians is never acceptable. We are firmly committed
to addressing the threat posed by international

12-32940

terrorism through multilateral forums and in
accordance with human rights, international law and
the United Nations Charter.
The United Nations has a pivotal role to play in
coordinating international efforts to fight the deadly
scourge of terrorism. It is important that Member
States pool their resources in combating terrorism
globally, and the multilateral system should be
strengthened to deal with those efforts. We should also
avoid the temptation to create parallel structures
outside of the United Nations, which results in
duplication, competition and the depletion of limited
resources that could have been used to reinforce United
Nations counter-terrorism global strategies.
South Africa is of the view that terrorism cannot
be defeated militarily or unilaterally. There is an urgent
need to focus on the deep-seated root causes of
terrorism and to develop collaborative strategies to
tackle the challenges of terrorism. In that regard,
concerted and sustained efforts must be reinforced in
order to resolve terrorism-related conflicts in all parts
of the globe.
We are concerned about the uncontrolled spread
of arms and ammunition in the Sahel region, emanating
from the Libyan conflict. That is directly related to the
increase in terrorism activities and transnational
organized crime in the Sahel and West African regions,
which present a threat to peace and security and
undermine efforts made thus far towards achieving
democracy, peace and stability. The global campaign
against terrorism should also include a worldwide joint
commitment to eradicating poverty and socio-economic
underdevelopment. Countermeasures can never be
sustainable if those factors are not addressed in relation
to counter-terrorism initiatives.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy remains a useful and flexible collective
platform for guiding the international community’s
response to terrorism. It provides a holistic and
multifaceted response to the challenge that is premised
on respect for human rights and the rule of law. The
Strategy recognizes that it is important to address
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism not
only in their own right, but also as part of an effective
anti-terrorism strategy. Furthermore, the strategy builds
on the international consensus that terrorism cannot be
ascribed to any particular religion or culture.

17

S/PV.6765

South Africa is convinced that international
efforts to support counter-terrorism initiatives have a
better chance of success if they also focus on regional
cooperation and coordination. It is up to all countries
and subregions to contextualize the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and to make it meaningful for
themselves as they address the diverse range of local
actors required for its successful implementation. A
one-size-fits-all approach would not work.
In that regard, we acknowledge the joint
initiatives of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force designed to strengthen regional cooperation
in the implementation of the Strategy, and their close
cooperation with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. We also appreciate the technical assistance
and cooperation that are offered to those countries and
regional organizations that need to address challenges
related to terrorism.
There should be greater interaction and
cooperation between the General Assembly and the
Security Council in order to ensure that actions taken
by the different structures in countering terrorism are
complementary, and not competitive or duplicative.
South Africa has taken note of the review of the
existing United Nations structures to combat terrorism
and the recent announcement made by the SecretaryGeneral regarding the appointment of a counterterrorism coordinator. In creating such an office, it is
important that the mandate and scope of the coordinator
be clarified, as should be the relationship between the
coordinator and existing United Nations structures
dealing with terrorism, each of which has its own
specific mandate. My delegation is of the view that the
creation of any new office should be measured against
its contribution to facilitating international efforts to
combat terrorism rather than duplicating existing
structures or placing additional burdens on Member
States, especially those from the developing world.
Building on existing international solidarity and
cooperation is the key to progress in addressing the
scourge of terrorism. It is therefore important that we
continue our efforts to finalize the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism by reaching
agreement on a definition of terrorism. We encourage
delegations to participate in activities aimed at
finalizing the draft convention, including discussions
on submitting a draft resolution.

18

As stressed in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, respect for human rights is
an essential element of our counter-terrorism efforts. It
is not possible to claim the moral high ground while
abusing basic human rights and compromising laws in
the interests of political expediency. We cannot remain
silent where rights are ignored and individuals are
subjected to unlawful detention, torture and
assassination. The Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
should be supported.
Security Council sanctions have to be capable of
withstanding legal scrutiny, including on the question
of due process. We therefore welcome efforts to create
fair and transparent procedures to be used in listing and
de-listing processes. Similarly, the Office of the
Ombudsperson, with the support of the members of the
Security Council, is playing a significant role in
strengthening the legitimacy and credibility of the
work of the sanctions committees.
In conclusion, we wish to emphasize that the
United Nations counter-terrorism agenda should place
a particular focus on the deep-seated socio-economic
and political disparities that are the breeding ground
for the spread of the terrorism in different parts of the
world. We also want to express our support for the
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of
today’s meeting.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we thank you for having taken the
initiative, through your Permanent Mission to the
United Nations, of organizing today’s meeting and for
doing us the honour of presiding over it personally. We
also express our gratitude for the concept note that you
have prepared (S/2012/281, annex), which will no
doubt guide today’s debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his presence and for the
information that he has presented.
The Government of Guatemala categorically
rejects all acts of terrorism and reiterates its
commitment to preventing and combating the scourge.
It is discouraging to find that terrorism in its different
expressions and locations continues to spread and even
to gain in intensity. The number of events and victims
is on the rise, at least in some parts of the world,
leaving a tragic trail of dead and wounded who are
almost always innocent men, women and children. The

12-32940

S/PV.6765

methods used are becoming increasingly grotesque,
and no one, not even United Nations personnel and
representatives of humanitarian institutions, escapes
the risk of experiencing a terrorist act.
Nor does the phenomenon recognize borders,
which is why international cooperation is critical in
addressing it. In that regard, we acknowledge the
important progress achieved in the fight against
terrorism, but evidence shows that we can and must do
much more.
Consistent with our repudiation of terrorism, we
have to date ratified 12 universal instruments currently
in force and the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism. In addition, we have a law against the
financing of terrorism, and we have established a
presidential commission against money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism. We are currently in the
process of incorporating into our national legislation
those acts of terrorism listed in the universal
conventions, and we have prepared a draft law against
international terrorism, which is currently under
consideration in the appropriate congressional
committees.
We are well aware that all States, in all regions —
be they large or small, strong or weak — are
vulnerable to terrorism and its consequences. Any
discussion of this important issue should therefore
focus not just on the threat to one country in particular
but on a concerted response by all countries.
Mr. President, in your concept note you have
submitted for discussion various ways of strengthening
international cooperation for the implementation of
measures to combat terrorism. In that respect, we
would like to make the following remarks.
First, we would like to see a stronger emphasis on
measures to prevent terrorism. We believe that we
should avoid focusing all of our attention on ex post
facto measures, particularly sanctions. In that regard,
we believe that conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism — its root causes — represent a key element
of the preventive measures that should be considered
on a priority basis.
Secondly, one of the many lessons learned over
the past 15 years is that it is not possible to combat
terrorism exclusively though military force. Although
terrorism is a criminal and unjustifiable act, all
measures to combat it must conform strictly to

12-32940

international law, in particular international norms for
the protection of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The legitimacy of the actions
undertaken by the United Nations and its Member
States is of crucial importance.
Thirdly, in making international cooperation a
fundamental pillar of the global effort to eliminate
terrorism, it is important to take two dimensions into
account: cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, and cooperation within the United
Nations system. With respect to the latter, this year the
General Assembly will undertake the third review of
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. That exercise will also
contribute to strengthening the capacity of the Security
Council as a key actor within the system. Concerning
the first aspect, we await with interest the
consideration of additional measures aimed at
strengthening the coordination, coherence, efficiency
and transparency of the Organization, with a view to
adequately responding to the needs and specific
circumstances of States and to optimizing relations
with regional and subregional organizations.
Fourthly, we believe that is necessary to adopt, as
soon as possible, a general convention on terrorism,
especially given the multidimensional character of this
phenomenon. We believe that the value added of a
general convention that would supplement existing
instruments to combat international terrorism would
include the following elements.
A general convention could contribute to
preventing impunity for those who commit acts of
terrorism, which is at this time one of the major threats
to international peace and security. It would facilitate
cooperation and mutual legal assistance among States
so as to bring the perpetrators to justice. It would
provide a definition of terrorism, allowing for the
universal classification of such despicable acts. It
would also bridge existing gaps in the work of the
Security Council, in particular with respect to the 1373
(2001) Committee and the measures taken by the
sanctions committees.
Fifthly, we express our solidarity with the victims
of terrorism and their survivors. We welcome the trend
towards the humanization of victims of terrorism.
Finally, my delegation fully supports the
proposed presidential statement that will be adopted at
the end of this meeting.

19

S/PV.6765

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
Azerbaijan’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council and to thank you for having convened this
debate on counter-terrorism. It is imperative that the
Council remain actively seized of the matter.
As the Secretary-General emphasized in his
statement, more than 10 years after the events of
11 September 2001, terrorism remains a grave threat to
international peace and security, and we must continue
to work relentlessly to combat it. This issue, which was
one of our priorities during our 2011 presidency of the
Group of Eight, is particularly important to France,
which was recently affected by that scourge on its own
territory.
The terrorist threat, which is more present than
ever, has evolved; specifically, it is becoming more
regional. Many local-level groups are affiliated with
Al-Qaida or pursue their own objectives. Those
amorphous groupings are having an impact on the
security and socio-economic development of entire
regions, in the Sahel — today in particular — Yemen,
the Horn of Africa, Central Asia or South Asia.
The Sahel region is very much affected, as the
events of the past few weeks have made clear, with the
occupation of cities in northern Mali by terrorist
groups and those who support them. We note that those
groups, wherever they are to be found, take advantage
of the historical weaknesses of the States targeted and
exploit them in order to create sanctuaries, which can
then be used as rear bases for operations aimed at
neighbouring States.
We cannot stand by idly in the face of the threat
of the expansion of regional hotbeds of violent
radicalization. To meet that challenge, the international
community must work together and give pride of place
to the implementation of national, regional and
international strategies. Such strategies must deal with
the issue comprehensively. Thus the elimination of
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism
requires the implementation not only of security
policies but also of development and good-governance
programmes. That can be done by, for example, putting
in place regional strategies. That is the approach taken
by the European Union, whose Sahel strategy has both
a security track and a development track.
I believe that two components of counterterrorism strategies are particularly important:

20

capacity-building and the promotion of the rule of law,
because they provide States under threat with a longterm approach. As we all know, when State authorities
lack resources, that fact is often exploited by terrorists.
Such States, threatened by the activities of terrorist
groups on their territory, must have at their disposal the
means necessary to dismantle networks and foil attacks.
They must also begin to cooperate politically and
operationally, especially at the regional level.
However, it is also vital that they have the means
and the technical assistance necessary to allow them to
prosecute, try and convict terrorists while complying
with human rights. France participates in these global
efforts, for instance by lending its support to the
establishment of judicial counter-terrorism centres in
Mauritania and Niger and offering training for judges.
France attaches great importance to counterterrorism efforts at the United Nations, the role of
which is irreplaceable and indispensable. The United
Nations has allowed us to establish a sound
international framework to combat terrorism. I am
thinking in particular of the relevant resolutions of the
Council, beginning with resolution 1373 (2001), the
many relevant United Nations conventions and
protocols and in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, the creation of which we supported
in 2006 when it was established by the General
Assembly. This series of texts reflects the current
international consensus on counter-terrorism.
Establishing norms is not enough, of course. We
need to strengthen specific actions against terrorism.
To that end, a number of projects and initiatives are
being undertaken under United Nations auspices, such
as the activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime on the ground, the technical assistance
programme of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, and the new United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre. I welcome the quality of work done
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which analyses and assesses the situation
of States, facilitates the establishment of technical
assistance programmes, and works to strengthen
regional cooperation by States in combating terrorism.
As we approach the biennial review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to be held in the next few
weeks, it is essential to continue working to improve
the institutional architecture of the United Nations
bodies tasked with fighting terrorism. On this point, we

12-32940

S/PV.6765

support the proposal of the Secretary-General
regarding the appointment of a United Nations counterterrorism coordinator. It is indeed vital to improve
international coordination, particularly through the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
offers the appropriate framework.
That improved coordination should be done on
two levels. First, it should be undertaken within the
United Nations in order to avoid duplicated initiatives
and to allow for synergies. Secondly, however, there
should also be coordination with outside institutions,
such as the European Union or the Global Forum, and
with other organizations that have counter-terrorism
competencies, such as INTERPOL. That is how we
will ensure both the coherence of international action
and the clarity of the work of the United Nations in this
area.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this timely meeting and for
honouring us with your presence in chairing it. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his introductory statement.
International terrorism continues to pose
enormous challenges to the international community,
requiring increasingly coordinated efforts to ensure
that it is effectively prevented and countered. The
presidential statement that we are going to adopt
rightly calls for enhanced coordination among all
relevant actors, including improvements in the
cooperative work done within the United Nations
system, on the one hand, and among international,
regional and subregional organizations, including civil
society and the media, on the other. I would like to
highlight some aspects in this context that, in our view,
deserve particular attention.
First, I note the need to encourage and assist
States in developing comprehensive and integrated
counter-terrorism strategies. Those strategies must be
devoted not only to law enforcement and reactive
approaches, but also to addressing conditions
conducive to radicalization and recruitment for terrorist
purposes. The strategies therefore must include
consistent preventive efforts and measures of a
structural and cross-cutting nature. Moreover, where
such preventive approaches are concerned, we attach
great importance to the promotion of a universal
culture of mutual understanding and tolerance among
different cultures, religions and communities. In this

12-32940

regard, we would like to underline the influential role
being played by the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, with its national and regional strategies
aimed at creating and nurturing a culture of inclusion
and tolerance for diversity.
Secondly, we very much value the attention given
to strengthening multilateral and bilateral technical
assistance programmes, offered upon request to the
States and regions that are most affected by terrorism.
The dimensions and seriousness of the challenges
posed to those States and regions by terrorism and
terrorist acts require, in our view, more consistent
provision of international assistance in the form
deemed most appropriate and effective. To that end, by
advancing regional solutions that are better tailored to
realities on the ground and better designed to respond
to similar challenges and to build on common strengths
and capacities, regional approaches often seem to be
the most effective framework.
Thirdly, we share the concerns expressed over the
increasing connection, in some areas of the world,
between terrorism groups and transnational organized
crime networks, including those involved in illicit arms
and drug trafficking, piracy and robbery at sea, moneylaundering and the trafficking of human beings.
Last but not least, we would like to reiterate the
particular importance of ensuring that counterterrorism measures fully comply with obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law. Respect for
human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law is also, in our view, a very effective tool for
fighting radicalization and countering the narratives
and appeals put forth by terrorist groups.
In this regard, and specifically referring to the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) on
terrorism, we are pleased to express our appreciation
for the remarkable improvements brought by the Office
of the Ombudsperson with regard to the fairness and
clarity of procedures for de-listing. Once again, we
take the opportunity to highlight the active role of the
Ombudsperson, Judge Kimberley Prost, in achieving
these goals in conformity with her mandate. In our
view, the possibility of introducing this positive step in
the framework of other United Nations sanctions
regimes merits further active consideration.
More has to be done, and in a more effective
manner, by the United Nations, including this Council,

21

S/PV.6765

to enhance the preventive agenda of global efforts to
counter terrorism. The United Nations retains wide
range of structures, both at Headquarters and in the
field, that in our view could be used in this area in a
more coordinated and interactive way.
We welcome all the organizational and
operational measures taken so far, but we encourage
further adjustments that could strengthen the
interaction of all the United Nations bodies engaged,
directly or indirectly, in preventive counter-terrorism
efforts. Among these measures, and as stated in several
occasions in the past, we are of the view that United
Nations political missions and political offices in the
field, which are particularly well placed to assess the
risks of terrorism and forms of violent extremism,
should be given the mandates and resources necessary
to allow them to advise and assist on appropriate
preventive efforts. They should function as a link
between the field and the relevant counter-terrorism
structures at Headquarters, such as the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, among
others. We stand ready to engage in further thinking on
how to enhance the role and capacities of United
Nations missions and offices in strengthening this
preventive aspect of counter-terrorism.

conducive to networking between terrorists and those
acting in such territories.
Azerbaijan has been affected by terrorism in
several ways, including as the direct target of
externally sponsored terrorist activity. The Republic of
Armenia committed dozens of terrorist acts against the
civilian population and infrastructure of Azerbaijan, as
a result of which over 2,000 Azerbaijanis have lost
their lives. Armenia orchestrated those acts with the
direct involvement of its security agencies and by
using international terrorist groups. During the active
phase of the Armenia-Azerbaijan Nagorno-Karabakh
conflict, Armenia widely practiced the use of terrorist
acts against the civilian population, in conjunction with
military aggression, to achieve ethnic cleansing. Those
acts of cruelty culminated in February 1992 in the
annihilation of the population of the town of Khojaly,
where 613 innocent people perished, including children,
women and elderly people. More than 100 women and
63 children were killed. Armenia also targeted civilians
far beyond the conflict zone, by masterminding
terrorist acts against public transport and critical
infrastructure, such as the bomb explosions in the Baku
metro in 1994 and others.

Although today we have largely been able to
neutralize the terrorist threat coming from Armenia, the
risk of terrorism posed by that country remains high.
As with many other international threats, We still encounter statements openly made endorsing
prevention is key to our medium- and our long-term certain terrorist acts as a legitimate military tactic,
success in fighting terrorism.
including the targeting of civilian infrastructure,
especially Azerbaijan’s water reservoir dams and oil
The President: I shall now make a statement in
pipeline networks. Such attacks will definitely result in
my capacity as President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
hundreds of thousands of casualties among the civilian
Terrorism is a serious threat to international population. Elements of international terrorist
peace and security and to the enjoyment of human organizations have been integrated into Armenia’s
rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy, political security and defence sector. It is appalling to see a
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and the country that claims to share European and universal
social and economic development of all Member States. values venerating operatives of international terrorist
Azerbaijan strongly condemns terrorism in all its forms organizations as heroes, and even erecting monuments
and manifestations. We consider that all terrorist acts to them.
constitute serious crimes and must be condemned and
The policy of the ethnic cleansing of Azerbaijanis
prosecuted. Terrorists must never be allowed to try to
has resulted in the occupation of 20 per cent of the
establish a pretext for their actions. All terrorist acts
internationally recognized territory of Azerbaijan,
are unjustifiable regardless of their motivation.
creating more than 1 million refugees and internally
Terrorism has a changing nature and character. In displaced persons, who have been forced to leave their
many instances, it is inseparably linked to aggressive homes. The Security Council has adopted four
separatism, extremism and organized crime. Areas resolutions demanding the withdrawal of Armenian
affected by armed conflict — especially territories troops from the occupied territories. Unfortunately, for
under foreign military occupation — create conditions

22

12-32940

S/PV.6765

almost 20 years those resolutions have been ignored by
Armenia.
The occupied territories of Azerbaijan represent a
source of grave concern in terms of the linkage among
terrorism, separatism, extremism and organized crime,
including drug trafficking, money laundering and the
illicit supply of arms to the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan. In addition to the terrorist threat from
Armenia, Azerbaijan continues to face the risk and
threat posed by international terrorist groups. The
proximity of our country to volatile regions makes the
threat even more imminent for us. It is, therefore, no
coincidence that Azerbaijan has been undertaking
comprehensive national measures and actively
contributing to international efforts to curb terrorism.
Being a proponent of the indivisibility of security,
Azerbaijan has been an active contributor to the
international counter-terrorism coalition.
Although the international community has made
remarkable achievements in countering terrorism, more
should be done to prevent and combat the scourge. The
absence of a clear definition of terrorism in
international law hampers the efforts of the
international community to bring to account not only
individual terrorists and organizations but also States
that promote, support or finance terrorist activities. In
that regard, Azerbaijan stresses the importance of
reaching agreement on a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism to serve as an effective
instrument to combat terrorism. Achieving agreement
on a definition of terrorism and a convention on
international terrorism could effectively address some
outstanding issues, including the issue of getting States
to refrain from organizing, financing, encouraging,
providing training or otherwise directly or indirectly
supporting terrorist activities.
Such an agreement should precede open and
holistic discussions on the root causes of terrorism. We
need to pay due attention to that issue within the
ongoing international efforts, including through United
Nations mechanisms, to address issues of social and
economic development and education. Low levels of
education, coupled with economic hardships, are
factors that facilitate the work of terrorist propaganda,
which is often promulgated through misinterpretations
of religions.
The war on terrorism should not be used to target
any particular religion or culture. Today, we are living

12-32940

at a time of heightened religious awareness, which in
certain instances takes on exaggerated forms and
sometimes is maliciously exploited to fuel conflicts on
ethnic, religious or cultural grounds. In recent years,
the unacceptable “Islamophobia” emerging in some
countries confirms the vital necessity of joint efforts
and dialogue to counter instances of defamation and
misconceptions.
Azerbaijan does its best to contribute to the
dialogue among civilizations. Our country hosts
numerous events aimed at creating a better
understanding among representatives of various
religions.
Azerbaijan
is
a
multinational,
multi-confessional country, where people of many
nationalities and practitioners of all religions live
together in peace and harmony. The multicultural
dialogue we enjoy in our country can serve as an
example of the peaceful coexistence of people of
differing religious backgrounds. Azerbaijan is a
country of tolerance, and we highly value our varied
heritage and the multicultural legacy of our past. Today
we are increasingly working to create a spirit of
partnership and fraternity among our many
nationalities and religions.
Economic development is one of the most
important aspects of the fight against terrorism,
promoting good governance and improving living
conditions for populations. Over the last decade
Azerbaijan has made great economic progress. Our
country has been independent for only 20 years. But
those years have been years of reform, transformation,
development and progress. In less than 10 years our
economy has tripled. Poverty has been reduced from
nearly 50 per cent to 7 per cent. One million jobs have
been created. Many social programmes are being
implemented. The international financial institutions
recognize what we are doing. Three major international
organizations, Fitch Group, Moody’s Corporation and
Standard and Poor’s, recently upgraded our credit
rating. That is good sign of development, especially in
the midst of the financial and economic crisis.
Combating poverty, creating new jobs, developing
solid legislation, strengthening the rule of law, battling
corruption — all those help countries’ development and
consolidate efforts to combat terrorism.
We must all join our efforts to combat terrorism.
The nature of terrorism today and its increasing
connection with other threats to international peace and
security require close international cooperation among

23

S/PV.6765

States, including through the establishment of a more
coordinated, coherent and systematic United Nations
approach. However, the existence of conflicts among
States, foreign military occupation and aggressive
separatism provide fertile ground for terrorism. The
international community should, therefore, facilitate
the resolution of conflicts on the basis of the generally
accepted norms and principles of international law,
particularly those relating to respect for territorial
integrity and inviolability of the internationally
recognized borders of States, and help countries restore
sovereignty over their own territories.
I would like to use this opportunity to thank all
the States Members of the United Nations for their
support of Azerbaijan’s candidacy. Last October, for
the first time in our short history, Azerbaijan was
elected as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. This is a big responsibility, and we are ready
to assume that responsibility. Azerbaijan will defend
the ideals of justice, international law and peaceful
cooperation between all countries.
We have done considerable work within our
region in order to bring countries together. Our
initiatives are aimed at the expansion of regional
cooperation in the spirit of friendship, partnership and
good neighbourliness. We definitely intend to
contribute much during our presence in the Security
Council, and I can assure our friends in the United
Nations — all Member States — that Azerbaijan will
be a reliable and friendly partner to all countries. We
want to expand our cooperation and partnership, and
we are very grateful for this support.

24

Our country has had a great history, culture and
traditions, but as an independent State, it has had only
20 years of experience. These recent years have been
years of transformation, development and presentation
to the world. The very fact that 155 countries
supported our candidacy showed that we managed to
present ourselves in a positive way. That demonstrates
that the international community trusts us, believes in
us, and is willing to confer this responsibility on us.
I can assure the Council that Azerbaijan is ready
for this responsibility. We will not let down those who
have trusted us, and we will do everything in order to
create a more predictable, safer world for all of us.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members of
the Council, I shall take it that members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2012/17.
It is so decided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12:25 p.m.

12-32940
