TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 24 JANUARY

1969

Na?lW YORK
.,/.. .-

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1463) , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . .

1

Expression of sympathy to the representative of Algeria . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of, thanks to the retiring President and to the retiring members of the
Security Council, and welcome to the new members and to the representative of
the United States of America . . , , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . , . . , . , . . . . . , , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

2

Letter dated 9 January 1969 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council transmitting the text of General Assembly
resolution 2479 (XXIII) of 2 1 December 1968 (S/8962):
Note verbale dated 16 January 19 69 from the Permanent Mission of .the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations qddressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8967) and note verbale dated 16 January 1969
from the Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8968) . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

S/PV. 1463

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of cnpita2 letters combined with
figures. Mention of sucha symbolindicatesa reference to a UnitecZNations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .>are normally

published in quarterly

Supplementsof the Official Recordsof the Securi2y Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

AND

dd in New York

SIXTY-T

on Fd ay, 24 January

Fresident: Mr. Max JAKQBSON (Finland).

MEETING
1969, at 10.30 a.m.

Bouattoura. Perhaps I may be permitted to suggest that the
telegram read as follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, ,Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

“On the occasion of the first meeting of the Security,
Council in 1969, and on behalf of all members, I wish to
extend sympathy on your recent accident and the very
best wishes for full and speedy recovery.”
This will be signed by the President of the Security Council.

Prcsvisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 463)

6. As I hear no objection, I take it that the Council agrees
that the telegram be sent.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 9 January 1969 from the Secretary.
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council transmitting the text of General Assembly
resolution 2479 (XXIII)
of 21 December 1968
(S/8962):
Note verbale dated 16 January 1969 from the
Permanent Mission of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8967) and note ’
verbale dated 16 January 1969 frdm the Permanent
Mission of Sp.ain to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8968).

7. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): My
delegation and I have been deeply touched by your
generous expressions of sympathy for the ordeal which
Mr. Bouattoura’s family and the members of our Mission
are now undergoing. We hope that our Ambassador will
recover and be able to rejoin us very soon, and I shoild be
grateful, Mr. President, if on behalf of our delegation and of
Mr. Bouattoura’s family, you would thank all those who
have offered us help and sympathy-in particular U Thant,
the Secretary-General of our Organization, and Mr. Wiggins,
whose assistance has been invaluable. We all pray that
Mr. Bouattoura may be promptly restored to health, and
we shall of course transmit the text of the President’s
telegram both to the Algerian Government and to
Mr. Bouattoura’s relatives.

Expression of sympathy to the representative of Algeria

1. The PRESIDENT: Before taking up the business of the
day, I am sure all members of the Council would wish me
to say how profoundly distressed we were to hear what had
happened to our highly respected colleague, Ambassador
Bouattoura. I should like to, ask the delegation of Algeria to
convey to its Government our feelings of concern and our
heartfelt hope for his early recovery.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President and to the
retiring members of the Security Council, and welcome to
the new members and to the representative of the United
States of America

8. The PRESIDENT: It is now my privilege, on behalf of
the Council, to pay tribute to my predecessor in the
Presidency, Ambassador Makonnen bf Ethiopia, who during
the last days of the past year presided over the meetings of
the Council with his customary skill and eloquence.
Throughout the two years of Ethiopia’s membership he
rendered outstanding service to the work of the Council in
accordance with the best traditions of his great country.

2. I now call on the representative of Senegal.
3, Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated
from Rench):
Mr. President, I should like to raise a point of order in
connexion with the confirmation you have just given of the
news that our colleague Mr. Bouattoura has met with an
unfortunate accident and is now in hospital in New York.

9. The five outgoing members of the Security Council
were represented by an unusually distinguished group of
men comprising, in addition to Ambassador Makonnen of
Ethiopia, Ambassador Castro of Brazil, Ambassador
Ignatieff of Canada, Ambassador Borch of Denmark and
Ambassador Parthasaratbi of India. On behalf of the
Council, I extend to them our sincere appreciation for their
contribution to the work of the Council, They set a high

4. I should like formally to propose to our colleagues that
a telegram should be sent to Ambassador Bouattoura
expressing our sympathy and wishing him a full and speedy
recovery.
5. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Senegal, and I would suggest that, if there is no objection, a
telegram be sent on behalf of the Council to Ambassador
1

example for those of us who represent the newly elected
members.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

10. At the first meeting of the year it is customary for the
President to welcome the new members. Since my own
country, Finland, is among them, it mdy be more appropri.
ate for me to say ,on this occasion that I am convinced that
the five new members-Colombia,
Nepal, Spain and
Zambia, as well as Finland-while
representing widely
different areas of the world, different points of view and
different interests,, are united in their desire to carry out
their duty to act on behalf of all Members of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Letter dated 9 January 1969 from tbe Secretary-General
addressed to the President 0% the Security Council
transmitting
the text of General assembly resolution
2479 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968 (S/6962):
16 January 1969 from the Permanent
nion of Soviet Socialist Republics to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8967) an note verbale dated 16
January 1969 from the Permanent Mission of Spain to
the United Nations addressed to tbe President of the
Security Council (S/8968)

11. Ambassador Turbay Ayala of Colombia, Ambassador
Khatri of Nepal, Ambassador de Pini& of Spain and
Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia have all played a prominent part in the activities of the United Nations and I am
sure that the Council will prbfit from their experience and
dedication.

16. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
begin its examination of the question placed before it by
the delegations of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and Spain in their communications which are referred to in
the agenda that has just been adopted

12. I should also like to take this opportunity to extend a
word of welcome to Ambassador Yost of the United States,
new as Permanent Representative of his country but well
known to most of us from his previous term of duty in the
United Nations. His recent book ends with the thought that
it is high time to begin the task of invigorating the United
Nations. We are happy that he has been given the chance to
take part in this great task.

17. In this connexion I should like to draw attention to
the draft resolution submitted by eight delegations and
circulated as document S/8976, as well as to the SecretaryGeneral’s note on financial implications, which has been
circulaied as document S/8977.
18. Mr. MALIK

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): I should like to express my great

13. I should now like to make a statement on behalf of
my own country, FINLAND, which today is represented at
this table for the first time.

satisfaction at the fact that my colleagues and myself have
the honour to be present today at this rather unusual
meeting of the Security Council-unusual, first, because of
the items under discussion and, secondly, because five new
members of the Council, elected at the twenty-third session
of the General Assembly, are taking part in the Council’s
work for the first time. I think the representatives of all
States members of the Security Council, both those
recently elected and those who might be called the
veterans-permanent and non-permanent members alikemust agree that the first Security Council meeting of a new
year with a new membership, following the regular session
of the General Assembly, is always watched by everyone
with keen interest; it automatically makes us look towards
the future and hope that the joint work of the old and new
members of the Council will be friendly and successful in
achieving the noble aims and objectives set for the Security
Council by the United Nations Charter.

14. As a small neutral country which has sought and
found security not through reliance on military alliances or
the protection of one group of Powers against others, but
through a foreign policy designed to keep it outside
international conflicts and controversies, Finland has a vital
interest in promoting the development of a peaceful and
rational world order based on the universal collective
security system provided by the Charter of the United
Nations. The primary responsibility for the effective func.
tioning of this system rests with the Security Council-the
supreme organ of co-operation between nations for the
purpose of maintaining international peace and security. We
believe that, as a member of the Security Council, Finland
can best contribute to this co-operation through strict and
consistent adherence t,o its policy of neutrality, which,
while it enjoins us to refrain from taking sides in disputes
betweetl the great Powers, enables us to maintain friendly
relations with ail States across the dividing lines of ideology
or military alignments and thus to work whenever possible
for the cause of conciliation and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Neutral States have, we believe, a special obligation, not cinly to themselves but to the international
community
as a whole, to conduct themselves with
objectivity and restraint so as to retain the confidence of all
sides and thus the ability to perform such peaceful services
as may be required in the interest of international peace
and security.

20. Those who have already participated in many Security
Council meetings, of course, also wish to acquaint themselves more closely with their new colleagues and to
co-operate with them in this noble work.

15. It is in that spirit that Finland will endeavour to make
its contribution to the work of the Security Council.

21. The Soviet delegation would like to offer its sincere
congratulations to all the new representatives in the

19. We hope that those who have taken their seats at this
table for the first time today also wish to participate fully
in our work, and make their contribution to the common
task of considering and settling matters relating to the
maintenance and strengthening of peace and international
security.

2

Security Council, and to wish them every success in the
common task of the enlarged Council.

28. But although it is merely a procedural matter; surely
no one would deny that the item on today’s agenda is not
only of great practical but also of great political importance. By dealing with this problem we shall improve the
machinery of the Security Council, increase its efficiency
and thus facilitate co-operation among its members.

22. We should also note another event at today’s meeting.
This is the first meeting of the Council to be attended by
the representative of the new Government of one of the
permanent members of the Security Council, the United
States of America. Of course, Mr. Charles Yost is not a
newcomer to the United Nations or to the Security
Council. What is new, however, both for us and for him, is
that he is now participating in our work as his country’s
Permanent Representative to the United Nations and the
Security Council.

29. We are convinced that this must in general have a
positive effect on the Security Council’s ability to discharge
the noble tasks assigned to it by the Charter.
30. At its recent twenty-third session the General Assembly adopted, by an overwhelming majority, a resolution on
the question of including Russian among the working
languages of the General Assembly. In that resolution the
Assembly expressed the desire that Russian should also be
included among the working languages of the Security
Council.

23. We should like to extend to him also our best wishes.
His wealth of experience, his vast learning, his knowledge of
international problems-especially the problem which has
recently been and remains the major preoccupation of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and world public
opinion as a whole-we hope that all these qualities will
contribute to the success of our common search for
practical ways and means of solving not only this problem
but all other problems facing the Security Council both
now and in the future.

31. This shows that a great many of the States Members of
the United Nations, representing all the social systems and
all the main geographical areas in the world, wish such a
decision to be taken.
32. During the proceedings in the General Assembly the
representatives of many Member States, advocating the
inclusion of Russian among the working languages of the
Security Council, noted that it had now become an
important means of communication
among States and
peoples, that it had made and continued to make a
significant contribution to world civilization, and that it
was one of the leading languages in contemporary literature
on’ the broadest range of scientific, technological and
cultural questions. Russian is spoken not only on earth, but
in outer space. If we take only one field of human
endeavour directly related to the work of the United
Nations-international
intercourse and diplomacy-we cannot but note that Russian is used in the United Nations
system by the representatives of countries with a population of more than 300 million, and that it is spoken by the
representatives of Member States from Europe, Africa, Asia
and now, it seems, even from Latin America.

24. We are especially pleased to welcome you,
Mr. President, the representative of a friendly neighbouring
country to which the Soviet Union is closely bound by
genuinely good-neighbourIy relations, and a country whose
contribution to the cause of mutual understanding and
co-operation stands high in our estimation.
25. Although only a short time has passed since your
country became a member of the Security Council, you
already enjoy a high degree of confidence and have the
authority to guide the work of this body, which under the
United Nations system is entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the main-tenance of international peace
and security. We have no doubt that your wealth of
experience, your goodwill, your tact, so well-known at the
United Nations, and your great talent for finding common
ground and establishing professional and personal relations
with the representatives of other countries are so many
guarantees that you will discharge your extremely difficult
but honourable and responsible duties to perfection, and
we wish you all successin your task.

33. This goes to show that the inclusion of Russian among
the working languages of the Security Council would make
a significant and valuable contribution
to international
intercourse and co-operation and would facilitate participation in the Council’s work both for representatives of the
States members of the Council and for those invited to sit
at the Council table during the consideration of important
matters involving their national interests.

26. To our great sorrow and regret, today’s meeting of the
Security Council is clouded by the enforced absence of the
distinguished representative of Algeria, Mr. Bouattoura, our
friend and colleague in the common struggle to strengthen
peace, stamp out aggression and foster friendship and
co-operation among peoples. We sincerely wish him a
speedy recovery.

34. It was also pointed out in the General Assembly that
Russian is the language of a country which played a
significant role in the creation of the United Nations, which
has been a permanent member of the Security Council since
the foundation of the Organization, which has always done
its utmost to forge the United Nations into an effective
instrument for strengthening international peace and security and giving support to all peoples in their struggle
against colonialism and racism for freedom and independence.

27. The Security Council has been convened today to
consider a rather unusual question. It is not debating a
dangerous international conflict or a dispute between states
threatening international peace and security, matters with
which the Security Council so often has to deal, beca.r:e of
the responsibility for the maintenance of peace placed on it
by the Charter. Today ‘he Council is concerned with a
matter connected with its method of work, i.e. the procedural question of including Russian and Spanish among its
working languages.

35. May I, in all modesty, say that we think tiat these
words are justified, since the Soviet Union does indeed
3

tions raised the question as to whether, in connexion with
the increase in the number of working languages of the
Security Council, some changes or improvements should
not be made in the existing practice regarding consecutive
interpretation of the statements made by the representatives of member States in the Security Council.

constantly and persistently strive to do all it can to
strengthen the United Nations through strict compliance
with the Charter.
36. Russian is the language of V. I. Lenin, the hundredth
anniversary of whose birth will be celebrated in 1970-a
man who proclaimed the noble principles of peace among
d States, self-determination of peoples and equal rights for
alI nations. It is the language of Chicherin, of Litvinov and
of other eminent Soviet statesmen and scientists who have
hoisted high in the world arena the banner of peace,
peaceful coexistence, disarmament and relaxation of
tension and co-operation among States. In all justice,
Russian can be and should be a working language of the
Security Council, which is required by the Charter of the
United Nations to keep constant vigil over the peace and
security of nations.

43. In our view, the answer to this question can only be
determined from the future experience of the Council; to
make any changes in its practice at this stage would be
premature and inappropriate.
44. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation would like to
express the hope that all members of the Security Council,
prompted by a desire to expand and strengthen their
mutual understanding and co-operation in the Council, will
unanimously support this draft resolution on the question
of including Russian and Spanish among the working
languages of the Security Council.

37. In strongly advocating the inclusion of Russian among
the working languages of the Security Council, the Soviet
Union was not and is not seeking any special one-sided
privileges. We understand and respect the interests of other
States and groups of States’ in this matter and for that
reason we unhesitatingly supported the proposal made at
the twenty-third session of the General Assembly that
Spanish should also be included among the working
languages of the Security Council, since it is the basic
language of many States Members of the United Nations.

45. I waive my right to consecutive interpretation,
46. Mr. DE PINlESl\(Spain)
(translated from Spanish):
Having been elected by the General Assembly to this
important office, my delegation is now taking part in the
work of the Security Council for the first time. My first
words must be to extend my greetings to all the members
of the Council, and particularly to the Algerian Ambassador, my good friend Mr. Bouattoura. We pray for his
speedy recovery and hope that we shall soon be able to
count on his valuable assistance.

38. Therefore, in proposing that the Security Council
should decide to include Russian among its working
languages, we ask that that decision should also be applied
to Spanish,

47. 1 should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on the election of Finland as a member
of this high Council. This also means that it is your task to
preside over the first meeting of the session which begins
today. Your competence, sense of responsibility and
personal qualities inspire confidence in us as we begin our
work.

39. The Soviet delegation is therefore pleased to introduce
officially to the Council a draft resolution submitted by
eight countries-Algeria,
Colombia, Hungary, Pakistan,
Senegal, Spain, Zambia and the Soviet Union-on
the
question of including Russian and Spanish among the
working languages of the Security Council [S/89 76/.
40. This draft and the General Assembly resolution to
which reference is made note that the use of several
languages by the United Nations could constitute an
enrichment and a means of attaining the objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations.

48. My delegation also wishes to congratulate the representatives of Colombia, Zambia and Nepal who have also
just joined the Council. I cannot fail to mention that we
derive special pleasure from the fact that on this auspicious
occasion we are joined by two Spanish-speaking countries
with which we have so many close ties.

41. The draft resolution contains a clear, simple operative
paragraph, in accordance with wbich’the Security Council
would decide to include Russian and Spanish among its
working languages and, ln this connexion, to amend rules
41, 42, 43 and 44 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council. The revised text of those rules is
annexed to the draft resolution. These amendments are
designed to reflect the increase in the number of the
Council’s working languages and do not propose any other
changes in the rules of procedure. It is our view that the
rules of procedure must be amended only to the extent that
is absolutely necessary. Of course, the changes in these rules
would have no effect whatsoever on the existing practice in
the Security Council which provides for simultaneous
interpretation into all the official languages of all state.
merits made in the Council.

49. Similarly, I should like to thank the representative of
the Soviet Union for his cordial welcome to the new
members of the Council. I should also like to extend my
greetings to the Unit.ed States Ambassador, Mr. Yost, whom
we know from the past. We congratulate him on his
election to such an important post.
50. While briefly mentioning my country’s feelings on
assuming this office, I feel bound to mention that, since
Spain joined the United Nations, its delegation has always
striven to uphold the ideals of the Charter. It has constantly
tried to strengthen the authority of the Organization and
comply faithfully with its resolutions and decisions.
51. It is a long time since the activities of the General
Assembly and the Council were of necessity restricted by
their limited membership. The historical circumstances in

42. We know that during the consultations

ceded this meeting

which preof the Security Council some delega.
4

which the Organization was established imposed unfair.
Limitations on it, which have in part been overcome.
Fortunately, ilttitlldCS haVe also changed since that time,
and the process of dccolonization has opened the doors of
our Orgunizntion to INW peoples and new ideas.
52. Although conceived of ideally as a universal organizalion, the IJnitcd Nations had in fact many defects in the
beginning. Fortunately, today WC can say that SORIC of the
early mistakes hue been corrected, certain injustices have
been wiped out and, with the admission of over seventy
more StatCS, millions Of IllCIl Cilil now IllilkC their voices
heard. Bven though the Olganization is still not perfect, it is
obviously n10rc rcprcscntative and fairer than it was
initially. I believe that these two characteristics are absolutely essential when 0nC considers the importance that our
discussions ilIld decisions Can have.
53. The spirit which made the ~‘WIOUS “package deal”
admission Of StiltCY possible in IOSS, which was when we
join4 the Organi?.ation, proved that it is always possible to
coml>romisc. The fact that two of those States arc today
taking their plact! in tlir Conncit for the first time is yet
anotljer itrgllllldIlf
in filVtNlr of the ildInisSi0Il of all
pc;lce-lovi~~g L’ountrics which undcrtakc to respect the rules
of the OIgani;z:!t ion ill orilcr to ItliikC it trllly universal.
S4. The problcnls that we shall have to consider in the
by their vrry Ililtllrc, serious. Whatever
they III:I~ be, my country is ready always to consider them
in the ligll t 01‘ the strictest principles of equity and justice.
In.th:it Gay. it will merely bc trying to he faithful to an
age-old tradition rooted in the point in history--and I want
to stress this -at which its material power wx at its peak.
b:thicnl reasons, tclgethcr *with the internationalist tradition
of the Spitnisll schol>l of SaIaIllitIIca aIlcl Aleal;i, make IIS
always ready to tistcn to the voice of justice and to
cnd~;lvour to ensure comptianc*c with the obligations arising
from voluntary ac<:el>tancc of the Charter, an undertaking
which id1 Memtxx StiltCS tlilVC CXpreSSly lll~lCIC. 111a world of
opposing intcrcsts ilIld fierce conflicts the only olt~rIliltiVC
io the tragfjcly of il world-wide catastrophe is strict
enforcement of the law and complete raspcct for the
principles of Itic C’lliirter.
next two years ilIt,

55. My country fully ur\d~rst;lnds that thcrc are reasons
for granting certain privilcgcs to other Stales with wider
intcrests. At ill1 CVClltS, WC 1laVCiIll flJITlillly XCCplCd ttlCSC
privilcgcs. I1iIl it is only fair that, whilst recognizing theIll,
wc shc.)ultl rcrnind the privilcgcd StiltCS. of their greater
responsibility and their binding duty to respect the opinion
of the majority, rcflccted in General Assembly resolutions,
when that privilege is not involved. That is the only way
that ttlu k!liL!iltC IllCChillliSlll
Of IXll~lrlCCS created by the
Ctlilrkr to SilfCgll~lrd 1XilCC and security Cilfl function.
56. My delegati1tn ~olcmnly undertakes to devote itself
entirely to the great responsibility it has assumed hy
iiCCI?ptiIIg this office. We will iIlw~lyS Cll~lIll~JilJIl gOOd CnlISCS;
WC shall be iI friend to all those who come to IIS and make
no distinction between old and new countries. from one
continent or another, whatever their political convic:Lions;
we Shdl bc ready to help them to find settlements through
negotiation based on the principle of justice which should

inspire all our actions. In the final analysis, we are guided
by the desire to try to perform a service, as far as WC are
able, to international peace and security.
57. I should now like to say a few words about the draft
resolution before us /S/S976/, concerning the use of
Spanish and Russian as working languages of the Council.
Quite apart from the satisfaction that, for obvious reasons,
my delegation derives from this resolution, in all objectivity
I should like to point out that these two languages, Spanish
and Russian, are spoken by many mi!lions of men, and in
the case of Spanish, in twenty-one countries. Through the
centuries they have been important media for literature,
science, philosophy, etc., and they can now serve as
important instruments for furthering the aims of the
Charter and the obligations which all of us here have
assumed. In the view of my delegation, to add to the
instruments serving the cause of peace at 3 relatively
moderate cost is a vdid contribution thnt this Council can
make. For these reasons, my delegation hopes for a
unanimous’vote for the draft resolution which, along with
seven other countries, we have the honour of sponsoring.
58. Mr. CSATORDAY
(Hungary)
(frunslatcd jh~
12ussian):May I at this first meeting of the Security Council
in l!W) walcome you as the President of the Council for
this month and also as the representative of a friendly
country, Finland, one of the new members of the Security
Council. The ever-increasing tics between our countries are
due not only to our common efforts to maintain peace and
security in Europe, but to the special iink created by ethnic
and linguistic kinship. We trust that our co-operation with
you will prove fruitful and arc convinced that your
remarkable and well-known personal qualities will do much
to make this possible. I wish you iI11 success both as
President of the Security Council and in your future work
in the Council.
59. 1 am very happy to extend a warm welcome to the
representatives of Nepal and Zarnbiz, Mr. Khatri and
Mr. Mwoangn. The elrction of these countries to the
Security Council is an eloquent testimony of the high
cstccm in which the Members of our Organization hold the
honoured representatives of Asia and Africa. We are
convinced that these t,wo delegations will labour as unstintingly in the Council to strengthen lIeact: and security,
as they have done in other organs of the &ited
Nations.
60. I assure them that in this work they Cilll illWityS rely W
the sympathy and co-operation of the llungarian dclcgation.
61. I should also like to wdcorne, on behalf of my
dclegntion, two other new membt~rs of the Council--the
representatives of Colombia and Spain, Mr. Turbay Ayah
illId Mr, de PiniBs. I hope tllat we shall be able to combine
our efforts to settle international issues.
62. 1 should like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude tn those colleagues who lsft the Coxncil upon the
expiry of the term of office of their countries at the end of
1968. I shall always rcmembcr with pleasure our work with
the reprcsentntives of Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Ethiopia
and India.

71. We also welcome Mr. Charles Yost, a colleague and
friend of long standing, whose firm grasp and invaluable
knowledge of international affairs, whose exceptional qualities as a diplomat, whose fairness and shrewdness in
negotiations and whose constancy and friendship are
already well known to many of us. We also extend a
welcome to the representative of Spain, a well known
United Nations figure, and to the representatives of
Colombia, Nepal and Zambia, with whom my delegation
will doubtless develop relations of fruitful co-operation.

63. On behalf of my delegation I should like to welcome
Mr, Charles Yost, the new representative of the United
States of America, and a man well known to us all. We have
great respect for his remarkable diplomatic talents and his
experience. I should like to assure him that we are ready to
join hands with him to solve international problems in the
Security Council, just as we co-operated in the search for
peace and security with his predecessor.
64. We should like to join with the President in expressing
regret at the absence of our good friend, Mr. Bouattoura,
who is seriously ill. We wish to convey our sympathy to the
delegation of Algeria, with the hope that Mr. Bouattoura
will soon recover and continue to make his useful and
fruitful contribution
to internatiorud peace and COoperation,

72. I wish also to pay a sincere tribute to the delegations
of Brazil, Canada, Denmark and Ethiopia, who throughout
the two years in which we worked together were imbued
with this same spirit of co-operation, which must be the
moving spirit of the Security Council.

65. This Security Council meeting has been convened at
the request of the Soviet Union and Spain for the purpose
of considering the General Assembly’s proposal that Russian and Spanish should be included among the working
languages of the Security Council. General Assembly
resolution 2479 (XXIII), which was adopted by an overwhelming majority on 21 December 1968, indicated the
desirability of adopting such a proposal, and requested the
Secretary-General to transmit the resolution to the Security
Council. In our view, the General Assembly’s proposal quite
rightly requires the Council to take immediate action. Both
Russian and Spanish are already official languages of the
Council. Outstanding literary masterpieces have been written in those languages. They are both languages in which
many shades of meaning can be expressed. They are spoken
in many parts of the world. They are the mother tongue
and the means of international communication in a large
part of the world. At least one third of the members of the
Security Council use these languages in their work.

73. Finally, I wish to express to the delegation of Algeria
my delegation’s deep concern at the state of health of its
leader, Mr. Bouattoura, and to ask it to convey our wannest
sympathy to our colleague in his misfortune and to his
young wife.
74. On the item on our agenda, I intend to be very brief.
In the letters from the Permanent Representatives of the
Soviet Union and Spain which have been circulated to us,
reference is made to General Assembly resolution
2479 (XXIII).
My delegation voted in favour of that
resolution and it sees no reason to dwell at length on its
merits at this stage. Spanish is the official language of
twenty-one States in Europe, Latin America, Asia and
Africa, and is also widely used in other countries. Many
United Nations delegations speak that rich and varied
language, which I have admired since the time, long ago,
when I wasa member of the CasaVelasquez in Madrid.
75. The adoption of this new working language by the
Council, besides being the logical conclusion of the General
Assembly’s proceedings and recommendations, will be the
practical expression of the desire of the members of the
Council that their debates should be accessible to a wider
audience.

66. My delegation considers that these facts speak for
themselves. The Hungarian delegation, whose native tongue,
like yours, Mr. President, is unfortunately not a language of
international importance, fully support the General Assembly’s proposal, and is prepared to vote in favour of draft
resolution S/8976.

76. The same applies to Russian, Although admittedly this
language is spoken by only a small number of delegations, it
too has made a valuable contribution to culture and
civilization.

67. It also hopes that, as we start a new year, this draft
resolution will be adopted unanimously by the Security
Council.
68. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Mr. President, the fact that the honour and responsibility of
conducting the opening debates of our new Council have
been entrusted to you augurs well for the year 1969.

77. My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by Algeria, Colombia, Hungary,
Pakistan, Senegal, Spain, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and Zambia,

69. Your qualities as a diplomat and your experience in
the United Nations are well known to us all, and we have
on many occasions admired your intelligence, devotion and
spirit of co-operation. We are convinced that you will guide
our work in the right direction, thus following the path
paved by your predecessor, the representative of Ethiopia.

78. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Mr. President. Merci, Monsieur le B&dent. Blagadaryu
vas.
Gospodin Predseda tiel. Gracias, Seaor Presiden tee.

79. First I shall like to express the deep concern and
sympathy that my delegation feels for our brother, the
representative of Algeria.

70. We are happy to greet you also as the representative of
a country with which, as shown by the recent visit to Paris
of the President of the Finnish Republic, France has warm
and steadfast friendly relations, and we are very pleased to
welcome your country to this Council today.

80. Next, Mr. President, I should like to welcome you as
our President. When I first came here, two years ago, I
asked friends for lists of persons who really understood the
6

United Nations and who had the wisest judgement on our
affairs, and your name was on every lis,t I was given. We
have great confidence in you and great pleasure in
welcoming you asPresident.

88. My delegation has taken careful note of the views of
the general membership of the Organization as expressed in
the vote on General Assembly resolution 2479 (XXIII),
namely that in the instance of the Security Council it was
desirable to include Russian and Spanish among the
working languages.

81. I also wish to associate my delegation with the tributes
you paid to our greatly respected colleague, your predecessor, Mr. Makonnen, and to all our comrades who worked
with us in the past two years.

89. Despite our doubts and reservations, we shall vote for
the draft resolution set out in document S/8976, and we
pay homage to two splendid languages reflecting the genius
of two great peoples and civilizations.

82. Allow me also, on behalf of my delegation, to
welcome the representatives of the countries that have
joined us: Spain, Nepal, your country, Mr. President,
Colombia and Zambia. These are all countries with special
contributions to make to our work, and we look forward
greatly to working with them in our mutual task of seeking
for peace and security.

90. Finally, this draft resolution must have reminded all of
us of the extent to which we in this Council, as in other
organs of the United Nations, are dependent on the devoted
body of interpreters and translators. We should be helpless
without their services, whatever the number of working
languages. Considering the difficulties under which they
work and the speed at which they have to operate, their
standard is very high indeed. I am happy to have this
occasion to pay a tribute to them.

83. Lastly, may I add a personal, warm word of welcome
to my neighbour, Ambassador Yost.
84. My delegation well understands the natural wish of
those whose mother tongue is either Russian or Spanish to
see these languages working languages of this Council.
These are two great, rich and beautiful languages, and in
human and cultural terms we cannot but welcome the
addition of the languages of Tolstoy and Cervantes to those
of Shakespeare and Voltaire.

91. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (tmnsluted from
Spanish): Mr. President, first and foremost I should like to
convey to you our warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the office of President of this Council. We
have complete confidence that you will guide our discussions with the tact, wisdom and diplomatic skill which you
have always shown. We for our part offer you our
wholehearted co-operation.

85. The reservations we have are influenced, however, by
the rather more drab and mundane standards of practicality
and efficiency. Briefly we consider the test of the need to
adopt an additional working language to be the extent to
which its adoption would expedite our work. What we need
is the quickest, simplest and cheapest method of international communication. Maybe one day, regardless of pride
in our national tongues, we will all learn one common
second language. If the peoples of the world could
communicate in one international language there would be
few limits to what could be achieved. In the words of the
Old Testament,’ speaking of the days before the Tower of
Babel: “The people is one and they have all one language . . . and now nothing will be restrained from them
which they have imagined to do”.

92. Following the elections at the twenty-third session of
the General Assembly, the representatives of Colombia,
Finland, Nepal, Spain and Zambia are now taking their
places in the Council for the first time in 1969. We are sure
that each one of these countries will make an effective and
lasting contribution to the maintenance of international
peace and security in conformity with their past traditions.
We should like to extend the warmest welcome to all their
representatives. But, for reasons which will be quite clear to
everybody, I should like to mention in particular the
presence of Colombia and Spain. Those two countries have
old and fin-n bonds of friendship with mine and their
representatives to the United Nations have honoured me
with their friendship.

86. In the view of my delegation a multiplicity of working
languages is not conducive to the efficiency of the
Organization, nor does it represent the best use of our
limited financial resources. That remains our view. And we
do not consider that a decision to increase the working
languages of the Council should be regarded as a precedent.
Indeed, I sometimes think that rather than being eloquent
in four working languages, we would do better to emulate
Count Moltke, who was reported to be “silent in seven
languages”.

93, This is an occasion for celebration. Since the time
when the United Nations was established and the Council
actually began its activities, two places in the Council have
always been occupied by States from the Latin American
region where Spanish is almost universally spoken. These
representatives have constantly had to cope with the
disadvantage of having only the English and French versions
of verbatim records of the Council’s meetings and other
equally important documents. The only exception has been
that, in accordance with the last part of rule 45 of the
provisional rules of procedure, certain fragmentary-and I
repeat fragmentary-records have been available.

87. My delegation is also concerned lest the marrying of
four working languages with out-of-date rules of procedure
may give rise to opportunities for obstruction in the work
of the Council itself. I believe that the delegations of the
Soviet Union and of Spain are equally well aware of these
dangers, and will work with,the Council to avoid them.

94. There is no need to stress the magnitude of this
drawback-it has meant that the representatives of Intin
America have not been able to read and quote from these
important documents in their mother tongue. However, this
will be remedied when the Council adopts, as we are sure it

1 Genesis, chap. XI, 6.

7

--

will, the draft resolution sponsored by eight States.,
contained in document §/8976 and the annex thereto.

will bring fresh insight and strength to tht: Council in ‘the
discharge of its primary responsibility.

9s. Moreover, this a-mendment to t&c rules of procedure is
in accordance with the wishes of a substantial majority of
the members of the United Nations, as reflected in the
adoption of resolution 2479 (XXIII) during the twentythird session of the General Assembly.

102. Before I proceed further, I should like to express our
deep concern and sympathy to the Algerian delegation over
the illness of Ambassador Bouattoura, and to voice our
prayer for his speedy and full recovery.
103. Ambassador Yost is not a newcomer to this Council.
I should like to extend my delegation’s cordial welcome to
him as the distinguished representative of the United States.
He brings to his new duties not only a breadth of erudition
and richness 0-F txperience, but also an insight into the
insecurity of nations. He joins us here at a historic moment,
which promises to be a point of convergence of the forces
of peace. We are uplifted by the ,words of President Nixon
that America is determined to master this moment and
grasp the role of peacemaker for which history reserves its
highest accolade. The time of renewal and rededication is
also a time of re-examination. Ambassador Yost’s assignment here thus gain,s in significance, and we pray that his
tenure will witness the transition to the era of negotiations
with all the promise that it holds for the future of mankind.

96. We definitely hope that this long overdue decision will
now be adopted, now that for the first time in the history
of the Council, the representatives of three-I repeal of
three-countries
whose official langdage is Spanish are
taking part in thjs meeting as members of the Council. We
are also delighted that it was none other than Spain which
took the initiative and principal action to realize the
long-standing aspiration of Latin America. From what I
have said above, it will be.understood that when the draft
resolution in question is putjto the,,vote, my delegation will
vote in favour of it.
97. Before concluding, I should like to add a few words
more. Firstly, I should like to extend our greetings to the
new representative of the United States of Anerica,
Mr. Charles Yost. We welcome his return to the Organization which he has so brilliantly served in the past.

104.. On a personal level, I look forward to friendly
association and close co-operation with all our new colleagues, both within and outside this Council chamber.

98. Secondly, I should like to repeat what I said at our last
meeting in 1968, on 31 December, when I expressed our
sincere and profound gratitude to Canada, Brazil, Denmark,
Ethiopia and India and their representatives for their
outstanding work in the Council and our appreciation of
your predecessor .as President, our good friend Mr. Makonnen.

105. I should also like to take this opportunity to pay my
tribute to the devotion to the Council’s objectives demon,.
strated by the outgoing members. The positive contribu.
tions made by Ambassador de Arailjo Castro of Brazil,
Ambassador Ignatieff of Canada, Ambassador Borch of
Denmark, Ambassador Makonnen of Ethiopia and Ambassador Parthasarathi of India to the Council’s achievements
during their term of membership of the Couilcil will always
be remembered by those of us who had the privilege of
working with them. Ambassador Makonnen of Ethiopia
presided over the Council last month with conspicuous
ability, tact and wisdom.

99. At the beginning of today’s meeting, on behalf of the
Council you expressed common concern for our colleague,
Mr. Bouattoura, the representative of Algeria. In accordance with the proposal of the Ambassador of Senegal, it
was also decided to send the telegram tihich you kindly
read out to us. Although my delegation’s feelings are
reflected in your words and in the telegram, nevertheless I
should like to add a personal note and express my most
sincere wishes for the complete recovery of Mr, Bouattoura.
We are extremely concerned about his impaired health and
sincerely regret his absence from our midst at this meeting.

106. Finally, Mr. President, I offer you my congratulations on your assumption of the Presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. Having heard your
statement this morning, we have no doubt that your
devotion to the high principles of the foreign policy of
Finland and your own outstanding personal and professional qualities will be a source of inspiration and wisdom
to the Council.

100. I should like to ask the representative of Algeria to
accept our expressions of sympathy and, at the same time,
to be so kind as to convey them to Mr. Bouattoura’s family.

107. With regard to the item on our agenda for today, it
will be recalled that the General Assembly adopted, at its
twenty-third session, resolution 2479 (XXIII), deciding to
include Russian among the working languages of the
General Assembly and expressing the view that it was
desirable to include Russian and Spanish among the
working languages of the Security Council. Accordingly,
my delegation has joined with the delegations of the Soviet
Union, Spain and five other countries, namely, Algeria,
Colombia, Hungary, Senegal and Zambia, in sponsoring the
draft resolution contained in document S/8976 to give
effect to that recommendation of the General Assembly.

101. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, may I warmly
welcome you to the Council, and also our new colleagues,
Ambassadol: Turbay Ayala of Colombia, Ambassador
Khatri of Nepal, Ambassador de Pin& of Spain, and
Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia. As all of you join us here
you enrich the composition of the Council with your
personal abilities and dedication to the cause of the United
Nations, for which you are well known. You also bring to
the Council the distinctive perspectives in which the
problems confronting us are viewed in your respective
countries and regions, We have no doubt that by virtue of
the representation of your Governments and of the
confidence you enjoy from your own regional groups, you

108. The Pakistan delegation does not belittle the view
that the criterion for determining what should be the
8

war

shol
mea
Nat
WO’I
can
thei
WO’S

and
hi
thal

nictl
the
10’9
incl
it :ir
to I
thrd
1an.f
cot

1110
247
ne’n
2:

rant
its
whd
111
n-El!

See

we1
the
Par
WhC

guir
rep
and
lealc

beii
attc
sta
11:
SIXI
guil
11:
bat
be
set
Nal

al I:(
111
lasl
FMr

cas
ah.e
01:1
the

working languages of any organ of the United Nations,
should be efficiency and economy. While that yardstick or
measure is undoubtedly important where the United
Nations, which is the principal political organization in the
world, is concerned, considerations of a political nature
cannot be excluded. The United Nations reflects not only
the’ principle of balance among the major Powers of the
world, but also that of respect for the equality of peoples
and the main forms of civilization. We believe that the time
has come to give expression to those principles more fuily
than in the past, in the interests of goodwill and harmonious co-operalion among the various groups of Members in
the United Nations.

115. And again, in his inaugural address, last Monday,
President Nixon added to his oath of office “this sacred
commitment:
I shall consecrate my office, my energies and
all the wisdom I can summon, to the cause of peace among
nations”. It will be my privilege in the time ahead to work
with my colleagues here in the spirit of that solemn
commitment by President Nixon.
116. This opportunity is especially welcome to me because I deeply believe that nations can find only a limited
and precarious security in arming against each other, that
firm and lasting security for each nation can be realized
only as and when we carry out the pledges we each assumed
when we subscribed to the Charter of the United Nations:

109. Now that the General Assembly has decided to
include Russian and Spanish among its working languages,
it is both timely and appropriate for the Security Council
to give weight to the General Assembly’s considered view
that it would be desirable that these two great and rich
languages should become working languages of the Security
Council as well,

“to practise tolerance and live together in peace with
one another as good neighbours, and
“to unite our strength to maintain international
and security, and

peace

“to ensure,
by the acceptance of principles <and the
institution of methods, that armed force shall not be
used, save in the common interest”.

110. By responding to General Assembly resolution
2479 (XXIII), the Council is now beginning its work in the
new year on a positive note. It would be excessive optimism
on our part if we thought that in the coming months all
decisions would be equally harmonious and equally free of
rancour. But the hope is not vain that the Council will do
its utmost to sustain this note of balance and progress on
which we are proceeding with our deliberations today.

117. We are still far from having made a reality of those
principles and pledges. We have made but a beginning. Mow
far and how fast we go forward will depend to a large
extent on the members of this Council. I assure you that to
move forward together will be the solemn and the
unremitting purpose of my Government and myself.

111. Mr. YOST (TJnited States of America): Mr. President,
may I express to you and to my other colleagues in the
Security Council my warm thanks for the kind words of
welcome that have been addressed to me on my return to
the United Nations and. to the Council table. It is a
particular pleasure to return to the Council at a moment
when you, Mr. President, are in the Chair. Your distinguished record of service to the United Nations as the
representative of Finland is well known to all of us here,
and we are fortunate to be meeting und.er your able
leadership. I have a particular feeling of appreciation at
being able to collaborate with an old friend on this, my first
attendance here as Permanent Representative of the United
States.

118. At this first meeting of the Security Council in 1969,
it is my privilege also to say a word of welcome, on behalf
of the United States, to the distinguished representatives of
the five nations which have just begun their turn as elected
members of the Council: Colombia, Fi-iland, Nepal, Spain
and Zambia. Like their immediate predecessors-Brazil,
Canada, Denmark, Ethiopia and India-each of our newly
elected colleagues has much to contribute to our work, as is
shown
by their record of past service to the United Nations.
We shall, I know, have frequent reason to appreciate their
presence in this Council during the next two years, and my
delegation looks forward with much pleasure to working
with them.

112. Let me also express Ihe appreciation of the United
States delegation for the valued services of your distinguished predecessor, Ambassador Makonnen of Ethiopia.

119. Also on behalf of the United States, I wish to join
with those other members who have expressed deep
sympathy and concern over the serious illness of our
colleague and friend, the representative of Algeria, Ambassador Bouattoura. I very much welcome our decision to
dispatch to him a telegram of sympathy and good wishes.

113. I need hardly say how gratifying it is to me to be
back. My greatest wish as United States representative is to
be able to render some service to the cause of peace and
security among nations, the cause for which the United
Nations was created and to which my country
is unalterably comm.itted.

120. Finally, since I am a late-comer and missed the
occasion itself, I wish ,to take this opportunity to cnngratulate our distinguished Secretary-General on his sixtieth
birthday. I wish him many h.appy returns, which I am
confident will be happy returns not only for him and his
family, but for the United Nations and the world,

114. That commitment was reiterated by President Nixon
last 17 December, even before he took office, when he paid
call on the Secretary-General
accompanied by
Lr. Rogers, the present Secretary oi State. On that occasion Mr. Nixon pledged “our intention in these years
ahead to do everything that we can to strengthen this
Organization as it works in the cause of peace throughout
the world”.

121. Like other members of the Council, the United
States is pleased that we are starting the new year on a note
of harmony. As members of the Council are aware, the
‘Jnited States adopted a position in the General Assembly
9

1’27. I should like to take advantage of our meeting today
to thank the African Group and all the countries that made
it possible for the Republic of Zambia to succeed the sister
State of Ethiopia as a member of this most important organ
of the United Nations. I am very glad, indeed, to be here
today to speak for my country, the Republic of Zambia. I
am glad to be her& to join my two other African colleagues
from Algeria and Senegal in reflecting the views of the Once
forgotten continent of Africa.

on the question which is on our agenda today which wis
different from that on the draft resolution before us. No
one could have higher respect and admiration than we have
for the great Russian and Spanish languages and the great
peoples which are attached to them. But we have had some
concern-l believe a legitimate concern-over the administrative and budgetary consequences of the decision taken in
General Assembly resolution 2479 (XXIII). Elowever, in the
interest of harmonyoand co-operation, to which we attach
the highest importance, we support the draft resolution
before us {S/8976] and the amended rules of procedure of
this Council.

128.
We have come here, first, to learn how the job is
done from those who are alreacly masters in rhe art and,
secondly, to make our maximum contribution towards
fmding solutions to problems which so violently divide the
world. We are a small country both in ::rms of size and
population, but we have a big ambition lo work relentlessly
for the establishment of a ju.st and lasting peace, to build
bridges between nations where they do not exist and to
make wars a thing of the past. Zambia’s voice in the
Cbuncil will unambiguously serve the cause of justice and
freedom for all men wherever they may be. In keeping with
our cherished policy of positive non-alignment, we shall
continue to pursue a dynamic and ob.jective foreign policy
which will enable us to take positions on issues purely on
their merits. We shall therefore refuse to be taken for
granted by anyone, anywhere.

122. Since it is necessary to amend the Council’s provisional rules of procedure to take account of the decision we
are about to take, in the view of my delegation it would
also be desirable to take the additional step of dealing with
the problem of consecutive interpretation.
123. The practice of consecutive interpretation dates from
the early days of the United Nations when thr: technical
facilities for simultaneous interpretation did not exist.
After the provision of the excellent system of simultaneous
interpretation that we now enjoy, the practice developed
for speakers to waive the right to consecutive interpretation. By doubling the number of working languages but
failing to grapple with the anachronism of consecutive
interpretation, we have left open the possibility that the
work of the Council, which is of such high importance,
might be seriously impeded.

129. We have not come here for the purpose of making
friends; we have not come here for the purpose of making
enemies; we have come here to speak for justice and fair
play and against all evils which threaten the very existence
of mankind. We shall work tirelessly to help in the
furtherance of the purposes of the United Nations Charter
and in the discharge of the responsibilities devolving on the
Council under the Charter. The Republic of Zambia, which
I am privileged ,to represent, is geographically located in one
of the most potentially explosive areas of confrontation in
international politics, and it will, with this in mind, fight
for the total elimination of colonialism, of policies of
aggression in all their forms, of imperialism and of all forms
of intervention or foreign interference in the domestic
affairs of truly independent and sovereign States.

124. We are also faced, as the Secretary-General’s note
[S/8977/ makes clear, by substantial extra expenses, which
might be reduced if we take timely and appropriate
precautions. My delegation would therefore hope that at an
early date the Council may see fit to re-examine and to
adopt a further amendment to the provisional rules of
procedure which would provide for consecutive interpretation only at the prior request of a member of the Council,
perhaps with the further understanding that if consecutive
interpretation
is desired into more than one working
language such interpretation might be carried out at the
same time. We believe that an amendment along such lines
would facilitate our work and would contribute substantially to economy and efficiency in the Secretariat. I hope that
my colleagues will give this suggestion early and sympathetic consideration.

130. We pledge our full co-operation with the delegations
represented on the Council in defending the United Nations
Charter and promoting a policy of friendship among all
peoples based on equality.
131. Turning to the question on our agenda, my delegation voted in favour of General Assembly resolution
2479 (XXIII)
on 21 December 1968, and will today, for
the reasons stated then2 and as a co-sponsor of draft
resolution S/8976, vote in favour of this draft resolution
today.

125. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Mr. President, permit me
on behalf of my delegation, to extend our felicitations on
your assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council for the month of January. Knowing your
enormous personal qualities, we are confident that you will
perform your most difficult task to our utmost satisfaction.
I should also like to welcome Ambassador Yost, the
representative of the United States, and to assure him of
our fullest co-operation.

132. Mr. Turbay AYALA (Colombia) (translated from
Spanish): My delegation would like to express its appreciation for the. most sincere welcome which it has received
along with the other countries newly elected at the last
session of the Assembly to take their place in this Council.
The welcome encourages us and gives us confidence and it
makes US more aware of our grave responsibilities.

126. Since this is the first time that my country is
represented on the Security Council as a nonapennanent
member, I should like to ask the indulgence of the Council
and take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, and
alI those who have showered my delegation with overgenerous and undeserved words of welcome.

2 See Offiial Records of the General Assembly,
Session,Plenary Meetings, 1752nd meeting.

10

Twenty-tflird

133. Of course, this is not the first time that Colombia has
taken a seat in the Security Council. It has been represented
here before and, within the natural limitations experienced
by every small State, has resolutely and enthusiastically
made its contribution to the cause of peace. Now again my
delegation comes to the Council with the same aim, since
we think that despite our limited capacity we should help
to strengthen the Organization and, by so doing, strengthen
peace. However, we are very concerned that the world
Organization, in which so many hopes are placed, might
lose some of the prestige it enjoys in worid public opinion.
And this can happen if the many tensions threatening peace
continue, if we do not work efficiently to overcome them
or if efforts are systematically made outside the Organization to find solutions for problems outside it rather than
through it. We are convinced that the m.ain concern of all
Members of the United Nations is to make their contdbutions to the cause of peace. Of course, we who have the
honour of being in the Security Council should be resolved
to accept our share of sacrifice and self-denial, because it is
the best way to serve the cause which has been entrusted
to us.

139. Lastly, my delegation wishes to express its deep
sympathy and its best wishes for the recovery of the chief
of the Algerian delegation. I should like to ask the
representative of that delegation here today to convey this
testimony of our concern to him.
140. My thanks go to all. But I should not like to end
without expressing my appreciation of the work accomplished by the representative of Brazil, whose place
Colombia now occupies.
141. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): 1 should like first of all,
Mr. President, to welcome your country, Finland, as a
member of the Security Council, to congratulate you on
your assumption of the office of President of the Council,
and to express my delegation’s full confidence in you as our
leader for this month.
142. May I also welcome the other new members of the
Security Council-namely,
Colombia, Spain and Zambiawith whom we look forward to work in close collaboration
in the two years that lie ahead.

1134, I should like to state that we understand our position
here to be that of all small countries. We are definitely not
Powers in the material sense but are just as concerned as the
great Powers and perhaps more so when peace is disturbed.
The cause of peace is indivisible and concerns us deeply as
such, not the particular peace in any specific area.
Everything that happens in the world is of interest to us in
so far as today the world has shrunk and all the problems in
the world affect every citizen. Problems have ceased being
international problems to a certain extent and have become
national problems of concern to everybody.

143. I cannot fail to convey my profound gratitude to the
outgoing members for their valuable and constructive work
in the Council. I reserve my special appreciation and thanks
for Ambassador Parthasarathi and the country he represented, India, which we have succeeded in the Council and
with which my country enjoys the closest and friendliest of
relations, relations which are traditional
and timehonoured.
144. I also pay my tribute to Ambassador Wiggins of the
United States, who has left us after a brief but pleasant
association, and extend my hand of welcome to Ambassador Yost, whom many of us know as a valued friend and
colleague.

135. On this occasion I should like to place on record the
esteem which my delegation feels for the President of the
Council. We know his intelligence and his great experience.
We know that under his leadership we shall be well directed
and shall achieve the aims which we have set for ourselves.

145. On this occasion I wish to associate myself with the
telegram sent on behalf of the Council expressing concern
at the serious illness of Ambassador Bouattoura of Algeria.
We wish him a very speedy and complete recovery.

136. Similarly, 1 am extremely pleased that the representative of the United States, Mr. Yost, has today taken his
place at the first meeting of the Council in 1969 and that
he can bring to the cause of peace his knowledge, and above
all, the desire for peace expressed by the Government of his
country, which has filled the world with justified enthusiasm.

146. My delegation is very grateful to you, Mr. President,
and to other members of the Council for the generous and
friendly words of welcome addressed to my country as it
assumes membership of the Security Council. May 1 say
with humility that we are aware of the distinction, as well
as the responsibilities, of membership of the Security
Council, to which the General Assembly has elected us. We
take it as a mark of reassuring goodwill shown by Member
States to LIS, Nepal, whose policy, as laid down by His
Majesty King Mahendra, has all along been one of friendship and goodwill to all, and malice to none. I wish to
assure the Council of my delegation’s loyal service and full
and complete co-operation in the fulfilment of our common mandate: that is, the upholding of the integrity of the
Charter and the maintenance of international peace and
security.

137. With regard to the draft resolution now before us
was honoured to sponsor it
because it believes that even though there may be procedural difficulties involved, the possibility of using two new
important working languages would obviously make a great
contribution to the better understanding and achievement
of the aims of the Charter.

IS/89 761, my delegation

138. I do not think that there is any need to eulogize the
Spanish and Russian languages or point out their importance. The fact that they are spoken by 500 million persons
already in itself makes it most important to take them into
account as working languages of the Security Council. We,
for our part, believe that we are making a great contribution to better understanding among nations by sponsoring
this draft resolution.

147. With regard to the draft resolution before the
Council [S/8976], I should like to explain in a few words
the affirmative vote of my delegation. The delegation of
Nepal will cast a favourable vote on this draft resolution
11

because we voted in favour of General Assembly resolution
2479 (XXIII)
of 21 December 1968, by which the Assembly decided to include Russian among its working
languages and considered it desirable to include Russian and
Spanish among the working languages of the Security
Council. That General Assembly resolution and an earlier
one, resolution 2359 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967, both
considered that the use of several languages by the United
Nations could constitute not a hindrance but rather an
enrichment and a means of attaining the objectives of the
Charter, a consideration which the delegation of Nepal
recognizes as absolutely valid.
148. With the adoption of this draft resolution, all official
languages, with the exception of Chinese, will have similar
standing as working languages in two of the principal organs
of the United Nations. Our favourable vote on this draft
resolution, however, should not be regarded as derogating
in any way from our recognition of the status of Chinese as
one of the five Charter languages.
149. One of the world’s oldest and most developed and
articulate languages, Chinese, is spoken by, and unites,
more people than any other language. Moreover, it is an
embodiment
of all that is best and noblest in the
civilization and culture of mankind. It is in the interest of
promoting international understanding that we think that
that language also should be increasingly used by the
United Nations.
150. The discussion of the present draft resolution has,
quite logically, brought to our mind the deplorable situation in which our Organization finds itself today: The
People’s Republic of China, the source and mainstay of that
great language, a founding Member of the United Nations, a
major nuclear Power and, moreover, a permanent member
of the Security Council, has had all its rights usurped in the
United Nations. The fundamental way of life of the 800
million Chinese people, their culture, their civilization, their
aspirations, their heritage and their language can be
represented by no authorities except the Central People’s
Government of the People’s Republic of China, which is the
one legal Government accepted by them. If we are to be at
all successful in attaining the principles and purposes of the
Charter, it is high time that we restored all the legitimate
rights of the People’s Republic of China in the United
Nations and in all its organs and related agencies.

Council, and my delegation wishes to pay further tribute to
Mr. Makonnen, Mr, Parthasarathi, Mr. de Araljjo Castro,
Mr. Borch and Mr. Ignatieff for the valuable work they have
done.
154. I am convinced, like other representatives, that those
whom we are welcoming to the Council today will also
preserve their faith in our Organization and that they are
equally determined to co-operate sincerely and fruitfully
for the greater successof the Council’s work.

II
p:l
P”

155. In congratulating you, Mr. President, 1 wish in
particular to say that my country felt deeply honoured by
the fact that the President of Finland decided to spend his
recent winter holidays at Dakar. This is further evidence of
the ties between our two countries, as we reaffirm our
determination
to work together in this Council for the
attainment of our common ideals of peace and social
justice.

Pl

156. May I add that my delegation welcomes with
satisfaction the appointment of Mr. Yost as the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America. We
remember his predecessor, Mr. Wiggins, as a man both
talented and amiable. Mr. Yost is well acquainted with OUI
Organization, and we are aware of his wide knowledge and
of the work he has done in this Council. We are pleased to
welcome him and to wish him a pleasant stay with us, and
we hope our work together will help to realize our
aspirations for peace in a world ruled by social justice.
157. Finally, my delegation shares the concern of its
colleagues in the delegation of Algeria over the health of
our friend Mr. Bouattoura. We again wish the Ambassador a
speedy and complete recovery and ask the representative of
Algeria in the Council to transmit our warmest expressions
of sympathy to Mrs. Bouattoura and to the members of the
Algerian Mission.
158. It is encouraging to note that the first item before
our Council in this new year is of a cultural and thus a
peaceful nature. As we see it, the essenceof the question is
that Russian and Spanish are the two cultural languages
spoken by a large section of the world’s population.
159. My country is proud to belong to a large linguistic
group known as the French-speaking community, of which
it is one of the rnost staunch supporters and advocates.
Nevertheless, we cannot overlook the increasing influence
and importance of Russian and Spanish.

15 1. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French): My
delegation is pleased to be able to offer its congratulations
to
the new members of the Security Council-Colombia,
Finland, Nepal, Spain and Zambia.

160. In principle, my country
is in favour of the use of all
languages, as they are the real means of expressing thought,
and because, above all, they are a magnificent cultural
medium and an outstanding means of achieving the
understanding among all men without which there can be
no peace on earth.

W
SC:

11

1t
til
klll
1t
th
ard
in
sel,
lfl
fo
th
Se
sh,l
PI!
un

ea:i
16
wi:
nel
Wa

K
Ali
abi~
ass
del

1711
to
UR
to

152. These five countries are from different continents.
But although there are geographical, historical, economic
and ethnic differences between them, they are. bound
together not only by a feeling of human solidarity, but by a
steadfast determination to strive for the victory of our
Oganization’s noble ideals and for the achievement of a
new international system based on international peace and
security.

161. In this connexion, it is perhaps pertinent to note that
Senegal, a country which believes in the exchange of ideas,
which is open to all views and which hopes to play its part
in building a world civilization, has already made R.rtssian a
second optional language in its schools and colleges.

171
vn
wis
mil

153. It is this same ideal which, as we all know, for two
years prevailed among the outgoing members of this

162. Russian is the official language of the Soviet Uniona major political, economic and scientific Power and a

17:
is F

12

nation which played a decisive role in the Second World
War and thus became a founding member of our Organization and one of the permanent members of .the Security
Council.

Tolstoy, and Spanish, the language of Cervantes and Garcia
Lorca, apart from its links with our national language of
Arabic, are about to be adopted as working languages of the
Security Council.

163. Furthermore, the Security Council, as the body
primarily responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, cannot continue to neglect Russian as a
working language, when we see the exploits of Soviet
scientists and cosmonauts, a few days after those accomplished by United States scientists and astronauts.

173. Mr. LI[U (China): First of all, I should like to
associate my delegation with the words of tribute that have
been eloquently extended by previous speakers to the new
members and to the retiring members of the Council. In
particular, Sir, I welcome you as the first President of the
year.

164. We would like here to pay a tribute to them both.

1’74. Perha.ps I may add how glad I am to welcome back to
our midst an old friend and esteemed colleague, Ambassador Yost, who is no stranger to this Council.

165. Furfiennore, Russian is spoken by many millions of
people, and its influence throughout the world will increase
in the future. This is, therefore, a question not only of
doing justice to a great country, but also of paying tribute
to a nation which is earnestly trying to develop science in
the service of mankind and, consequently, of international
peace and security.

175. At its twenty-third session, the General Assembly, in
resolution 2479 (XXIII) adopted on 21 December 1968,
recommended to the Security Council to consider the
advisability of including Russian and Spanish among the
working languages of the Council. The CounciI is now
called upon to give effect to that recommendation.

166. As far as Spanish is concerned, we have for a long
time been acquainted with the literature of the beautiful
language of Cervantes.

176. Members of the Council cannot be unaware of the
fact that the distinction between working and other official
languages in the deliberative organs of the United Nations
has been steadily diminishing as has been pointed out by
the Secretary-General in a report issued in 1967.3

167. On a personal note, I should merely like to point out
that Spanish sounds and words, altered over the centuries,
are to be found in our national language. Spanish is spoken
in nearly all continents. We would therefore be pleased to
see the Council restore that language to its true place.

177. The Security Council, as far as the use of languages is
concerned, differs from other deliberative organs of the
United Nations in that here speeches are interpreted not
only simultaneously but also consecutively. The consecutive interpretation of a speech into three or four languages,
irrespective of their merits, would necessarily be a timeconsuming process and may have the effect of impairing the
efficient and effective performance of the Council’s functions. On the other hand it must be noted that in practice
the Courdl
has in recent years tended to reduce the volume
of consecutive interpretation, which is frequently dispensed
with in the interest of expedition.

168. If our Organization wishes to be the breeding ground
for a world civilization, it must welcome the inclusion of
these two languages among the working languages of the
Security Council. Realism, if nothing else, dictates that we
should do so. We will thus enable these two languages to
play their true role, which is to foster international
understanding so that the world peace which we all so
earnestly desire may become a reality.
169. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeiia) (transhted frorrz French): I
wish to take advantage of this opportunity to welcome the
new members of the Security Council and offer them our
warmest congratulations on their election to this high
position. Congratulations
go in particular to you,
Mr. President, the representative of a country with which
Algeria has long had close ties. We are convinced that your
abilities will find full scope in our work and would like to
assure you that you will receive full support from our
delegation in discharging your duties.

178. It is thus clear that, in the Security Council as in
other deliberative organs of the United Nations, the
distinction between working and other official languages
has come to be rather academic. While my delegation does
not see the necessity or wisdom of formally increasing the
number of working languages, we have no objection to the
proposal provided that in practice no undue burden will be
imposed upon the Council’s proceedings.

170. I should also like on behalf of the Algerian delegation
to welcome Mr. Charles Yost, the Ambassador of the
United States of America, a brilliant diplomat well known
to us all.

179. Allow me to say a few words in the light of what has
been said about the Chinese language, I am very much
impressed by what the representative of Nepal had to say
about the Chinese language but I cannot help regretting
that he was so carried away as to touch on matters outside
the scope of our consideration.

171. Once again I should like to thank those who have
sympathized with our grief in these difficult times. Their
wishes for Mr. Bouattoura’s speedy recovery will be transmitted to his family and to the Algerian Government.

180. Mr. President, in your introductory remarks you
enjoined all members of the Council to act for all Members
of the United Nations. Those were wise words. Indeed the

172. In conclusion, let me say that the Algerian delegation
is pleased to note that Russian, the language of Gorky and

3 Ibid., Twenty-second
ment A/6860.

13

Session, Annexes, agenda item 82, docn-

.

1

Security Council. That concludes my statement as representative of Finland.

Council receives its mandate from the entire membership
and acts on behalf of that membership. Only two months
ago the General Assembly, representing the entire membership, by a decisive vote confirmed the,rightful status of my
delegation. I do not believe this is the time or place to
question the majority decision of the General Assembly.

18.5. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I wish to state that the
Council can now proceed to take a decision on the
eight-Power draft resolution (S/8976/. If I hear no objet.
tion, I shall consider that draft resolution adopted unanimously. There being no objection, I declare the draft
resolution adopted.

181. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers on
my list, and I should like to take this opportunity to make
a brief statement’as representative of FINLAND.

7&e draft resolution was adopted.4

182. When the question of the working languages of the
various organs of the United Nations was considered by the
General Assembly, my delegation voted in favour of the
recommendation
that Russian and Spanish be included
among the working languages of the Security Council, and
naturally we support the draft resolution that is now being
considered by the Council.

186. The PRESIDENT: In connexion with the adoption
by the Security Council of the resolution on the inclusion
of Russian and Spanish among the working languages of the
Security Council and of the annex attached to it containing
a new wording of rules 41,42,43 and 44 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, I wish to make
the following statement.

183. The international importance of the Russian and
Spanish languages in the world today is self-evident and
needs no further elaboration. It is the hope of my
delegation that the addition of those two languages to the
working languages of the Council will improve mutual
understanding among its members and thus prove to be a
gain for us all. We should like to Iook upon the decision
that the Council is about to take as an indication of the
great interest of the Russian and Spanish speaking nations
in the activities of the United Nations and of their
commitment to this Organization.

187. The provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council deal with consecutive interpretation of statements
into the working languages, and the revisions now made are
the consequence of the decision to add Russian and Spanish
to the working languages of the Council. The established
practice of simultaneous interpretation of statements into
ail the official languages of the Security Council remains
unchanged. In the light of subsequent experience of the
practical effects of the decision to increase the number of
its working languages, the Council may wish to consider at
a later stage whether any improvements in the practices of
the Council could be made in order to enable it to carry out
its tasks as effectively aspossible.

184. I should not wish to conclude this statement without
taking the opportnnity to thank most sincerely all those
representatives who in their statements today have made
such generous comments about my country and about
myself. These expressions of goodwill give us greater
confidence as we now begin our term as a member of the

The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

4 Seeresolution 263 (1969).

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

j
82000-November

1972-2,050

/
