United Nations

S/PV.6093

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6093rd meeting
Thursday, 19 March 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shalgham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Ms. Eloeva
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Haiti (11 to 14 March 2009)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-27342 (E)

*0927342*

S/PV.6093

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Haiti
(11 to 14 March 2009)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Haiti, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mérorès
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by His Excellency Mr. Jorge Urbina, head of the
Security Council mission to Haiti and Permanent
Representative of Costa Rica.
I would like to welcome the return of the
members of the Council and representatives of the
Secretariat who took part in the mission to Haiti. I now
give the floor to Mr. Jorge Urbina, head of the Security
Council mission to Haiti.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): The
Security Council mission visited Haiti from 11 to
14 March 2009, in accordance with its mandate, as set
out in document S/2009/139. The mission was able to
assess first-hand the situation in Haiti at a time when
there seems to be a window of opportunity to reinforce
stability and undertake a process of sustainable
development.
I would like to start by expressing my thanks to
the representatives of Council members for their

2

interest in the mission and their active participation in
all its activities. Members of the Council demonstrated
the concern that exists regarding the situation in Haiti.
I fully believe that our future discussions will benefit
from the knowledge acquired during this visit.
On behalf of the members of the Council, I
should like to thank the Haitian authorities for their
hospitality and openness. I would also like to express
our gratitude to the Permanent Representative of Haiti,
Ambassador Léo Mérorès, for having accompanied us
and for his contribution to the success of the mission. I
must also recognize the impeccable organization
carried out by the Secretariat, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Hédi Annabi, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) teams and
United Nations representatives in Haiti. They should be
commended for their work.
The mission’s visit began with two successive
meetings with MINUSTAH leaders and the United
Nations team in Haiti. The Council’s mission
subsequently held a meeting with the President of the
Republic and his Prime Minister in order to hear their
views on the situation, receive information on their
programmes and gather their impressions of the work
carried out by MINUSTAH. Representatives of the
Council received additional information on the plans of
the Haitian Government during a subsequent meeting
with the Prime Minister and the Ministers for Planning,
Interior, Agriculture and Rural Development, Public
Works and Transportation. Moreover, Council
members held meetings with leaders of the Senate and
the Chamber of Deputies, the chairs of the Justice and
Security Committees of both legislative chambers and
the minister responsible for relations with Parliament.
Council members also met with leaders of political
parties and members of Parliament from the opposition
and held conversations with representatives of the
private sector and civil society in Haiti.
The meeting with MINUSTAH involved the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his deputies, the MINUSTAH Force Commander and
the Police Commissioner. The United Nations team
was led by the Resident Coordinator. Lastly, the
representatives of the Council undertook working visits
to Gonaïves, Fort Liberté, Ouanaminthe and Cité
Soleil.

09-27342

S/PV.6093

The members of the mission gathered updated
information and assessments of important aspects of
the situation in Haiti, in particular concerning the
general security situation, political dialogue and the
elections, the extension of the State’s authority, the rule
of law and human rights, social and economic
development, and regional cooperation.
The mission was able to note the progress made
in terms of security after five years of MINUSTAH
presence in the country, in particular that resulting
from the support provided to the National Police aimed
at increasing its capacity. The greatest improvements
can already be noted in a drop in crime and the
people’s growing confidence in the police force. The
police force is now being strengthened through
professional training for its personnel and the
enhancement of its operational and institutional
capacities.
The goal of having 14,000 members in the police
force and thereby reaching an acceptable rate of one
officer per 1,000 inhabitants, taking into account real
needs, is making solid progress. The original number,
3,000 members, has now been tripled. In addition,
recruitment and verification are being carried out
successfully.
The Council mission was able to assess the
community violence reduction programme during one
of its field visits. This project has been made possible
thanks to cooperation between MINUSTAH, its
Government counterparts, the National Disarmament
Commission and the United Nations team in the
country, led by the United Nations Development
Programme. Progress has been made possible through
quick-impact employment programmes, with intensive
use being made of labour forces. This has contributed
to stabilizing marginal city areas that were until very
recently considered lawless.
The mission also gauged the Haitian State’s lack
of capacity to control its borders and territorial waters,
which could potentially encourage illegal activities.
The commencement of maritime and air patrols by
MINUSTAH, with support from the National Police,
should improve the situation. These patrols should,
however, be complemented by other bilateral and
regional initiatives, as these problems are regional in
nature and MINUSTAH does not have the mandate to
carry out such operations or to carry out interdiction
operations.

09-27342

The mission received information on the political
dialogue and the electoral processes from the President
and the Prime Minister, who provided details on the
five committees established by the President to gather
input from political parties and civil society for an
ambitious institutional reform programme. During its
visit, the Council held conversations with the national
coordinator of these committees and those leading the
committee on constitutional reform.
The Haitian interlocutors agreed on the need for
significant reforms, although there were differing
nuances in the various points of view. There was
agreement on the general views on the division of
powers, excessive decentralization and the multiplicity
of electoral processes. The arguments in favour of a
revised Constitution are gaining ground among
political leaders, who agree on the general issues
relating to the cumbersome administrative structure
resulting from the 1987 Constitution, the costly
schedule of elections and other limitations that must be
changed. Members of the Council were aware of the
tight schedule for constitutional amendments and
acknowledged the importance of reforming the
Constitution to bring about better governance in the
country. Here, the mission passed on a message to be
pondered by Haitian political leaders in order to
achieve the necessary consensuses for the appropriate
constitutional reform process. In the meeting with the
President of the Presidential Commission for the
Reform of the Constitution, Council members
expressed the need to enhance coordination between
the executive power, Parliament and civil society in
order to avoid splits and political paralysis that could
hamper the reform process in the country.
Members of the Council also had meetings with
the President and judges of the Provisional Electoral
Council. Future electoral processes impose an electoral
period that will be spread out over the next 36 months,
during which voters will go to the polls eight times.
The Council mission received information on logistical
support provided by MINUSTAH to the Provisional
Electoral Council as well as on the security assistance
provided. For its part, the Electoral Council reiterated
its commitment to ensure free, fair and inclusive
elections in order to ensure the credibility of an
electoral process that is threatened by the
non-participation of one of the most important political
groups, which has been excluded on legal grounds. The
Council mission said that everything possible must be

3

S/PV.6093

done to deal with the perception of exclusion that is
felt in particular sectors of the population.
During their meeting with representatives of
political parties, Council representatives were able to
verify attitudes that undermine the legitimacy of the
forthcoming elections, such as suspicions of fraud and
pronounced State involvement. However, Council
members received assurances that objections will be
dealt with through legal mechanisms and there will be
support for the electoral process as a means for
clearing up political disputes.
With respect to extending the State’s capacity,
members of the Security Council became aware of the
weakness of the Haitian system of institutions. For
example, the State can provide education to only 10 per
cent of registered students, which is already a low
percentage of persons of school age. In addition, the
State controls neither the content nor the quality of
private education, which is responsible for a very high
percentage of education in the country. The same thing
is true of other sectors of the institutional structure that
do not provide basic services to the population.
The Council mission was able to note that the
Government and MINUSTAH work together in
broadening the State’s capacity, both on the ground and
in enhancing its ability to administer the country and
offer basic services to the population. National
authorities highlighted legal progress against
corruption, the approval of a customs code, a statute
for parliamentary staff and administrative and financial
rules for the workings of the legislature.
However, the Government and the local
administrations face limitations when it comes to
providing essential services to the people, such as
health and education.
During the visit to Ounaminthe, the Council
mission observed progress in the integrated border
management programme. The mission noted the
permeability of and free movement in the border area
between Haiti and the Dominican Republic and noted
that progress had been made on infrastructure.
Members of the mission heard explanations of the
preparation of key legislative documents on border
management drawn up by the Government in
collaboration with MINUSTAH.
Members of the Council encouraged the national
authorities to continue enhancing the customs data

4

system, intensify land patrols and open new control
points to increase the collection of income, which is an
important aspect of the State’s fiscal resources.
Similarly, members of the Council were informed of
the reactivation of the joint Haiti-Dominican Republic
Commission, which should lead to the drawing up of a
work programme dealing with issues of common
interest.
Council members visited the MINUSTAH naval
base in Fort Liberté, where they examined the
operational plan for maritime patrols together with the
United Nations police and the Haitian National Police.
The mission was shown that the joint naval team at
Fort Liberté also takes part in a weekly border patrol
by land, sea and air.
With respect to the rule of law and human rights,
from the conversations with the Minister for Justice
and Public Security, the Secretaries of State for Justice
and Public Security, the Director General of the Haitian
National Police and the Director of the Prison
Administration, as well as the Force Commander and
Police Commissioner of MINUSTAH, it became clear
that the priority for Haiti is to strengthen the capacity
of its National Police, which is essential for national
ownership of the matter of security. Progress has been
made, inter alia, in professional training for officials,
the increase of its institutional capacity and the
development of infrastructure with a view to achieving
the goals set out in the plan for police reform. The
ambitious programme requires the support and
cooperation of the international community.
The mission noted the successes achieved in the
reform and strengthening of the rule of law and its
institutions in Haiti. Council representatives who
attended the inauguration of the School for Magistrates
noted the advances in the organization of the judiciary
with the implementation of three important laws: that
establishing the Superior Council of the Judiciary, the
Statute of the Magistracy and the law supporting the
system for the training of judges.
Despite these successes, the country is still
awaiting the establishment of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary, the consolidation of the Office of Citizen
Protection, legal inspections, the execution of the
strategic plan for prison expansion in the country and a
general review of the current condition of prisoners in
preventive detention. The limited capacity of the
judiciary to administer justice quickly has led to a

09-27342

S/PV.6093

sharp rise in the prison population living in
overcrowded conditions and whose fundamental rights
are being violated. Both the Prime Minister and the
Minister for Justice expressed the desire to improve
justice sector capacity and recognized the support of
MINUSTAH in this area.
Haitian authorities emphasized the respect for
civil and political rights in the country, particularly for
freedom of expression. Members of the mission
expressed concern at the limitations on economic,
social and cultural rights in Haiti, a state of affairs that
has been aggravated by the humanitarian situation
caused by natural phenomena in 2008, the world food
crisis and the deterioration of the international
economy.
With respect to the humanitarian situation, Haiti
is particularly vulnerable when it comes to hurricanes
and tropical storms from the Atlantic. Members of the
Council saw the effects of the flooding caused by last
year’s hurricanes in the city of Gonaïves. They were
also made aware of the efforts to prevent disasters, to
reduce risk and regulate water basins. The mission
visited a labour-intensive project to reduce vulnerability
by terracing, constructing small dikes, reconfiguring
watercourses and renovation canals.
Food security is still one of the greatest concerns
in the country. Members of the Council received
information on the difficult situation of the farming
sector in Haiti. The Permanent Representative of
Japan, supported by other members of the Council,
expressed concern at the low productivity in a sector
that employs more than 50 per cent of the population
and that meets barely 48 per cent of food needs.
Members of the Council encouraged the Haitian
authorities to adopt agricultural policies designed to
boost production. Additionally, they urged the
Government of Haiti to display its commitment to
establish goals that can be attained in reasonable time
frames — all of this in order to contribute to stability
of the country.
With reference to economic and social
development, it was evident to the mission that the
current levels of extreme poverty — 80 per cent of the
population live on less than $2 per day and 50 per cent
on less than $1 per day — are incompatible with the
goal of establishing stability in the short term. The
Haitian interlocutors indicated how important it is to
continue working with the international community to

09-27342

implement a reconstruction and development strategy
in the country. They acknowledged the importance of
the poverty reduction strategy paper and the postdisaster needs assessment. In that context, the
proposals of Professors Paul Collier and Jeffrey Sachs
and the United States legislation establishing
preferential access for Haitian exports — the Haitian
Hemisphere
Opportunity
Through
Partnership
Encouragement Act (HOPE II) — are all essential
initiatives to activate Haiti’s economy and bring about
long-term economic security.
The forthcoming donor conference, to be held in
Washington, D.C., convened by the Inter-American
Development Bank was also viewed as a major
opportunity for Haiti to enjoy access to additional
funds for its recovery and reconstruction. The Council
mission noted that the contribution of the diaspora to
Haitian development, which is today contingent on
pending reform to allow dual citizenship, must also be
reviewed.
On the subject of regional cooperation, the
Council mission had the opportunity to meet with
members of the core group and was able to note the
decisive role it played in ensuring effective
coordination between MINUSTAH and the diplomatic
and donor communities. Throughout the mission,
Council members observed the high degree of
commitment of Latin American countries to Haiti. As
well as fully participating in peacekeeping by
contributing troops and police, the countries of the
region continue to lend support to the country’s socioeconomic development through bilateral and
multilateral support, specific development programmes
and quick-impact projects carried out in the
MINUSTAH framework. In that context, it must be
emphasized that the Haitian authorities stated on
repeated occasions that South-South cooperation is an
area of growing interest to them.
The mission was also able to see that the
continued participation of regional and subregional
organizations such as the Organization of American
States and the Caribbean Community is important to
ensure Haiti’s integration within the broader context of
Latin America and the Caribbean and in order to
strengthen the commitment of its partners in the
hemisphere.
I do not wish to conclude without the mission’s
conclusion that the international community has a

5

S/PV.6093

commitment to Haiti’s success. It is therefore
important that the Haitian authorities promote national
consensus, not only to ensure stability and political
security, but also in order to establish a solid basis for
Haiti’s socio-economic development.
The draft report of the mission will soon be
distributed to Council members for their review. It
contains a detailed analysis of the mission’s activities
and the conclusions it reached in the areas that were
covered in today’s briefing.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Urbina for his briefing.
On behalf of the Security Council, I should like
to express appreciation to all of the members of the
Security Council and the Secretariat who participated
in the mission, which was very ably led by Ambassador
Urbina, for the manner in which they discharged their
important responsibilities on behalf of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Mérorès (Haiti) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of Haiti, I thank the Security
Council for having organized the Council mission to
Haiti. Special thanks go to Ambassador Urbina, who
led the mission. We believe that his briefing was
comprehensive and covered all areas addressed by the
mission during its visit to Haiti. As members know, this
visit took place following the visit of the SecretaryGeneral accompanied by former President Bill Clinton;
it thus enabled the international community, represented
by the members of the Council, to get an exhaustive idea
of the situation that Haiti has been facing for some time.
As aptly stated by Ambassador Urbina, it is clear that
since 2005 the security situation on the ground has
improved considerably. That was clearly stated by the

6

various interlocutors who had the opportunity to share
their impressions with the members of the Council.
Nevertheless, as the country’s highest authorities,
starting with the President and Prime Minister, said,
the economic and social remains very fragile. As
Ambassador Urbina said, we are is still suffering the
devastating consequences of the four successive
hurricanes that struck Haiti in 2008. It is important to
underscore here for the Council that the meagre
economic progress achieved in 2007 was battered by
the hurricanes. As a result, the agricultural sector in
particular, as well as basic infrastructure, suffered a
serious blow from which the country is finding it very
difficult to recover.
Nonetheless, on behalf of my Government, I wish
to reaffirm to the international community that Haiti is
resolutely
committed
to
reconstruction
and
development. For that reason we attach great
importance to the upcoming donor conference to be
hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank in
Washington, D.C., and we hope that Haiti will again
enjoy the kind support of the international community,
which so far has never failed us.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my gratitude
to the Security Council for having organized this visit.
I wish again to convey my special gratitude to
Ambassador Urbina, who led the visit. I also wish to
express the appreciation of the Haitian Government for
the Council’s constant and continuing interest in Haiti.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

09-27342
