VI.

tion to refugees and to promote durable and speedy
solutions through voluntary repatriation or return, and
subsequent assistance in rehabilitation, in consultation
with the countries concerned, integration in countries of
asylum or resettlement in other countries of refugees
and displaced persons of concern to the Office of the
High Commissioner;
5. Urges Governments to intensify their support for
activities which the High Commissioner is carrying out
in accordance with relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, especially by:
(a) Facilitating his efforts in the field of international protection by observing the principie of asylum
and non-refoulement relating to rt:fugees:
(b) Supporting his efforts to promote, in cooperation with Governments, United Nations bodies
and non-governmental organizations, durable solutions
to the problems of refugees and displaced persons, including those in urgent need, whenever emergencies occur;
6. Welcomes the steps already taken in implementing the recommendations of the Conference on the
Situation of Refugees in Africa, held at Arusha, United
Republic of Tanzania, from 7 to 17 May 1979, urges ali
States to provide the utmost support for the envisaged
International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in
Africa 40 and recommends that the High Commissioner
should substantially increase, subject to the availability
of funds, the assistance programmes allocated to A frica
in order to respond effectively to the manifested needs:
7. Expresses its appreciation for the role of the High
Commissioner in the repatriation of Zimbahwean
refugees and in the co-ordination of the United Nations
humanitarian assistance programme for the initial settlement and rehabilitation of returnees and displaced
persons in Zimbabwe;
8. Stresses the importance of maintaining the relief
efforts and the resettlement momentum for boat and
land cases in South-East Asia and urges ali Governments to provide opportunities for durable solutions to
these refugees;
9. Urges the High Commissioner to explore the
further elaboration of arrangements in order to facilitate the prompt and unhindered disembarkation of
refugees rescued at sea and their resettlement:
10. Recognizes the High Commissioner's leading responsibility in emergency situations regarding refugees
and takes note of his efforts to contribute to the improvement of the co-ordination and effectiveness of the
action of United Nations bodies and other relevant organizations in providing international humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons of concern to
his Office;
11. Urges ali Governments in a position to do so to
contribute generously in order to provide the High
Commissioner with the necessary means to attain the
objectives of his humanitarian programme, taking into
account that the over-all financia] requirements of the
High Commissioner are on the order of $500 million in
1980 and that the same amount might well be required
in 1981.

73 rd plenary meeting
25 November 1980

'º See resolution 35/42 below.

1111

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Commitlcr

B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1166 (XII) of 26 November
1957, 2956 B (XXVII) of 12 December 1972 and 3271 B
(XXIX) of 10 Decemher 1974 in connexion with the
Emergency Fund of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Noting recomrnendation F of the Executive Cornmittee of the Prograrnrne of the High Commissioner,4
Authorizes the United Nations High Cornmissioner
for Refugees to allocate from the Ernergency Fund up to
$1 O mi Ilion annually for refugees and displaced persons
in emergency situations for which thcre is no provision
in the programmes approved by the Executive Committee. it heing understood that the arnount made available
for one single emergency shall not exceed $4 million in
any one year and that the Fund is maintained at not less
than $4 million.
1

73rd plenary meeting
25 November 1980

35/42.

lnternational Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa

The General Assemhlr,
Recalling its resolutil,n 34/61 of 29 November 1979,
Taking note of resolution CM/Res.814 (XXXV) concerning the situation of refugees in Africa, adopted by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity al its thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at
Freetown from 18 to .~8 .June 1980, ·12
Having heard the statements of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, the Secretarv-General of the Organi1ation of African Unity and ·the United Nations
I-ligh Commissioner for Refugees•' on the serious situalion of refugees in Africa.
Grave/y concerned at the growing number of refugees
on the African contineni, who now constitute over half
the population of refugees 111 the world.
A warc of the consequent social and econornic burden
placed on A frican countries of asylum as a result of the
incrt.:ased inllux of refugees and the subsequent impact
on their dt.:velopment,
Bearing in mind the heavy sacrifices that the countries
of asylum are rnaking, despite tht.:ir lirnited resources. to
alleviate tht.: plighl of those refugees,
Appreciating the contributions made by donor countries as well as the assistance that the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
lnternational Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Food Programrne and other intergovernrnental and
non-governmental agencies have provided to refugees in
A frica,
Noting with Jeep regret the inadequacy of the
assistance provided lo the growing number of African
refugees,
Recognizing the universal collective responsibility to
share the urgent and overwhelming burden of the
" See Ojficial Records of"the General Assemhly. Thirty-fifrh Session.
Supplement No. 12A (A/35 12•Add 1), para. 69.
,. See A 35/4(,3 and Corr.1. annex l.
'' Official Record., of rhe Gennal A.uembly. Thirty-Jifth Session.
Third CommillPe. 'i I st meeting. paras. 1-X.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

182

problem of African refugees through effective mobilization of resources to meet the urgent and long-term needs
of the refugees and to strengthen the capacity of countries of asylum to provide adequately for the refugees
while they remain in their countries, as well as to assist
the countries of origin in the rehabilitation of genuine
voluntary returnees,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/55 of 24 July 1980 in which the Council requested the Secretary-General, in co-operation with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to
consult the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity on appropriate ways and means of convening an international pledging conference for refugees
in Africa,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral44 on bis consultations with the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees concerning the organization of an international confen:nce
on assistance to refugees in Africa.
l. Notes with profound regret that the international
community has not given sufficien L attention to the
plight of refugees in Africa;
2. Requests, consequently, the international community to contribute substantially to programmes
designed to bélp those refugees;
3. Approves the report of the Secretary-General calling for an international conference to mobilize assistance for refugees in Africa, as well as the measures
proposed for a concerted programme of information
and publicity by the relevant bodies of the United
Nations system in support of the conference;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to convene at Geneva on
9 and 10 April 1981, at the ministerial leve], an International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General in the
process of preparing for the Conference, and in close cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to assist the concerned
African countries in identifying priorities and preparing
necessary documents and programmes for assistance to
African refugees;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General to meet the expenses for organization of the Conference under the
regular budget of the United Nations;

7. Appeals to the international community, ali
Member States, the specialized agencies, regional and
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to provide the utmost support for the
Conference with a view to offering maximum financia!
and material assistance to refugees in A frica;

8.

Further appeals to the international community to

provide ali necessary assistance to the countries of
asylum to enable them to strengthen their capacity to
provide the necessary facilities and services essential to
the care and well-being of the refugees and to assist the
countries of origin in the rehabilitation of genuine
voluntary returnees;
9. Urges the international community to continue to
support the annual programmes of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and of other United
"A/35/606.

Nations agencies co-operating with the High Commissioner on behalf of refugees in Africa;
10. Requests the High Commissioner, in close cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of A frican Unity, to keep under constant review the
situation of refugees in Africa in order to ensure maximum international assistance on a global basis;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.

73rd plenary meeting
25 November /980

35 / I 25.

Elimina tion of all forms ofreligious intolerance

The General Assemhly,
Recognizing the need to achieve international cooperation in promoting · and encouraging respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, as
provided in the Charter of the United Nations,
Mindful of article 18 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights•' and article 18 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,4' which proclaim that everyone has the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion,
Convinced of the need for the elaboration of an international instrument on the elimination of ali forms of
intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or
behef,
Recalling its resolution 3267 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974, in which it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to submit to the General Assembly, through the
Economic and Social Council, a single draft Declaration on the Elimination of Ali Forms of lntolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,

Recalling a/so its resolutions 33 / 106 of 16 December
1978 and 34/43 of 23 November 1979,
Taking note with appreciation of Commission on
Human Rights resolution 35 (XXXVI) of 12 March
1980, 17 in which the Commission decided to establish
again, at its thirty-seventh session, an open-ended working group and to allot more time to that working group
in order that it might complete the formulation of a
draft Declaration on the Elimination of Ali Forms of lntolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or
Belief,
Taking note a/so of Economic and Social Council
decision 1980 / 140 of 2 May 1980 concerning meeting
services for the Commission on Human Rights,
1. Welcomes the progress so far made by the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-fifth and thirtysixth sessions in its drafting of the Declaration on the
Elimination of Ali Forms of lntolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief and its decision
to give the matter the highest priority and to complete
the formulation of that draft at its thirty-seventh sess1on;
'' Resolution 217 A (111 }.
"· Resolution 2200 A (XXI}, anncx.
" See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /980.
Supplement No. 3 (1 '1980/13 and Corr.l}. chap. XXVI, sect. A.
