United Nations

A/RES/58/233

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 39 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/58/L.17/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

58/233. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002 on the United Nations
Declaration on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
Recalling also its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002 on the final review and
appraisal of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the
1990s 1 and support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, 2
Recalling further its resolution 57/297 of 20 December 2002 on the Second
Industrial Development Decade for Africa,
Mindful of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2001-2010, 3 the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, 4 the Doha
Ministerial Declaration, 5 the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference
on Financing for Development 6 and the Plan of Implementation of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 7
Noting with appreciation the commitment of the international community in its
support of the New Partnership, and welcoming in this regard the outcome of the
third Tokyo International Conference on African Development,
Noting with appreciation also that the Group of Eight summit in Evian,
France, in June 2003 devoted a significant part of its deliberations to the New
Partnership, welcoming in this regard the endorsement of the report on the
_______________
1

Resolution 46/151, annex.
A/57/304, annex.
3
See A/CONF.191/13, chap. II.
4
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
5
A/C.2/56/7, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
2

03 50850

A/RES/58/233

implementation of the Group of Eight Africa Action Plan, and also welcoming the
inaugural meeting, in Paris in November 2003, of the Africa Partnership Forum in
support of the New Partnership,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “The New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: first consolidated report on progress in
implementation and international support”, 8
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;8

2.
Reaffirms its full support for the implementation of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development;2
3.
Recognizes the progress made in the implementation of the New
Partnership and regional and international support for the New Partnership;
4.
Also recognizes that much needs to be done to achieve the objectives of
the New Partnership, particularly with regard to economic growth and poverty
reduction;
Reaffirms that the international community, Africa and its development
5.
partners should further cooperate with one another to achieve the objectives and
priorities of the New Partnership, on the basis of the principles of ownership and
partnership;
Calls upon Member States and the international community, and invites
6.
the United Nations system, to enhance their support for the implementation of the
New Partnership, in accordance with its principles, objectives and priorities;
I
Action by African countries and organizations
7.
Notes with satisfaction efforts made by the African countries in fulfilling
their commitments, in implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, to deepen democracy, human rights, good governance and sound
economic management, and encourages African countries to continue to strengthen
their efforts in this regard by developing and strengthening institutions for
governance and the development of the region;
Welcomes the efforts of African countries in the management and
8.
resolution of conflicts in the region, in particular their determination to establish a
Peace and Security Council within the African Union, African mediation in a
number of conflicts and the efforts of the African Union and African regional
organizations to develop their capabilities for peace-support operations;
Takes note of the adoption of the Memorandum of Understanding on the
9.
African Peer Review Mechanism, signed in Abuja on 9 March 2003, and welcomes
in this regard the progress made with respect to the Mechanism, in particular the
accession of a number of States members of the African Union and the appointment
of the panel of eminent persons, and encourages other States members of the African
Union to accede to the Mechanism as well;
10. Welcomes the priorities identified in the New Partnership and the
progress made in the development of programmes in the areas of agricultural

_______________
8

2

A/58/254.

A/RES/58/233

development, environment and infrastructure development, as well as the ongoing
work in the areas of health and education and science and technology;
11. Also welcomes the efforts of African countries to fulfil their
commitments to promote gender equality, the empowerment of women and the
mainstreaming of gender perspectives in the implementation of the New
Partnership;
12. Further welcomes the adoption by the African Union in Maputo, on
12 July 2003, of the Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Corruption; 9
13. Encourages African countries to take further concrete steps to deepen the
process of integrating the priorities of the New Partnership into their national
development plans and frameworks, including poverty reduction strategies, where
they exist, to mobilize public and political support for the New Partnership, to
develop sound programmes in the designated priority areas of the New Partnership
and to mobilize resources for those priority areas;
14. Emphasizes the role of national focal points in monitoring the
implementation of the New Partnership and the need to build and strengthen human
and institutional capacities in order to effectively implement it in all its aspects;
15. Also emphasizes that regional economic communities are effective
vehicles for the development and integration of the African continent, and in this
regard calls for the strengthening of their role in the coordination and
implementation of programmes and projects of the New Partnership at the
subregional level;
16. Encourages the further integration of the priorities and objectives of the
New Partnership into the programmes of the regional structures and organizations,
as well as programmes for the African least developed countries;
17. Calls upon African countries to promote the development and
strengthening of their domestic private sectors and to facilitate their effective
involvement in the growth and development of, and economic integration among,
the African economies;
18. Recognizes the efforts of African countries to raise awareness of the New
Partnership and to involve all African stakeholders, namely, Governments, the
private sector and civil society, including women’s organizations and communitybased organizations, in its implementation;
19. Welcomes the decision taken by the Executive Council of the African
Union in Maputo to integrate the New Partnership into the African Union structures
and processes;
II
Action by the international community
20. Welcomes the pledges of increased official development assistance made
by many of the development partners, also welcomes the contributions that have
been made, and urges that partners take steps to continue to disburse the assistance
they have pledged;

_______________
9

See A/58/626, annex I, Assembly/AU/Dec.27 (II).

3

A/RES/58/233

21. Notes with satisfaction that some developed countries have untied their
official development assistance, and encourages countries that have not yet done so
to untie their aid, in accordance with the relevant recommendation of the
Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development;
22. Calls upon the international community, relevant multilateral institutions
and developed countries to enhance coherence in their trade, investment and aid
policies towards African countries;
23. Stresses the need to find a durable solution to the problem of external
indebtedness of heavily indebted poor countries in Africa, including through debt
cancellation and other arrangements, and the need to encourage innovative
mechanisms to comprehensively address the debt problem of low- and middleincome African countries, bearing in mind that external debt relief can release
resources that may be utilized in the successful implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, taking into account initiatives that have been
taken to reduce outstanding indebtedness and the need to pursue debt relief
measures vigorously and expeditiously, including within the context of the Paris
Club, the London Club and other relevant forums;
24. Welcomes the actions taken by creditor countries within the framework of
the Paris Club and by some creditor countries through the cancellation of bilateral
debts, urges all creditor countries to participate in efforts to remedy the external
debt and debt-servicing problems of African countries, notes the Evian Approach of
the Paris Club of October 2003, and also notes that debt relief does not replace
alternative sources of financing;
25. Encourages developed countries and other partners to support the
promotion of private investment in African countries from their countries, in
particular in the key productive sectors of the economy, to provide investment
guarantees for such investment and to support policies of African countries aimed at
promoting a conducive environment to attract foreign investment;
26. Underlines the need to take concrete steps to implement existing
frameworks and programmes of South-South cooperation, including through
triangular cooperation in support of the New Partnership;
27. Acknowledges the activities in African countries of the Bretton Woods
institutions and of the African Development Bank, and encourages them to continue
their support for the implementation of the priorities and objectives of the New
Partnership;
28. Notes the growing collaboration among the entities of the United Nations
system in support of the New Partnership, and requests the Secretary-General to
promote greater coherence in the work of the United Nations system in support of
the New Partnership, on the basis of the agreed clusters;
29. Calls upon the United Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies to strengthen further their existing coordination and programming
mechanisms, as well as the simplification and harmonization of planning,
disbursement and reporting procedures, as a means of enhancing support for African
countries in the implementation of the New Partnership;
30. Notes that the entities of the United Nations system have been actively
using the regional consultation mechanism as a vehicle for fostering collaboration
and coordination at the regional level, and encourages them to intensify their efforts
4

A/RES/58/233

in developing and implementing joint programmes in support of the New
Partnership at the regional level;
31. Requests the United Nations system to continue to provide assistance to
the secretariat of the New Partnership and to African countries in developing
projects and programmes within the scope of the priorities of the New Partnership;
32. Welcomes the cooperation and the support granted by the United Nations
to the African regional and subregional organizations in conflict prevention and
conflict management, takes note with appreciation of the work carried out by the
Economic and Social Council ad hoc advisory groups on African countries emerging
from conflict, while looking forward to the evaluation of their work during the
substantive session of the Council in 2004, and encourages the pursuit of these
activities in support of African efforts for conflict prevention and conflict
management and in post-conflict situations;
33. Also welcomes the creation of the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to take measures to
strengthen the Office to enable it to effectively fulfil its mandate;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth
session on the basis of inputs from Governments, organizations of the United
Nations system and the other stakeholders in the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, such as the private sector and civil society.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

5
