S/PV.8639

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8639th meeting

Thursday, 10 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2019/780)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-30978 (E)
*1930978*

S/PV.8639

Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2019/780)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/780, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to present the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on Colombia (S/2019/780). I welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila, Presidential
Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation, and
thank them for their support of the work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
The peace process has continued to move forward
through a challenging period since the last briefing (see
S/PV.8581). Two years after the successful conclusion
of the laying down of arms by the former guerrillas of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia2/20

10/10/2019

Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), the vast majority of
former fighters remain engaged and committed to the
Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and the
Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace. Thousands
of former fighters are pursuing academic studies,
receiving vocational training, participating actively
in cooperatives and employed in activities related to
the peace agreement. More than 3,500 combatants
are involved in collective and individual productive
projects, ranging from agricultural ventures to clothing
manufacturing to ecotourism.
It is important to emphasize the commitment
of these former combatants to the peace process,
especially given the regrettable and unjustified actions
of a few former FARC-EP commanders, who recently
announced that they have taken up arms again. I would
like to recognize the swift and categorical rejection of
these actions by all sectors across the country, including
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
(FARC) political party, which has expelled those who
took up arms again, and certainly by President Duque
Márquez and his Government. The Special Jurisdiction
for Peace also declared that all those who announced
their rearmament would be excluded and lose the
benefits provided under the peace agreement. It is now
more important than ever to support the women and
men who remain resolutely committed to peace and
to transforming their lives and those of their families
and communities.
Important results have been achieved in the approval
of productive projects by the National Reintegration
Council, but further efforts are needed given that
the projects that have thus far received Government
funding represent 14.7 per cent of the accredited
former combatants. It is critical to accelerate the pace
of disbursement of funding and to guarantee access
to land. Additionally, it is fundamental for all actors
to ensure that these projects become sustainable so
that former combatants and surrounding communities
can see lasting results from their hard work. All
reintegration efforts should involve and benefit local
communities, as well as empower women. I welcome
that all productive projects approved by the National
Reintegration Council include a gender-sensitive
approach. I trust that both parties will work together to
move forward in their implementation.
I am pleased to report that the Government has
temporarily extended the monthly allowance, the
provision of food and services and the presence of
19-30978

10/10/2019

Colombia

public security forces around the former territorial areas
for reintegration. The decree regulating that transition
was adopted on 9 September, although specific details
are still pending. I welcome the announcement by
the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation of the extension of the monthly allowance
and food services until August 2020.
Now I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the situation of more than 8,000 former combatants
living outside the former territorial areas, who have
limited access to reintegration benefits and are more
vulnerable to violence and to recruitment by illegal
armed groups. More should be done to support
that population.
(spoke in Spanish)
Last week I was in the department of Putumayo,
a region where more than half of whose residents are
registered as victims of the conflict and yet have not
received the full benefits of the signing of the peace
agreement. I met with several women social leaders and
it was very inspiring to see the courage and strength
with which they exercise leadership on behalf of their
communities and work for territorial peace, despite the
many obstacles and threats to their lives.
The situation of those admirable women is a
reflection of the situation of thousands of leaders, human
rights defenders and communities that continue to be
victimized by violence. In this and all my visits to the
territories, the same messages are heard. Communities
clamour for development, basic services, security
and economic opportunities through comprehensive
State presence. In addition, they call for immediate
strategies to improve protection and security in the
regions, in cooperation with communities and local
authorities. That is, undoubtedly, the promise of the
peace agreement.
Part of the solution to address this worrying
situation lies with the National Commission on Security
Guarantees, which was convened by President Duque
in August and is tasked with formulating, with input
from civil society, a public policy for the dismantling
of criminal organizations and their support networks.
It is essential that regular discussions be held on this
issue and that their decisions be translated into concrete
actions that, in the short term, protect all communities
and consolidate State institutions in the affected areas.

S/PV. 8639

(spoke in English)
Unfortunately, I must report that attacks against
former FARC-EP combatants continue to be of
serious concern. Since my last briefing to the Council,
20 former combatants have been killed, for a total of
151 since the signing of the peace agreement. There has
been some progress in the implementation of various
measures announced by the Government to strengthen
security guarantees for former combatants and to step
up investigations into those killings. But more needs to
be done, including to address the continued budgetary
shortfalls faced by the entity in charge of providing
protection to former combatants.
The departmental and local elections are less than
three weeks away, and violence against candidates
is affecting political parties across the ideological
spectrum, including FARC, which is participating in
local elections for the first time. Protection measures
for all candidates should be strengthened.
I welcome the National Pact for Political Culture and
Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign, signed
in August by 12 national political parties, rejecting
violence and calling for a peaceful and respectful
campaign. It should certainly serve as an example of
how dialogue can lead to consensus. Dialogue is also
key to overcoming challenges in the implementation
of the peace agreement. I encourage the Government
and FARC to continue to engage constructively, as seen
during the joint visits to the former territorial areas.
In the same spirit, I hope that they make increased
use of the architecture established for that purpose
under the peace agreement, especially the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement. Constructive
dialogue that is inclusive of FARC should also be
reflected in any further discussions on reforms related
to provisions of the peace agreement, to the extent that
such discussions continue. It would also be important
to ensure that any such reforms have only future
applications, as Foreign Minister Holmes Trujillo
García has previously emphasized to the Council.
On 26 September, 10 former FARC-EP commanders
appeared before the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
to acknowledge their responsibility and to ask for
forgiveness for kidnappings committed during the
armed conflict. This was also an important step in
the implementation of the provisions of the peace
agreement that are aimed at ensuring accountability,

19-309783/20

S/PV.8639

Colombia

truth and reconciliation. The willingness of Colombia’s
victims to embrace forgiveness is inspiring. In that
connection, the Truth Commission plays an essential
role in fostering truth and reconciliation by bringing
the victims to the forefront. Victims must continue to
be at the centre of the peace process.
This a precious opportunity to put an end to the
recurrent dynamics of violence in Colombia. The
United Nations remains convinced that the way
forward is through a comprehensive implementation
of the Final Agreement. Advancing rural development
and political participation, just to cite two examples,
is as important to consolidating peace as reintegrating
former combatants. I have heard this conviction
repeatedly expressed in the rural areas of Colombia by
community activists, local authorities, peasant women
and indigenous leaders.
The hopes of Colombians for a peaceful and
prosperous future can be realized if we all — the
Government, FARC, Colombian society as a whole and
the international community — work together to ensure
that the letter and spirit of the peace agreement become
concrete deeds and actions to improve the lives of those
who have suffered the most from the conflict. The
unified support of the Security Council for the peace
process will continue to be of the essence. The United
Nations Verification Mission, along with the country
team, which has played a key role in supporting different
aspects of implementation, is ready to continue doing
its part to help consolidate peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for his
comprehensive briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the
first time I am speaking in the Chamber this month,
let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency and our Russian colleagues for the
presidency in the month of September.
It is very good to have the Foreign Minister of
Colombia with us once more. He is very welcome. It
is always good to have him here and we appreciate
the seriousness with which he takes the Council’s
consideration of this important mission. My thanks as
well to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
4/20

10/10/2019

I think we all know that we are meeting almost
three years since the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace was
signed in November 2016, and significant progress has
been made since then. Transitional justice institutions
have gained more stable ground, programmes for the
substitution of illicit crops are under way and thousands
of ex-combatants are being reintegrated into civilian
life. And there have been other advances.
The progress, however significant, though, has
been met with a number of serious challenges. The
recent announcement by former leaders of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) that they were returning to armed
activity was an obstacle. We have to admit that,
but we should not let it overshadow positive steps
forward. We condemn the dissidents’ rejection of
the peace accords, but at the same time welcome the
swift response by the Colombian Government, the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC)
political party and the transitional justice system,
among other stakeholders. It remains clear — and this
is welcome — that the majority of former FARC-EP
combatants remains committed to the peace process.
Of course, we must guard against complacency
and step up efforts to ensure that currently manageable
threats like those do not escalate, worsen and spiral
beyond our control. Therefore, rather than calling
broadly for the implementation of the agreement, which
is customary at these meetings, I would like particularly
to respond to the request made by President Counsellor
Archila, who is in the Chamber today, regarding the
Council’s recent trip to Colombia for us to be more
specific in our appeals.
First, we recognize the political and financial
challenges facing the Colombian Government, but we
believe that sufficient funding for rural development
in the 170 municipalities benefiting from development
programmes with a territorial focus is essential to
deliver the accords. Adequate resources should also
be made available to the transitional justice system
and reincorporation process, as these are crucial for
public and ex-combatant trust in the peace process and,
therefore, to ex-combatants’ continued participation in
it. Increased State presence in rural areas will assist in
addressing ongoing security issues, not least the killing
of former FARC-EP members, community leaders and
human rights defenders, as has been discussed in the
Council before.
19-30978

10/10/2019

Colombia

Secondly, I would like to underscore the importance
of the parties’ renewed high-level engagement with
vital spaces for dialogue, including the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, the National
Commission on Security Guarantees and the National
Reintegration Council. These mechanisms have been
less active recently, but they serve an important purpose
in maintaining communication and coordination on
the accords.
Looking ahead to emerging developments, on
27 October Colombians will vote in regional and local
elections — a milestone on the road to peace, especially
given the strong regional focus of the peace agreement.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/780) highlights
worrying statistics on candidates being threatened
and killed. In that regard, we welcome the signature
of the new National Pact for Political Culture and
Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign. We
call on all stakeholders to adhere to the Pact, to
refrain from violence and intimidation and to ensure a
peaceful election.
The United Kingdom commends the Colombian
Government for the progress made so far amid
challenging circumstances. We look forward to
continuing to provide support along Colombia’s road to
sustainable peace.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for his informative briefing
and welcome Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García,
Foreign Minister of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio
Archila, Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation, whose continued presence at these
meetings reflects the importance that the Government
of Colombia attaches to the Council’s support of the
peace process.
As this is possibly our last intervention on the
issue, which is so close and important for Peru, I would
like to recall our first intervention in the Chamber
(see S/PV.8154), when we recognized that, although
the implementation of the peace agreement would be a
complex process with numerous challenges, we trust in
its future with conviction and hope.
Today, we reiterate our confidence in the Colombian
Government and people in their commitment to peace
and to continuing to implement the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace in a comprehensive manner, including

S/PV. 8639

by strengthening State presence and through
comprehensive rural reform, the crop-substitution
programme, legal and security guarantees and the social
and economic reintegration of former combatants. The
Government’s continued efforts to implement the “peace
with legality” strategy and development programmes
with a territorial focus through a multidimensional and
multisectoral approach to reintegration are consistent
with that commitment, as is the transition process in
the territorial areas for training and reintegration, the
development of productive projects, collective and
individual alike, access to land and effective integration
into local communities.
It is also important to strengthen support and
protection mechanisms for more than two-thirds of
former combatants who reside outside of the territorial
areas for training and reintegration, while taking
into consideration the specific needs of women and
young people, as well as rural, indigenous and ethnic
communities. The killings of former combatants and
social leaders, exacerbated by the ongoing regional
election campaign, mean that better schemes must be
put in place to protect candidates and apprehend those
responsible and bring them to justice.
Upholding commitments, such as the National
Pact for Political Culture and Non-Violence during the
Electoral Campaign, signed in August in the presence
of President Iván Duque, is also vital. The Pact ensures
respect for political opponents and seeks to ban violence
during electoral campaigns. In that context, because we
are also affected by the actions of criminal groups, we
reiterate our categorical rejection of the announcement
by Iván Márquez and a small group of dissidents to
return to arms. We trust that this petty decision will not
undermine the commitment of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común and that of other former
combatants to peace. Those involved will have to
answer for their actions before justice and history.
The contribution made by the institutions of the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation,
and Non-Repetition to the peacemaking process must be
recognized, as they play a fundamental role in ensuring
accountability, legal security and reconciliation and in
honouring the memory of the victims.
Lastly, we highlight the work of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, both in Colombia and
in New York alike, for the dedication, professionalism
and excellence with which it discharges the mandate

19-309785/20

S/PV.8639

Colombia

10/10/2019

that was unanimously renewed by resolution 2487
(2019) on 12 September.

with special focus on those of indigenous and AfroColombian origin and those with disabilities.

The peace process in Colombia must continue to
set a good example for the world. To that end, Colombia
will always have the support of Peru and, we are sure, of
the Security Council and the international community.

We commend the Government of Colombia
for launching the Zonas Futuro strategy, which are
Strategic Zones of Comprehensive Intervention, led by
civilians, in partnership with the private sector and local
communities supported by international cooperation,
monitored by the Verification Mission.

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Minister Carlos Holmes
Trujillo García for being here. It is an honour to have
him in the Security Council once again.
We also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his informative briefing on the report of SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/780).
We reiterate the interest and support of the
Dominican Republic in and for the peace process in
Colombia and welcome the determination and sacrifice
of the Colombian people in the process. Since the
signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, Colombia has
set the example for peace. Two years after the signing
of that historic agreement, Colombians have left behind
more than half a century of violence, held peaceful
and inclusive elections and developed transitional
justice institutions.
We welcome the efforts of President Duque
Márquez and his Government to advance the process
of reintegrating former combatants who have laid down
their weapons. We acknowledge the progress made
and challenges seen during the reporting period, in
particular in implementing the “peace with legality”
strategy and in launching the development programmes
with a territorial focus, which are aimed at reintegrating
former combatants and guaranteeing their security.
It is vital that projects aimed at reintegrating former
combatants be sustainable. We encourage former
combatants to remain involved in the peace process. At
the same time, we call on the National Reintegration
Council to strengthen its initiatives and projects, as this
is a crucial time to extend professional training to those
who wish to lay down their weapons.
Social reintegration is a pillar of the peace process.
We therefore request that attention be paid to the more
than 8,000 former combatants who reside outside
of the territorial areas for training and reintegration,
6/20

The Dominican Republic firmly condemns the
decision taken by some former combatants to return
to arms, which is a blatant violation of the 2016 peace
agreement. We reiterate that violence cannot be a
legitimate method of defending political positions
of any kind. We also condemn incidents, some fatal,
that occurred in connection with the upcoming local
elections and encourage the Government to take
additional security measures in preparation for those
elections. It is essential to ensure that the elections are
not disrupted.
In spite of the circumstances, young Colombians
remain committed to peace. We acknowledge the
vital role played by Colombian youth in implementing
the agreement and breaking the cycle of violence in
the country. We therefore commend the Verification
Mission and the Colombian Government for their
efforts to include young people and youth organizations
in the decision-making process and in implementing
the Agreement.
Similarly, we believe that it is important that we
be regularly informed about the implementation of the
agreement at the local level so as to ensure that women,
including those of African descent, of indigenous
origin and those who live in rural areas, are included in
the transitional justice and reconstruction mechanisms.
Lastly, we call on the international community
to support Colombia’s peacebuilding efforts, while
maintaining a focus on the future.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
briefing. We are also very glad to welcome Foreign
Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo García and Presidential
Counsellor Archila to the Council again today.
The 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace remains an
inspiration to all of us and is a reminder of the enduring
value of aspirational leadership. The United States will
continue to support the United Nations Verification
19-30978

10/10/2019

Colombia

Mission in Colombia and we recognize the Colombian
Government’s commitment to the Mission.
On the subject of aspirational leadership, we
are encouraged by the efforts of President Duque
Márquez to expand the Government’s presence in
conflict-affected areas and to bring hope to vulnerable
populations through justice, security and opportunities
for legitimate economic activity. Those efforts
represent welcomed progress. President Duque and
his Administration have also shown admirable resolve
by expanding counter-narcotics efforts and working
towards our shared goal of halving coca cultivation and
cocaine production by the end of 2023.
That resolve has produced modest but noteworthy
results. Coca cultivation is estimated to have slightly
declined in 2018 and the United States welcomes
that news. However, while we understand that lasting
peace is the work of decades, not days or weeks,
several hurdles have slowed the implementation of the
peace accords to a worrying pace. We note that some
two thirds of former combatants still reside outside
territorial areas for training and reintegration. A
smooth transition period is needed, as the legal status
of those areas has expired.
We also remain deeply concerned about the reports
of violence against human rights defenders and social
leaders, as well as political candidates across the
ideological spectrum. Particularly in the light of the
upcoming elections, Colombia’s first nationwide local
elections since the peace accord came into effect, we
reiterate our support for the Government’s efforts
to protect leaders and ensure that they can safely
conduct their vital work. With security in mind, the
United States applauds the recent signing of a national
non-violence pact, with President Duque and Special
Representative Ruiz Massieu as witnesses. We urge
all parties to honour the principles of that pact. We
are also alarmed by the information in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/780) that participants in
crop-substitution programmes continue to be the
target of threats, attacks and killings. We call on the
Colombian Government to ensure their protection and
boost economic development in areas with significant
coca cultivation. The people of Colombia need viable
alternatives to that crop. They need visible paths to
dignity if they are to pull themselves out of an economic
cycle that ultimately funds violence and impunity.

S/PV. 8639

The Colombian Government’s commitment to the
equal dignity of all people is especially evident in its
response to the crisis in Venezuela. The Government is
currently hosting 1.4 million Venezuelan refugees and
other displaced Venezuelans, driven from their homes
by the chaos and violence sown by Maduro’s illegitimate
former regime. It is even granting citizenship to
thousands of Venezuelan children born in Colombia.
Colombia has also shown leadership by supporting
interim President Juan Guaidó as Venezuela’s legitimate
leader. We are grateful for Colombia’s leadership and
generosity, and we want to be clear today that the United
States is equally committed to peace in the country and
the region.
But we cannot merely endorse aspirational
leadership as we address these challenges. We must
practice it. That is why we have provided more than
$214 million in assistance to manage the effects
produced on Colombia by Venezuela’s man-made crisis.
It is why yesterday in Washington our Secretary of State,
Mike Pompeo, welcomed Foreign Minister Trujillo and
High Commissioners Archila and Ceballos to a highlevel dialogue. It is also why Deputy Secretary of State
John Sullivan, United States Agency for International
Development Administrator Mark Green and
Presidential Adviser Ivanka Trump visited Colombia
in September for the launch of initiatives designed to
empower women and enhance economic development.
The United States is committed to envisioning and
realizing a better future for all Colombians, and we look
forward to continued partnership with Colombia and its
continued progress in implementing the peace accord.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio
Archila, Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation. We also thank Special Representative
Carlos Ruiz Massieu for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/780).
We agree with previous speakers that the peace
process is at a critical stage. We greatly appreciate the
contribution of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia to the post-conflict peacebuilding. We
know that the support of the United Nations is warmly
welcomed by all stakeholders in Colombia, including
the Government, the parties to the peace process,
the country’s indigenous peoples and civil society as

19-309787/20

S/PV.8639

Colombia

a whole. That speaks to a high level of trust in the
international staff and their objectivity. Needless to
say, however, the main responsibility for the peace
process lies solely with the Colombians themselves,
and not on any external actors. And judging by today’s
report, despite a certain amount of progress that has
been made, the greater part of the work of consolidating
peace in the country is still to be done.
The fact that various participants in the peace
process have returned to armed combat shows that not
everyone in the country is happy with the progress
made in implementing the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The Secretary-General warned about such risks in
previous reports, and it is currently reported that a
further 8,000 participants are at risk. The situation
is creating increasing concern and once again shows
that the peace is not irreversible. However, we want to
emphasize that armed confrontation is unacceptable. A
consensus in Colombian society can be achieved only
through a broad dialogue without preconditions and
within a legal framework. Resorting to violence in order
to resolve political differences is impermissible. That
also applies fully to the run-up to the elections. We are
naturally disturbed by the information in the report that
there have been 54 cases of electoral violence during
the reporting period, including seven murders, five
attacks, two abductions and 40 death threats.
Besides the emergence of new threats to the
Colombian peace process, there are also a number of
existing challenges requiring urgent solutions. There
are still complex and knotty problems involved in
ensuring the safety and security of participants in the
peace process and civilian activists, and in order to
address them, the presence of State authority in areas
distant from the capital has to be strengthened. Progress
must also be made with humanitarian mine-clearance
programmes and agricultural reform, a key element
in the peace process, as well as the implementation of
crop-substitution programmes.
It will be important to strengthen public trust
in the peace process, and that requires more active
promotion of programmes for the legal, socioeconomic
and political reintegration of former combatants and
the creation of jobs for them. In that context, we share
the view expressed by Cuba and Norway, the guarantor
countries of the Colombian peace negotiations, in their
joint communiqué of 30 August.
8/20

10/10/2019

The decision to end negotiations and return to
the forced suppression of rebels from the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional in the wake of the terrorist attack
on 17 January has introduced additional problems.
While we condemn the attack unequivocally, we also
believe that without a dialogue with the group it will
be impossible to achieve lasting peace in Colombia.
We call for resolving the differences with Cuba
regarding the negotiators there and for compliance with
the guarantees established under the protocols of the
signed agreement.
In general, we want to emphasize once again
that the consolidation of peace in Colombia can
be achieved only through the comprehensive and
consistent fulfilment by all Colombian stakeholders of
their obligations under the final peace agreement. We
believe that should continue to be the Government’s
priority and at the centre of public discussions. We fully
support the Secretary-General’s call for all disputes
to be resolved within the framework of existing legal
mechanisms, and for any new legislative initiatives to
be subject to broad public discussion. Only in this way,
step by step, can Colombia consolidate its society and
thereby create lasting peace.
As far as the views on the impact of external
factors on the Colombian peace process are concerned,
we believe that it was the Colombians themselves who
reached the key agreements on peace in their country
after decades of internal armed conflict. It was the
Colombians themselves who assumed their national
responsibility for their country’s fate and committed
to the path of the peace process. That commitment to
peace has become an exemplar of responsibility and a
source of pride for the Security Council, and we hope
it will continue.
We are pleased with the assurances of commitment
to the peace process, but Colombia cannot rest on
those laurels. The international community, the United
Nations, the Security Council and, most importantly,
the Colombians themselves expect the Colombian
Government to comply strictly with its obligations.
Without that, we can never consider the internal armed
conflict a thing of the past. We hope that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia will continue
to play a meaningful role in the peace process.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would first like to thank
the Special Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing and to extend a very warm welcome to
19-30978

10/10/2019

Colombia

His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García.
Germany is in full agreement with the thrust of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/780). I would
therefore like to limit my remarks today to a few
aspects of the overall picture of the implementation of
the peace agreement and some more specific issues.
I think it is important to note at the start that the
implementation of the peace agreement is still a success
story, albeit not without setbacks. We strongly condemn
the decision by a group of former commanders from
the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) to take up arms
again, but we welcome the immediate rejection
of their announcement by the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) party and the
widespread expressions of commitment to the peace
process from former combatants across the country.
We also very much welcome President Duque’s
reaffirmation of his commitment to reintegrating the
vast majority of former combatants who laid down
their weapons in good faith and remain part of the
reintegration process. It is now even more important to
redouble our efforts and accelerate the implementation
of the peace accord in a comprehensive way to prove
the FARC-EP dissidents wrong.
Council unity and engagement on Colombia remain
equally important and must be preserved, particularly
if and when the peace process is faced with obstacles.
The support of the international community has helped
Colombians realize their aspirations for a more peaceful
future. In that regard, let me commend the key role
that is being played by the United Nations Verification
Mission and agencies working in Colombia. Let me also
underline that Germany will also continue to strongly
support Colombia on its way to sustainable peace.
Among several other specific aspects relating
to the implementation of the peace agreement, one
is obviously the reintegration of former FARC-EP
members. Following the expiration of the legal status
of the territorial areas for training and reintegration, we
commend the Government for its responsible handling
of the transition and the FARC for its constructive
role. We welcome in particular their joint visits to the
territorial areas.
However, we also call on all actors to pay more
attention to the situation of the more than 8,000 former
combatants who reside outside the former territorial

S/PV. 8639

areas for training and reintegration and face even
greater challenges in terms of security, basic services
and productive opportunities. In the context of the
reintegration of former FARC-EP members, we are also
convinced that even more attention needs to be paid
to the implementation of the gender provisions of the
peace agreement, and the same applies to young people.
In that regard, we would like to commend the Mission
for its youth, peace and security strategy and regular
reporting on the issue.
A second more specific point concerns providing
support for the institutions of the peace agreement.
The extremely valuable work of the Truth Commission,
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and the Unit for the
Search for Persons deemed Missing in the Context of
and Due to the Armed Conflict gives hope that Colombia
will be able to overcome the deeply entrenched legacy
of conflict and achieve true reconciliation. The
independence and proper functioning of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace and the other components of the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition are of crucial importance. Reforms that
may lead to a growing sense of uncertainty about their
legal status among former fighters could be seriously
detrimental to the consolidation of the peace process.
With regard to the relevant institutions and the issue
of funding, which other colleagues have also mentioned,
it is important to ensure that all Ministries and entities
entrusted with the implementation of the peace process
receive adequate funding. Therefore, we very much
welcome the fact that the proposed budget includes a
15-per cent increase for the Comprehensive System of
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition.
In connection with the security situation, which
remains concerning, especially in rural areas, social
leaders and human rights defenders who support the
peace agreement and the resulting policies, such as land
restitution, continue to be at particular risk. We are also
worried that indigenous leaders, women leaders and
women’s rights defenders are facing additional security
threats. The elevated number of killings that Mr. Ruiz
Massieu mentioned in his briefing obviously remains
alarming, especially within the context of the upcoming
holding of local and regional elections, which might
lead to further tensions. Therefore, we also welcome
the signing of the National Pact for Political Culture
and Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign by
12 political parties.

19-309789/20

S/PV.8639

Colombia

10/10/2019

Lastly, we encourage the Government to extend the
presence of State institutions to remote and conflictaffected areas in order to create a secure and stable
environment for all Colombians.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing and welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Trujillo García among us today.

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the participation of Foreign Minister Trujillo
García and thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.

We acknowledge the progress made in the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace over the past three months, as the SecretaryGeneral has indicated in his report (S/2019/780). We
particularly welcome the success achieved in the areas
of reintegration and the initial implementation of the
development programmes with a territorial focus.

The peace process in Colombia is key to achieving
comprehensive peace and stability in the country. It
also affects regional security and development. The
Colombian Government is committed to promoting
the peace process and has made enormous efforts in
many areas, such as strengthening national institutions,
advancing comprehensive reforms and reintegrating
former combatants. China commends the significant
progress that has been made.
The full implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace is also facing multiple challenges. In his report
(S/2019/780), the Secretary-General indicates that the
security situation in certain parts of the country remains
precarious, with former combatants and social leaders
exposed to security threats. The full implementation of
the peace agreement is a long-term, systematic project,
involving many political, security, development and
social integration aspects. It faces complex challenges.
We hope that the Colombian Government and
the parties concerned will resolutely stay the course,
cherish the hard-won peace process, prioritize the
full implementation of the peace agreement, conduct
inclusive political dialogue, speed up socioeconomic
reconstruction, enhance mutual trust through dialogue
and promote peace through development.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu and the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia have significantly contributed
to promoting the peace process in the country, which
China commends. We hope that the Mission will work
on the basis of respect for Columbia’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, further
enhance communication among all the parties in the
country to create synergies and push for more results
from the peace process in Colombia. China stands ready
to work with other Council members and contribute
to promoting the peace process and achieving
comprehensive peace, stability and development in
Columbia as soon as possible.
10/20

Belgium condemns in the strongest terms the call
by a small number of former commanders of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) to take up arms once again. History
will bear witness to the gravity of their error. Every
party and sector of society were quick to condemn
that decision. As an indication of the strength of the
agreement and the peace process, the overwhelming
majority of former FARC-EP members continue to
respect the agreement and to work towards their
reintegration as law-abiding Colombian citizens. In
that regard, we acknowledge the positive and inclusive
efforts to find a solution with regard to transitioning
from the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration and call for specific and practical
measures to be formalized in a spirit of constructive
cooperation as soon as possible.
In general, it is important to strengthen and
solidify trust and cooperation with regard to the
implementation of the final agreement. The parties
have everything to gain by taking advantage of the
consultation, monitoring and verification institutions
and mechanisms established to that end. Comprehensive
and renewed implementation is predicated on additional
progress, particularly in terms of the extension of State
presence in conflict-affected areas, including access to
public services, as well as the launch of rural reforms,
including with respect to access to land — the lack of
which is one of the root causes of the conflict.
I commend the three components of the transitional
justice system for their work and reiterate the
importance of the independence and autonomy of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. In addition to transitional
justice, the increased funding of which I welcome, every
Government entity responsible for implementation
must receive adequate funding. We also welcome the
19-30978

10/10/2019

Colombia

leadership of the Colombian authorities in the area of
the reintegration and protection of children, but we
remain concerned about the increase in the recruitment
and use of children, as well as sexual violence, by
non-State armed groups.
The security of social leaders, human rights
defenders and former FARC-EP members must be
strengthened and guaranteed, in particular during
the holding of elections, by focusing on the conflictaffected areas. We regret the fact that 24 former FARCEP members have been killed in the past three months.
Belgium stresses the importance of protecting
all candidates and their families, taking into account
the specific challenges faced by women candidates.
Progress has been made in the implementation of the
comprehensive programme of guarantees for women
leaders and human rights defenders, but it must be
equipped with adequate resources to ensure access to
preventive and protective measures. The most recent
presidential elections were the most peaceful in the
country’s recent history. Peaceful local elections
would serve to reveal that peace has its dividends.
In that regard, the National Pact for Political Culture
and Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign is a
welcome initiative.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Belgium’s
strong support for the full implementation of the
peace agreement and the positive role played by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. The
unanimous adoption last month of resolution 2487 (2019)
to extend the mandate of the Mission demonstrates
what the Council can achieve when it is united. In the
same vein, we call on all parties and Colombian society
to foster consensus and combat polarization in order to
build a better future.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, in this briefing to discuss the
political situation in Colombia. His presence reflects
the special attention that his Government is giving
to that issue. We commend Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, for his comprehensive briefing.
My country notes with satisfaction the progress
made, with the support of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, whose mandate

S/PV. 8639

was renewed on 12 September at the request of the
Colombian authorities, in the implementation of
the “peace with legality” strategy since President
Iván Duque Márquez’s took power one year ago. In
the context of the forthcoming local elections, my
delegation welcomes the signing of the National Pact
for Political Culture and Non-Violence during the
Electoral Campaign, which reflects the commitment
of the stakeholders to banning violence and holding
peaceful debates during the electoral campaign. In
order to ensure the success of the electoral process,
Côte d’Ivoire urges the Government to strengthen
security measures for all candidates.
We also welcome the efforts that have been made by
the Government and other parties, including the approval
of productive projects, the launch and implementation
of development programmes with a territorial focus and
the reaffirmed determination and commitment of the
Colombian authorities to reintegrating ex-combatants.
My delegation further commends the actions of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace with a view to focusing
particular attention on the rights of victims and its
excellent work with regard to the transition process in
the territorial areas for training and reintegration. We
also welcome the spirit of cooperation of the former
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) members.
My country notes with concern that, despite
significant progress, major difficulties remain with
regard to the implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace. Those include the climate of insecurity,
the lack of resources for the financing of projects
and the inadequacy of the social measures aimed at
reintegrating former FARC-EP combatants. In addition,
Côte d’Ivoire encourages the Government to redouble
its efforts to undertake resolutely the appropriate
political, socioeconomic, land and judicial reforms in
order to guarantee lasting peace. If the process is to be
successful, it will require the allocation of appropriate
financial resources to the various structures involved
in the implementation of the peace agreement, together
with the proper coordination of actions. It is also crucial
to ensure the dismantling of criminal group networks in
the most vulnerable areas and to initiate investigations
to determine the perpetrators of crimes, particularly
the perpetrators of targeted killings.
My delegation is concerned about the announcement
made on 29 August by Luciano Marín Arango, also

19-3097811/20

S/PV.8639

Colombia

known as Ivan Márquez, former leader of the FARCEP, on behalf of a group of dissidents of former
FARC-EP combatants to return to arms. The effective
implementation of that decision would undermine
peace and reconciliation efforts in Colombia, deal
a serious blow to any peace process and send a bad
message a few weeks before the regional and municipal
elections of 27 October. Côte d’Ivoire believes that,
in a context of regional tensions, renewed fighting
between the military forces of Colombia and a dissident
group of former FARC-EP combatants would certainly
aggravate an already worrying security situation. We
therefore call on the leaders of that dissident group to
remain committed to the peace process and to sustain
the hope created by the various agreements that have
been reached. We also urge all stakeholders to redouble
their efforts in their respective commitments in order to
give peace a chance.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its support
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
his actions aimed at restoring peace and stability in
Colombia. In that same vein, we reiterate our call on
the international community and, above all, to the
Council to provide further support to the efforts of the
Colombian parties in that legitimate pursuit.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): First, let me extend our
thanks to Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García for his
presence with us in the Council today. I would also like to
thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his informative briefing.
The signature more than two years ago of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace between Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP), followed by its implementation
process, remains an undeniable success story and a
great example for others to follow. The implementation
of such a complex agreement is a demanding task that
may sometimes result in disaffection and mistrust
among the parties involved.
Having said that, we are of the view that the recent
situation, where a small group of former FARC-EP
combatants have contested the agreement to the point
where they have decided to take up arms and continue
their fight outside of the provisions of the law, is
unacceptable and demands universal condemnation. At
the same time, we recall with appreciation messages
coming from the different sides of the Colombian
12/20

10/10/2019

political scene that focus on the unity of all Colombians.
We want to praise the efforts of the Government
and a clear majority of former FARC-EP guerrilla
members who overwhelmingly support the ongoing
peace process. Thanks to the peace agreement, both
parties can turn to the Commission for the Follow-up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of
the Agreement to overcome implementation challenges
and thereby strengthen the coordination mechanisms.
Much has been done in the area of the protection
of human rights defenders and social leaders. However,
according to the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/780), there is still a significant gap to be
diminished. Close protection, especially for former
FARC-EP members around and outside of the territorial
areas for training and reintegration, must be ensured.
Comprehensive security measures must be provided
without delay to the departments historically affected
by the conflict.
The full political, legal and socioeconomic
reintegration of former FARC-EP members is crucial
to creating trust and confidence in the peace process.
As urban reintegration is steadily gaining relevance,
it is essential to ensure that the former combatants
will get appropriate access to housing, health systems
and education. We are pleased to note that the
implementation of the development programmes with a
territorial focus is gaining traction and soon will bring
relief to the areas that suffered the most during the
armed conflict period.
Let me now focus on the local elections scheduled to
take place on 27 October. Expectations are high in that
regard. That is why we are worried about the spike in
attacks against candidates, as is noted in latest report of
the Secretary-General. We hope that the security forces
will step up and deliver the best possible protection. On
a positive note, it has to be underlined that the signing
by all major political parties of the National Pact for
Political Culture and Non-Violence during the Electoral
Campaign was a much-needed step to reject violence as
a way of conducting policy.
In conclusion, let me underline Poland’s support
for the United Nations Verification Mission and the
United Nations country team. I would also like to
reiterate our strong support for the Government and the
people of Colombia in their dedicated efforts to ensure
sustainable peace in the spirit of national unity.
19-30978

10/10/2019

Colombia

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his detailed briefing and the
work carried out by him and his team to ensure lasting
peace in Colombia.
Let me also welcome to the Security Council once
again Minister Carlos Holmes Trujillo García. His
presence today once again raises the profile of this
briefing. I would like to make three brief points today.
First, Indonesia commends the measures and efforts
taken by the Government of President Duque Márquez
and its commitment to continuing to implement the
Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict and Build a
Stable and Lasting Peace. We also once again welcome
the many positive developments achieved by the people
of Colombia in fulfilling the peace agreement, as
well as the positive role played by the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. Nonetheless, in
line with the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/780),
we also call on all the relevant parties to continue to
make efforts to enhance mutual trust and deliver on
their commitments made to victims, conflict-affected
communities and former combatants.
Secondly, we are deeply concerned at the
announcement by a group of former commanders of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) of their decision to rearm. We
are worried about the potential negative impact the
announcement might have in terms of violence and the
security situation in some regions of Colombia. Such
an act clearly shows that those individuals are not
interested in peace, in contravention of the wishes of
the people who strive and hunger for peace.
We should focus more on amplifying the success
stories of the vast majority of former combatants,
who remain committed and engaged in reintegration
programmes as an integral part of their contribution
to the overall peace process. We are glad to hear from
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu that former
combatants are involved in various projects. We
appreciate the efforts of the Government through the
National Reintegration Council to approve more new
collective productive projects, benefitting more former
combatants, including women. It is up to us all in
the international community to support Colombia’s
economic and social reintegration efforts, especially
gender-sensitive projects.

S/PV. 8639

Lastly, we must not lose the existing positive
momentum. As we encourage the parties to redouble
their efforts to implement the peace agreement, the
Security Council, too, should continue to effectively
assist the Government with its peacemaking efforts.
Political reintegration and successful local elections are
also important to ensure stability.
Still fresh in our memory is the strong commitment
expressed by all parties during our last visit to
Colombia — President Duque Márquez, leaders of
FARC-EP, heads of peace-agreement institutions,
representatives of civil society organizations and
former combatants and communities from Santa
Rosa to Cauca. We heard them, and it is therefore our
obligation to deliver on our promises to make the peace
agreement work. Indonesia stands ready to assist,
including by sharing our experiences and best practices
in reintegration and illicit drugs crops, as well as in
crop-for-peace programming, including palm oil.
In conclusion, we strongly commend the people
of Colombia for their courage to achieve peace and
stability in their country. Their commitment to the
peace process is exemplary. May Colombia’s example
of nationally led peace continue to be a success story
for the Council.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the speakers and welcome the
presence with us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo.
The Security Council has regularly stressed
that the Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict
and Build a Stable and Lasting Peace represents an
unprecedented and courageous path towards building
peace and national reconciliation in Colombia. The
Council has been united in supporting this collective
effort, including by establishing the United Nations
Verification Mission, led by Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
whose work I commend. Given the challenges facing
peacebuilding, we must, more than ever, continue to
support the rigorous approach chosen by the Colombian
Government, the former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) and civil society in building lasting
peace. I wish to focus on the following several points.
The reactions to the announcement, which
France condemned, on 29 August by former FARC
commanders that they would rearm paradoxically
showed that the peace agreement is very much alive.

19-3097813/20

S/PV.8639

Colombia

Indeed, the Colombian Government, the FARC party,
other political parties and civil society alike strongly
rejected that announcement and reaffirmed their
commitment to the agreement. Individual choices to
return to violence will not undermine the collective
process of building peace.
The security situation in former conflict zones
remains a priority, given the high number of killings
of social leaders, human rights defenders, FARC excombatants and political candidates, especially in the
context of the local elections on 27 October. France
condemns those killings. In that regard, France
welcomes the adoption, on 26 August, of the National
Pact for Political Culture and Non-Violence during
the Electoral Campaign. We encourage the authorities
to step up their efforts to provide all the necessary
guarantees to men and women engaging in politics or
human rights activism.
Faced with these challenges, the solution is to
further strengthen the implementation of all components
of the agreement. With regard to the economic and
social reintegration of former combatants, significant
progress has been made and must be continued. The
peace agreement also includes ambitious provisions
on rural reform, political reform, substitution of illicit
crops, as well as crosscutting provisions in favour of
women and ethnic minorities. Their comprehensive
implementation is key for building peace in the long
term. The monitoring mechanisms provided for in the
agreement should also be used. The institutions of the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition must be able to carry out their
work, which is essential to prospects for lasting peace,
in an atmosphere of calm.
In conclusion, we are fully aware of the challenge
the migration crisis poses to Colombia. In that regard,
I wish to commend the generosity of the Colombian
Government and people in welcoming the migrants,
with the support of the international community. Given
these various challenges, I would like to assure the
Government and the people of Colombia of France’s
support and readiness, together with our partners in the
European Union, to continue supporting them on the
exacting road the peace.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, our delegation would like
to thank you, Sir, and your delegation for convening
this meeting during the October, a crucial time in
14/20

10/10/2019

Colombia’s electoral calendar. We also wish to welcome
the presence of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo García,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, with us
today at this meeting, and to wish him a pleasant stay
in New York.
We join other Council members in thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and his team for
the very clear, detailed and informative presentation.
The report before us today (S/2019/780) continues
the trend in previous reports that allows us to hold up
Colombia as a clear example of how, when a people
comes together in action, they can prevent a crisis from
escalating and save lives, thereby realizing the mandate
of the United Nations enshrined in the Preamble to the
Charter of our Organization. That political will on the
part of the Colombian parties, after more than 50 years
of conflict, has been evident at critical junctures, from
the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict
and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace
of 2016 to the successful 2018 elections. It is now
reaffirmed by the National Pact for Political Culture and
Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign, signed at
the end of August by the political parties, which rejects
violence and promotes dialogue and political rights in
the context of the elections to be held on 27 October.
Given those significant steps, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea joins the call in the SecretaryGeneral’s report and all voices to encourage the parties
and the people as a whole to follow a constructive
direction, set aside the discourse of polarization and
stigmatization and work towards extending a hand
and reaching an inclusive consensus on the aspects of
most interest to society, especially to those who have
suffered the most from the conflict.
On another note, we strongly condemn all known and
unknown attempts to reverse the achievements already
made in the long process of reconstruction. Given the
suffering of the people of Colombia, there is no reason
to justify the decision announced on 29 August by a
group of former Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants
to take up arms again. The international community
must continue to express its condemnation to that end
and put pressure on those responsible, especially the
individuals Luciano Martín, known as Iván Márquez,
19-30978

10/10/2019

Colombia

S/PV. 8639

and Seuxis Pausías Hernández Solarte, known as Jesús
Santrich, to reconsider their decision.

in its efforts to achieve a lasting and stable peace. They
have our full support.

In that regard, we welcome the rejection of the
political party Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Común of that decision and its reaffirmed commitment
to the peace agreement. We also endorse the messages
of support from the various sectors of Colombian
society for the former leaders and combatants of the
FARC-EP who remain committed to the peace process
and who made many calls for the revitalization of the
implementation of the peace agreement as a whole.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate our appreciation to
the Colombian Government for the activities that it is
carrying out, the commitments that it is upholding and
the strides that it is making on a daily basis in pursuit
of restoring social and political peace to the Colombian
people, something for which they sorely yearn.

The increase in incidents against political party
candidates overall is a matter of concern to my delegation
because it could pose a risk to this month’s elections.
However, we encourage all parties to ensure that those
elections be held in a climate of peace and tranquillity,
through inclusive dialogue and in compliance with the
law. With respect to attacks by insurgent armed groups,
appropriate measures to dismantle those criminal
networks and bring their perpetrators before justice
must be urgently taken.
We call for the draft laws and constitutional reforms
submitted to the present legislature to respect the
commitments set out in the peace agreement, as those
are the cornerstone for achieving the reconstruction
of Colombia.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that it
is our duty to underscore the importance of all armed
groups becoming aware of the overriding interest of the
Colombian people, namely, peace and national unity. In
that regard, we urge the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
to consider the preconditions of the Government to
resume the stalled negotiations.
Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the efforts
of President Iván Duque Márquez and his Government
in the implementation of their “Peace with legality”
strategy, while encouraging all those concerned to
redouble their efforts to implement all parts of the peace
agreement in order to meet the commitments made to
former combatants, victims and communities affected
by the conflict.
We once again commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for
the noble and commendable work they are undertaking
by playing a crucial role in supporting the Government

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting. I
also welcome the Foreign Minister of Colombia, who is
present with us today to participate in the meeting. And
I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Columbia, for his
invaluable briefing on the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/780), which deals with the notable achievements
and the challenges facing the implementation of the
Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and
the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace.
Since the signing of the historic Colombian
peace agreement, which ended 50 years of conflict,
Colombia has been able to achieve a great deal of
national successes and gains, notwithstanding the
challenges facing the implementation of the agreement.
That requires intensified efforts by all stakeholders to
safeguard the successes and make further ones.
Concerning socioeconomic reintegration, we
appreciate the efforts undertaken by the Colombian
Government through the continued implementation
of programmes related to the Colombian peace
agreement in terms of the socioeconomic and political
reintegration of former members of the Fuerza
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP). The Government’s communiqué
of 14 August concerning a transition period of two
years for training and reintegration in certain locations
following the expiration of their legal status is a
positive step in implementing the peace agreement. We
urge all stakeholders to contribute to expediting the
reintegration process by providing the necessary legal
and security guarantees for former FARC members. We
fully recognize the magnitude of the many challenges
that all stakeholders will face.
In that regard, we welcome the support extended
by all stakeholders for the National Pact for Political
Culture and Non-Violence during the Electoral
Campaign, which rejects violence and promotes both

19-3097815/20

S/PV.8639

Colombia

dialogue and political rights during the election to be
held on 27 October. We hope that the elections will
be a success and a contribution to the Colombian
peace agreement.
Turning to the security situation, the continuing
murders, violence and threats targeting former members
of the FARC-EP as well as community leaders and
human right defenders is a source of great concern.
We need greater efforts to address the situation, while
also promoting security guarantees and precautionary
measures. To that end, we note the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations Verification Mission by
communicating with the Ministry of the Interior and
civil society to establish a national comprehensive
policy to protect those groups.
We reject the statement made by former FARCEP leaders announcing that they would take up arms
again. That could undermine the implementation of the
peace agreement.
Lastly, pertaining to the efforts of the United
Nations Verification Mission, we pay tribute to the
Mission’s ongoing efforts to strengthen the peace
process under the auspices of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, while cooperating with local
and national authorities and many agencies, including
the United Nations Development Programme, the World
Health Organization and the United Nations Population
Fund, as well as the private sector. We also pay tribute
to the role played by the Mission in encouraging youth
and youth organizations to participate in building peace
through volunteer work, athletics, cultural activities
and dialogue.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.
Let me start by thanking and welcoming His
Excellency Carlos Holmes Trujillo García, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to this meeting,
together with his high-level entourage. We appreciate
his commitment and availability to brief the Council
each time the agenda item of Colombia is discussed. He
has South Africa’s full support in his country’s quest to
achieve long-term and sustainable peace. In the same
spirit, we also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his informative briefing and his perseverance in
dealing with the peace process in Colombia.
16/20

10/10/2019

South Africa fully supports the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, signed between the Government of Colombia
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) in 2016. We welcome the mechanisms of
the Final Agreement, such as the Commission for
the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, which can
be used to address the gaps and challenges related to
the implementation of the Agreement. We encourage
both parties to use the peace agreement as a basis for
strengthening dialogue.
South Africa welcomes the recent positive steps
taken by the Government of Colombia, which lay the
foundation for the Government to continue its initiative
to integrate the former FARC-Ejército del Pueblo
(EP) combatants and to ensure that they can live full
and decent lives in their communities. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts of President Duque Márquez
and his Administration to implement the “Peace with
legality” strategy, which has made way for the approval
of various projects for former combatants, the beginning
of the implementation of the development programmes
with a territorial focus and his visits to former territorial
areas for training and reintegration, which can be seen
as confidence and trust-building efforts between the
Government and former combatants.
We welcome the Government’s efforts with regard
to the transformation of those territorial areas for the
purposes of training and reintegration, as well as the
constructive role and responsive attitude of the FARC.
Those positive efforts can help to return the lives of
8,000 former combatants to normalcy so that they
can contribute to a prosperous Colombia. We agree
with the Secretary-General’s assessment in his latest
report that that is “an example for overcoming hurdles
in implementation through dialogue” (S/2019/780,
para. 101), which South Africa supports, as it contributes
to addressing the concerns and uncertainties of the
FARC combatants regarding their future in Colombian
daily life politically, socially and economically.
That is important, as it relates to rural and political
reintegration and reform, the development of territories,
transitional justice and the rights of victims, who
should remain at the centre of the full implementation
of the peace agreement. We welcome the role of the
Truth Commission and the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace in that regard. South Africa’s own experience
with its Truth and Reconciliation Commission affirms
19-30978

10/10/2019

Colombia

that it is crucial to achieving national unity. Hearing the
different views and the various versions of events of all
communities in Colombia will ensure that the road to
peace is based on an inclusive political process.
The consolidation of peace after decades of conflict
and mistrust is not an easy task. In that regard, we are
concerned about the announcement made in August by
a group of former FARC-EP commanders regarding
their decision to take up arms. Such narratives have
the potential to reignite violence in territories and
undermine the political progress that has been made
and the foundations for trust that are being established,
as well as the prospects for long-term peace for all who
live in Colombia.
We agree with, and wish to join, the United Nations
Verification Mission in commending the resilience of
Colombian society and its institutions and encourage
them to remain committed to the peace process that has
saved many lives to date. We also wish to commend
the Government of Colombia and the FARC party
for swiftly responding to that potentially damaging
announcement and rejecting it by expressing their
commitment to the peace process on behalf of former
combatants across the country. Former combatants
who laid down their weapons in good faith must
remain part of the reintegration process, which must be
respected, honoured and realized, because their efforts
remain important to the work of the comprehensive
system of truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition.
We call on all political parties to fully respect and
remain committed to the agreement and to continue
to desist from any actions that may undermine its
comprehensive implementation.
We remain concerned about the security of all
stakeholders. That includes the recent killings of various
political candidates, community and social leaders,
human rights defenders, former FARC-EP combatants,
persons participating in the implementation of the
peace process, rural communities, including people
living with disabilities, indigenous peoples and AfroColombian communities, particularly in the context
of the upcoming elections expected to take place later
this month.
It is also important to be cognisant of the specific
threats to female candidates and leaders and to urge
the Government and all stakeholders across Colombian
society to double their efforts to promote peace and
tolerance so as to ensure the safety of all in the context

S/PV. 8639

of the elections and beyond. It is important that the
Government and all stakeholders in Colombian society
encourage the participation of young people and women
at the grass-roots and all other levels, whose voices and
perspectives can significantly contribute to the longterm plans for the integration and stability of Colombia.
We note the joint communiqué issued on
9 September by Cuba and Norway, guarantor countries
of talks between the Government of Colombia and the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo, and we commend them for their willingness
to continue supporting and accompanying efforts to
achieve a stable and lasting peace in Colombia.
Let me conclude by stating that South Africa
urges Member States and the international community
to support and encourage the people of Colombia to
persevere and fully implement the Final Agreement in a
comprehensive manner in order to address the concerns
and rights of victims, access to justice, reparation,
guarantees of non-repetition, inclusive dialogue and a
peaceful settlement. Colombia has come a long way.
The road to peace is near.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Mr. Trujillo García (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I commend and congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the presidency of the Security Council. I am grateful
for the convening of today’s meeting to consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2019/780). I
would like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of Mission, for his briefing and his ongoing work
in Colombia.
I would also like to express our gratitude to the
members of the Security Council for their commitment
to Colombia and the implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. The proof of that is the
adoption of resolution 2487 (2019), thanks to which the
Council unanimously decided to extend for another year
the mandate of the Verification Mission in Colombia at
the request of President Ivan Duque Márquez, who is
carrying out the “Peace with legality” policy for which
the majority of the Colombian people voted in order to

19-3097817/20

S/PV.8639

Colombia

implement the Final Agreement along with forwardlooking reforms so as to achieve that implementation
by consensus and through institutional mechanisms.
I would like to start with the Secretary-General’s
recognition in his report of the Government’s
commitment to the implementation of the “Peace with
legality” policy and the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The report presents a balanced view of the important
progress made and the multiple challenges we face
in the implementation process. The Government is
fulfilling its commitments — and this is not just
something for us to claim on the international stage
but it has been clearly demonstrated by the results and
progress contained in the report. The transformation
that Colombia requires in order to achieve “Peace with
legality” is a long-term project.
With regard to reintegration, the report highlights a
positive evolution, recognizing the achievements of the
Government of President Iván Duque Márquez over the
first 14 months of his Administration. Work has been
conducted in a coordinated manner to transform the
territorial areas, whose legal status ended on 15 August.
Achieving their transformation and reintegration within
the territorial framework is an ambitious process.
It is important to keep in mind that, while the report
draws attention to the need for rapid progress, that
process was not specifically determined in the Final
Agreement; nonetheless, although it presents a series of
complexities, the Government is deeply committed to
moving forward in that regard.
It is also worth highlighting the economic
implications of the former territorial areas. Over
the past year, $7.92 million has been invested in the
administration and supply of those areas. In addition,
the national development plan authorizes the extension
of the monthly subsidy for ex-combatants, subject to
their compliance with the reintegration process.
I mention those measures because they go beyond
what was agreed and demonstrate that the “Peace
with legality” policy recognizes that the only way to
achieve stabilization in the areas afflicted by violence
is by generating real opportunities that allow for the
sustainable economic and social reintegration of excombatants. Therefore, the implementation of the Final
Agreement is one of the cross-cutting components of
our national development plan, as well as one of the
objectives of the “Peace with legality” policy.
18/20

10/10/2019

Efforts in terms of reintegration are evidenced by
constant progress in the approval of both collective
and individual productive projects aimed at achieving
effective socioeconomic reintegration. Compared
to the levels previously reported by the SecretaryGeneral (see S/2019/530), the number of approved
collective productive projects has increased from 24
to 35, thereby increasing the number of beneficiaries
from 1,566 to 2,204. In the same way, the number of
individual projects rose from 216 to 559, benefiting
nearly 700 people.
I would like to mention two specific issues that
exemplify the complexities we face, which can be
understood only by going beyond what is set out in the
report. On the one hand, there is the issue of access
to land by ex-combatants. The report mentions that
greater efforts are required in that area. It is important
to clarify that, although that point was not determined
in the Final Agreement, the Government has identified
a series of alternative options for access to land that,
within the framework of reintegration, will enable the
advancement of productive projects in the territorial
and agricultural spheres.
On the other hand, the report states that better
results are needed in terms of the provision of quality
health-care services, especially for ex-combatants
living outside the former territorial areas, and also
affirms that little progress has been made in terms of
psychosocial support, sexual and reproductive health
and maternal health. That analysis requires greater
depth given that 98 per cent of ex-combatants are
already registered to date in the Colombian health care
system and that significant progress has been made in
providing health coverage in rural areas.
The Government believes it important that the
Council should not lose sight of the fact that the
implementation process will not be achieved overnight
but will require at least 15 years — as acknowledged
in the Final Agreement itself. Bringing the rule of
law, physical and legal security and the services of
each public institution to all regions of the country is
a commitment that goes beyond the implementation of
the agreement.
With regard to the second pillar of verification,
namely the mandate of the Mission in Colombia, and
security measures for ex-combatants and communities,
I must begin by recognizing the scale of the challenge
19-30978

10/10/2019

Colombia

to guarantee the protection of the lives of some of the
ex-combatants and social leaders.
On various occasions, both here before the Council
and on the Council’s visit to Colombia, the Government
has highlighted the measures taken to reduce any
type of threat, homicide or other crime. The report
mentions the significant progress made by the Special
Investigation Unit of the Attorney General’s Office, the
strengthening of security and prosecution measures,
the decisions taken to reduce electoral violence, the
meetings of the National Commission on Security
Guarantees convened by President Duque and the
adoption of the Action Plan for the Protection of Social
and Community Leaders, Human Rights Defenders
and Journalists.
That is one of the main sources of concern for the
Government — we cannot and will not deny it. My
country rejects the murders of former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) combatants, social leaders and human
rights defenders. In that regard, the President of the
Republic has himself ordered the adoption of more than
20 measures to strengthen security for ex-combatants
and 15 specific measures to ensure the security of the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC)
political party candidates.
The relevant authorities are working diligently to
investigate and prosecute those responsible for those
crimes to ensure that they do not go unpunished. The
Government has identified that, among the risk factors
affecting the population in general, and social leaders
in particular, is intensified competition for dominance
and control of illicit economic activities, such as
drug trafficking and illegal mining. Many efforts are
being undertaken to tackle that security issue, and the
Government stands ready to do more.
Just over a month ago, Colombia and the
international community received the unfortunate news
that a narco-terrorist group had been established by
individuals known as Iván Márquez and Jesús Santrich,
as well as other former FARC-EP leaders, who are a
clear minority. I am grateful for the remarks of Council
members on the matter. I would like to highlight the
FARC political party’s early condemnation of those
events — indeed, just yesterday they decided to expel
those individuals from the party. I would also like to
reiterate the subsequent rejection of those individuals
by Colombian society.

S/PV. 8639

The actions of those former FARC-EP leaders
constitute the most flagrant violation of the
commitments of the Final Agreement. However, that
incident made it possible to demonstrate that 90 per
cent of the ex-combatants are complying with their
obligations; moreover, 76 per cent of them claim to
feel optimistic and motivated regarding their future as
law-abiding members of society. The Government will
remain committed to that vast majority, as we consider
that to be a sign of confidence in their reintegration
and therefore in the reconciliation that the Colombian
people long for.
For those who do not comply, we will be bringing
down the full weight of the law upon them. That is why
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, through its Chamber
for Acknowledgment of Truth and Responsibility,
expelled those individuals several days ago, stripping
them of the benefits of transitional justice.
We cannot overlook the fact that the agreement
includes a series of commitments made by both parties
and that the Verification Mission should also follow up
on FARC non-compliance. It is urgent that the party
provide information on the location of the minefields
and missing persons, hand over the entirety of its
assets for victim reparations and allow the effective
reintegration of recruited children and adolescents,
among other things. Building peace with legality is a
collective effort that involves rights and obligations,
without exception.
I wish to conclude by highlighting two fundamental
issues on which the Government is making progress: the
Government’s joint work plan with the components of
the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition and the proposal to increase its
budget by 15 per cent, and the implementation of the
development plans with a territorial focus. We have
formalized the 16 plans. We allocated over $130 million
of tax resources to the regions. We have formalized
300,000 hectares and included more than 450,000
hectares in the National Land Agency. In line with the
philosophy of building peace with legality, we will do
all we can for regions affected by violence and people
who walk the path of legality. Those two issues are
critical to ensuring comprehensive reparations for the
victims and the stabilization of the areas most affected
by violence, as tools to achieve an effective peace
with legality.

19-3097819/20

S/PV.8639

Colombia

The Government of Colombia will continue to work
as diligently as possible in
“building a culture of legality in which we recognize
our differences and choose coexistence, and the
rule of law is forged as the indissoluble marriage of
security and justice” (A/74/PV.5),
as President Iván Duque Márquez said during the most
recent general debate in the General Assembly.
Colombia will not stop at building peace. That
process is irreversible and requires the commitment and

20/20

10/10/2019

support of all gathered here as witnesses of the valuable
path we have embarked upon, as well as support for
President Iván Duque’s ongoing call to build agreements
and consensus to advance in the implementation of the
policy of peace with legality.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

19-30978
