11.

mittee and to provide them on a regular basis with the
necessary facilities to carry out their functions;
10. Expresses its appreciation once again to the Secretary-General for taking appropriate steps in following the
situation closely and requests him to continue to do so and
to exercise his good offices in order to contribute to a comprehensive political settlement;
11. Invites the Co-Presidents of the Paris Conference
on Cambodia to intensify their consultations with a view
to reconvening the Conference and its committees at an
appropriate time;
.
12. Expresses its deep appreciation once again to donor
countries, the United Nations and its agencies and other
humanitarian organizations, national and international,
that have rendered relief assistance to the Kampuchean
people, and appeals to them to continue to provide emergency assistance to those Kampucheans who are still in
need, especially along the Thai-Kampuchean border and
in the various encampments in Thailand;
13. Reiterates its deep appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts in co-ordinating humanitarian relief
assistance and in monitoring its distribution, and requests
him to intensify such efforts as necessary;
14. Urges the States of South-East Asia, once a comprehensive political settlement to the Kampuchean conflict is achieved, to exert renewed efforts to establish a zone
of peace, freedom and neutrality in South-East Asia;
IS. Reiterates the hope that, following a comprehensive political settlement, an intergovernmental committee
will be established to consider a programme of assistance
to Kampuchea for the reconstruction of its economy and
for the economic and social development of all States in
the region;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortv-fifth session the item entitled "The situation in Kampuchea".
58th plenl1ry meeting
16 November 1989

44/23,

United Nations Decade of International Law

Stressing the need to promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciatioll of international law.
Noting that, in the remaining decade of the twentieth
century, important anniversaries will he celebrated that
are related to the adoption of international legal documents, such as the centenary of the first International
Peace Conference, held at The Hague in 1899, which
adopted the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Displltes 75 and created the Permanent Court
of Arbitration, the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the
Charter of the United Nations and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations,
1. Declares the period 1990-1999 as the United Nations Decade of International Law;
2. Cotlsiders that the main purposes of the Decade
should be, illter alia:
(a) To promote acceptance of and respect for the principles of international law;
(b) To promote means and methods for the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States, including resort to
and full respect for the International Court of Justice;
(c) To encourage the ['lrogressive development of international law and its (;odiftcation;
(d) To encourage the teaching, study. dissemination
and wider appreciation of international law:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Member States and appropriate international bodies, as
well as of non-governmental nrganizations working in the
field, on the programme for the Decade and on appropriate action to be taken during the Decade, including the
possibility of holding a third international peace conference or other suitable international conference at the end
of the Decade, and to submit a report thereon to the Assembly at its forty-fifth session;
4. Decides to consider this question at its forty-fifth
session in a working group of the Sixth Committee with a
view to preparing generally acceptable recommendations
for the Decade;
5. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its forty-fifth session the item entitled "United Nations
Decade of International Law".
60th plenl1ry meeting
17 November 1989

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that one of the purposes of the United Na-

tions is to maintain international peace and security, and
to that end to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international
law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or
situations which might lead to a breach of the peace,
Recalling the Declaration 011 Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations 73 and the Manila Declaration on the
Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes,74
Recognizing the role of the United Nations in promoting
greater acceptance of and respect for the principles of internationallaw and in encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Convinced of the need to strengthen the rule oflaw in international relations,
7.1 Resolu(J(ll} 2625 (XXV), annex.
74

Reso!ul}on .17/10, annex

31

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

44/24.

African Alternative Framework to Structural
Adjustment Programmes for Socio-Economic
Recovery and Transformation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution S-13/2 of I June 1986, the annex
to which contains the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990,
Recalling also its resolution 43/27 of 18 November 1988
and, in particular, paragraph 55 (c) of the annex to that
resolution, in which African countries were urged to increase their efforts in the search for a viable conceptual
and pradical framework fllr economic structural adjust-

,~~ SI..:'t' t'anlcg.JC Llld()\~IIlL'nl I"\)r Illfl't'Il:tIIPllal Pl':I ...'L'". fil.' 11((1.~lh
[Hltl f)r't"/(UdUO!l\ (It /8 t /(/ 'Hui ll)(17 (Nl.'\\' 'r ,H~. U\forL!

CW/I't'IJUU/I"

l it!l\ CI',ll \ PI (,..,..." 1q 1")
