ITY COUNCIL
AL RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2204) . . ..*......,.,,.....1....1..........*
Tribute to the memory of Mr, Ton Due Thang, President of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam . , , . , , , . , , . , , , . , . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . .
Adoption of the agenda , . , , . . ,...,,,.,,..,,,,,.......,.................
,The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13855). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV 62204

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document .
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjcicrl’ Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

President: Mr. Donald 0. MILLS (Jamaica).

2. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Egypt, Iraq, Israel, Jordan and
Lebanon in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2204)
1. Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Bafi (Iraq), Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan) and Mr. Tue’ni (Lebanon) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980from the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13855)

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
27 March from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that I be allowed to
participate in the Security Council’s consideration
of the item ‘The question of the exercise by the
Palestinian people of its inalienable rights’, in
accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, in my capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.”

The meeting was called to order at II .55 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of Mr. Ton Due Thang,
President of the Socialist Republic of Met Nam

1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the members
of the Council that word has been received this
morning of the death of the President of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, Mr. Ton Due Thang. On this
occasion, I wish to express our profound condolences
to the Government and people of Viet Nam on their
great loss.

On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters
on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council should accede
to that request.

Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kane (Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People) took a place at
the Council table.

The agenda was adopted.
The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
Of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13855)

4. The PRESIDENT: I have also received a letter
dated 28 March, from the Rapporteur of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that I be allowed
to participate in the Security Council’s consideration of the item ‘The question of the exercise by
1

Against:

the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights’,
in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure, in my capacity as Rapporteur of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People.”

United States of America

Abstaining:
France, Norway, Portugal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The proposal
4 abstentions.

In accordance with past practice in this regard, I propose that the Council should accede to that request.

was adopted

by IO votes to I, with

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Terzi (Pafestine Liberation
Organization)
took n place at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gauci (Rapporteur of the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Znalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People) fook a
place at the Council table.

8. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received a letter
dated 31 March from the representative of Tunisia
[S/13867] which reads as follows:

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received a letter
dated 27 March from the representative of Tunisia
[S/13865] which reads as follows:

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to extend an invitation to Mr. Clovis Maksoud,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States
to the United Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The question of the
exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable
rights’, in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.”

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in the Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘The question
of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights’, in accordance with the Council’s
usual practice.”

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to accede to that request.

The proposal of the representative of Tunisia is not
made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, but, if approved by the Council,
that invitation would confer upon the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) the same rights of participation as those conferred on a Member State under
rule 37. Does any member of the Security Council
wish to speak on this proposal?

It was so decided.

9. The PRESIDENT: The Council is meeting today
in response to the letter dated 6 March from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council and circulated
in document S/I3832 and the letter dated 24 March
from the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security Council
contained in document S/13855.

6. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): As
recently as 22 February [2/99th meeting], the United
States stated in the Council that it had no objection
to the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization in the debate before the Council. At the same
time, the United States also stated, as it has consistently stated in the past, that the legal basis for
the Council to invite the PLO to participate is rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure. We do not
believe that such an invitation can properly be formulated in terms that suggest that the Palestine Liberation
Organization be given procedural rights that would
accrue to a State Member that wished to participate in
the work of the Council. For these reasons, the United
States will vote against the proposed invitation.

10. The members of the Council also have before
them document S/13715, which contains the text of a
note by the Secretary-General dated 30 December
1979, by which he drew the attention of the Council
to General Assembly resolution 34/65 A.
11. The first speiker is the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, Mr, Falilou Kane. I now call on
him. -

7. The PRESIDENT: If no other member of the
Council wishes to speak at this stage, I shall take it
that the Council is ready to vote on the proposal of
Tunisia.

12. Mr. KANE (Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People) (interpretation from French): Mr. Chairman,
allow me, as Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and also on my own behalf, to address to you
our warmest congratulations on your accessionto the
presidency of this distinguished organ. This is a
tribute which has been paid to your country, Jamaica,

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Bangladesh, China, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Philippines,
Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
2

which has always evinced deep devotion to our Organization’s ideals of peace and justice, as well as to the
principles of the non-aligned movement, in which it has
won the deepest respect.

proposals to promote recognition of the national
rights of the Palestinian people.
17. What in fact occurred? Unfortunately, the Committee must note today that its patience and goodwill
have not been rewarded. It seems that certain members, which continually request that the Council
should defer a decision, are simply trying to delay the
taking of a decision as much as possible and thus to
prevent the Council from acting-for reasons we find it
difficult to discern.

13. I am grateful to the members of the Council for
having acceded to our request for an urgent meeting,
pursuant to my letter which appears in document
S/13855. On behalf of the Committee, I should like
to thank them very sincerely.
14. Since 1976 the report of the Committee’ has been
before the Council. Its contents and its recommendations were presented to the Council by my predecessor. I shall therefore not repeat what has already
been said. However, I should like to recall that all
those recommendations are based on previous resolutions of the Council and of the General Assembly.
Moreover, the recommendations are based essentially
on certain fundamental principles, namely: the right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination, to
national sovereignty and to return to its homeland,
and the inadmissibility of the annexation of Palestinian
territories, which have been occupied by Israel since
1967. Finally, these recommendations make specific
proposals, on the basis of these resolutions and basic
principles, for ways and means of resolving what
is generally termed the Palestinian problem.

18. The General Assembly has on several occasions
in the past deplored the Council’s immobility in connection with the important, indeed urgent, problem
of Palestine. In its resolution 34/65 A it
“Once again urges the Security Council to consider and take as soon as possible a decision on the
recommendations endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolutions 3t/20, 32140A and 33/28 A
and in the present resolution”.

In the same resolution the Assembly authorized and
requested the Committee
“in the event of the Security Council failing to
consider or to take a decision on those recommendations by 31 March 1980, to consider that situation
and to make the suggestions it deems appropriate”.

15, The members of the Council will undoubtedly
recall that in resolution 31/20 the General Assembly
endorsed the recommendations contained in the report
of the Committee. In the same resolution, the General
Assembly requested the Security Council to consider
the recommendations contained in the Committee’s
report so that the necessary steps could be taken to
implement them. Such steps were to achieve early
Progress towards a solution of the problem of Palestine
and the establishment of a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. It is pursuant to this mandate of the
Assembly, which was renewed in resolutions 32140A,
33128A and 34165A, that the Committee called upon
the Council to resume, before 31 March 1980, its consideration of the recommendations of the Assembly
on Palestine for the purpose of taking a decision on
them.

19. The General Assembly resolutions, as well as
recent developments in the occupied Arab territories,
show that it is necessary, urgent and timely for the
Council to take a speedy decision on the Assembly’s
recommendations. Indeed, recently the Israeli Cabinet
authorized the establishment of Israeli settlements in
the very heart of the Arab town of Al-Khalil, which
is situated in the territories illegally occupied by Israel
since 1967, That decision, which is part and parcel
of a series of similar measures taken by the Israeli
authorities, is a further step in Israel’s policy of faits
accamplis-a policy which, as is known, is contrary
to the rules of international law and to the resolutions
of the United Nations. On 25 February, on the instructions of the Committee, I had an opportunity to speak
at some length on this question [220&h meeting].

16. The Council has in fact dealt with this matter on
two occasions, but no decision was taken. In October
1977, and in June and August 1979, an important
member of the Council requested that a decision be
deferred because of the negotiations under way at
that time on the Middle East problem. On both those
occasions, the Committee, wishing to demonstrate
its goodwill and its desire to do everything to promote
the restoration of peace in the Middle East, agreed
to a suspension of the debate. At the same time, however, it made it abundantly clear that it would not
accept a postponement sine die by the Council of a
discussion of the question of Palestine, and that the
time for reflection that had been granted should be
used by the members concerned to present positive

20. The Members of the Council still have fresh in
their memories resolution 465 (19801, which they
adopted unanimously on 1 March. The Committee
cannot but welcome a unanimous decision by the Council making it clear that all measures taken by Israel to
change, inier ah, the demographic composition and
the status of Arab and Palestinian territories illegally
occupied since 1967 have no legal validity. In that
resolution, the Security Council called upon Israel to
dismantle the existing settlements and in particular to
cease on an urgent basis the establishment of new
settlements in the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem. At the same time, the Council strongly
deplored the Government of Israel’s policy of estab3

to the Middle East problem. Since the problem
Palestine is at the very heart of the Middle El
conflict, it would appear to us to be unrealistic to se
to solve it in a way that ignored the legitimate aspil
tions of the Palestinian peoples, wherever they m
be. That is why the Committee believes that there
still time for the Israeli leaders to face the facts
recognizing the national rights of the Palestinian peoI
and entering into talks with its representative, t
Palestine Liberation Organization.

lishing settlements and described it as a serious
obstruction to the achievement of a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
21. The patent scorn of the Israeli Government for
the decisions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly and for world public opinion cannot be more
clearly demonstrated than by the provocative decisions to expropriate vast tracts of Arab land around
Jerusalem and other cities in order to establish new
settlements--only a scant few days after the adoption
of resolution 465 (1980).

26. Name-calling and mud-slinging are no lank
appropriate today. The fact of Palestine is a realir
since it has been recognized by more than 110 State
It is in Israel’s own interest to bear that in mind, if
does not wish to find itself in the absurd, inde
ridiculous, situation of someone who seeksto stem t
tide with his bare hands.

22. Only a few days ago, Israel, pursuing its policy
of defiance of our Organization, decided to open two
so-called schools in Al-Khalil. That attempt to establish new settlements in the occupied territories, under
the guise of educational institutions, proves-if proof
were needed-that the Israeli authorities still have no
intention of abandoning their plans to annex the
occupied Arab territories and the Holy City of Jerusalem.

27. Israel’s security depends on the satisfaction
the legitimate aspirations of its Arab neighbours. Wt
is occurring in Lebanon is precisely an extension oft
Palestinian conflict, obviously stirred up by Isra’
Genuine peace will be possible only if the rights
all the parties concerned, including the Palestiniar
are respected.

23. Such practices and such an attitude should induce
the Council to act swiftly and to recognize the right of
the Palestinian People to self-determination and its
right to establish an independent and sovereign State
in Palestine, Indeed, the more time passes, the more
opportunities Israel has to present the world with
furtherfuits accomplis and to make it more difficult to
progress towards peace.

28. The Committee has been greatly encouraged
its endeavours by the successwhich has been won
the Palestinian cause throughout the world since le
than a year ago. The countries of the European EC
nomic Community, as far as they are concerned, h
already accepted this fact, as members may reca
during the general debate at the thirty-fourth session
the General Assembly. They have just reaffirmed tl
through their most authoritative spokesmen. Duri
the most recent Summit Conference of the non-align
countries, which was held in Havana, the cause oft
Palestinian people received the firm support of mc
than 90 countries. Recently, other European countri
have declared themselves on the subject of the rig1
of the Palestinian people. Such developments a
striking proof of the broad consensuswhich is gradua’
emerging within the international community on t
need to take account of the national rights of t
Palestinian people in any peace effort in this part
the world.

24. Quite obviously, the Council’s failure to act can
only encourage Israel to persist in its delinquency.
It is, however, heartening today to note that authoritative voices have been heard quite recently-particularly that of President Giscard d’Estaing during a
visit to the Arab peninsula-in favour of the recognition of the inalienable right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, as well as its right to have its
legitimate representatives participate in any negotiation to determine its future; and, since then, some
European countries have taken that position. That
means that today the vast majority of the members of
the Council are-to a greater or lesser degree, it must
be said-in favour of recognizing the rights claimed
by the Palestinian people. That is an important and
significant fact which, as time passes, will become
more and more crystallized, because injustice cannot
go on for ever. We who come from peoples that used
to be under the colonial yoke have experienced this
ourselves.

29. The Committee can only be pleased at this than
in the attitude on the part of the European Gove]
ments with respect to the Palestine question. 5
venture to hope that the representatives of those cor
tries, as well as other countries, will henceforth ada
a more positive attitude to the Committee’s reco:
mendations and suggestions regarding the ways a
means for promoting the return of peace to the Mid<
East.

25. A certain permanent member, however, is still
using the excuse of not wishing to interfere with the
negotiations going on outside this body on the problem
of the Middle East. That hardly seems to us a convincing argument. Indeed, it is the Committee’s
opinion that recognition by the Council of the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people cannot
but be a positive contribution to any discussion aimed
at finding a just, lasting and comprehensive solution

30. It has always been the aim of the Committee
take account of all opinions when it formulates i
recommendations and suggestions. Its door has dwa!
been open to all Member States, including Ism
4

the decency, calm and courtesy which are appropriate
in this place because we hold in high esteem the
institution which the Security Council represents, just
as we have high esteem and respect for the individual
countries represented there.

Unfortunately, it has been faced with the boycott
tactics of Israel and its protectors. Today, however, it
is becoming increasingly obvious that it is not because
the Committee suffers from a congenital bias that
Israel preaches boycott. The truth is quite simply that
Israel seeks to prevent the United Nations from
shedding light on its annexationist and expansionist
policies and its violations of human rights.

34. The ever-growing consensus on the elements of
the solution to the problem of Palestine, as well as on
the tension which prevails in the occupied Arab territories, should encourage the Council to give a positive
impetus to the process of peace in the Middle East.
As everyone knows, a general strike was declared as
of yesterday in the occupied Arab territories to
observe Earth Day, which has been celebrated for
four years, in protest against the seizure of Arab
lands by the Israeli authorities. This very serious situation should encourage everyone to reflect and to seek
an urgent solution to this problem.

31. Is it conceivable at the end of the twentieth
century-at a time when there are discussions everywhere of the new international order which should
govern relations between States in the spheres of
politics, economics, culture and information-that a
State, a single State, Israel, continues to hold fast to
unrepenting fanaticism and blind absolutism? “This
self-assured and dominating people”-that was how
General de Gaulle described it in 1967 and he could
hardly have been a better prophet. Does that country
believe itself to be the only one that is right among a11
the other countries in the international community,
among all the members of the Security Council, in the
whole of this Organization? We wonder. Its leaders
would do well to think about this situation and also
about certain events which it would be useful to recall:
the blindness of certain leaders brought the world to
the brink of a conflagration when, in Viet Nam, the
legitimate aspirations of a people were not respected,
At that time, all the cosmetic solutions which were
attempted collapsed like a house of cards and Viet
Nam freed itself and reunified itself. For severaf
decades, the great country of China, the most populous country in the world, found itself refused admission to the United Nations, again because of the
narrow and unrealistic stance of those same leaders.

35. The search for a solution can be accomplished
initially, as we see it, by the adoption of a resolution
which would recognize the legitimate national rights of
the Palestinian people, as they have been defined by
the General Assembly. In taking such a decision the
Council would be helping to remedy one of the most
serious and most flagrant injustices of our time. Such
a decision would not, as has been misleadingly suggested here, signify the denial of the rights of one of
the parties to the Middle East conflict-to wit, the
State of Israel. The Committee, in this connection,
has always felt that what is essentially at stake in the
Middle East is recognition of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. Israel not only enjoys its
national rights, but, indeed, continually misuses them
by illegally occupying Arab territories in violation of
every principle of jus genrium, of the Charter and of
the pertinent resolutions.

32. Remember what was said at this table by an
eminent representative, no longer one of us, when he
left his post, I refer to Mr. Andrew Young. If it is true
that good sense is the quality most evenly distributed
throughout the world, a lesson should be learned from
those two instances and it should be admitted that
the Palestinian people should not be treated as apeople
that has not yet come of age, that exists to be dominated, mistreated and occupied, while in Africa, Latin
America, Asia and elsewhere, other peoples have
freed themselves from colonization and foreign
occupation.

36. It is not the existence of Israel that is at present
at issue, That country exists, it is seated among us,
and no one here wants it to disappear. This is quite
clear and I wish to reaffirm it on behalf of the Committee, On the other hand, on the pretext of its desire
for absolute security, that country must not apply a
policy of totally denying the existence of Arab Palestine and of the legitimate and inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. Therefore, if we truly desire to
solve the overall problem of the Middle East, we must
start by recognizing the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, a right that is at the very heart
of the Palestinian question.

33. During this debate we shall again hear the
offensive language of the representative of Israel. We
know that, as he did while the establishment of settlements in the occupied territories was under consideration, he will indulge in personal attacks on the
representatives of countries who intend to participate
in this debate in a manner which he does not like.
Apparently, if he has no arguments, he can do nothing
but engage in insults, “If you are not right, if you have
no arguments, insult your opponent,” as a prominent
statesman of the last century said, The lesson has been
well learnt. But this will not prevent us, for our part,
from sticking to our guns, for we take care to respect

37. As Chairman of the Committee, this is the positive approach which I have come here to propose.
If the Council agrees to this approach, it will make it
possible for us to glimpse the beginnings of a solution
of this extremely complex issue for which the United
Nations bears the indelible marks of original sin. We
have every hope that the Council will do this because
that is the price of peace in the Middle East and,
indeed, in the whole world.
5

allow it to fall in tired disappointment and frustration
engendered by the intransigence of one nation and the
indifference of a few?

38. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Rapporteur of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, and I now
call on him.

45. The General Assembly and the non-aligned
movement have already responded positively, The
former by a majority that has increased with every
passing year and the latter with regular unanimity
have endorsed the recommendations of the Committee
as a basis for the solution of the Palestine question,
I would recall that at the latest session of the General
Assembly 117 nations voted in favour.

39. Mr. GAUCI (Rapporteur of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People): Mr. President, I wish first to compliment you and your country on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
March and I wish to associate myself and my delegation with the message of sympathy that you have
conveyed to the people of Viet Nam on the irreparable
loss that they have suffered.

46. But the Security Council has not yet decided
and so far has not pronounced itself either on the Committee’s recommendations or, indeed, on any other
internationally accepted alternative-for, if one recommended approach is not taken up, a rational alternative
must be devised unless we wish to court disaster.
The Committee itself has provided several opportunities for constructive additions or amendments to
its suggestions, both here and in the General Assembly,
None has been suggestedeven though we have waited
patiently for over three years, under constant pressure
from the Assembly.

40. It is in itself sad that we should again be appearing before this body. Our presence here unfortunately only symbolizes a lack of progress on a
problem that has been allowed to drag on for over
three decades, and we only appear here because our
sense of responsibility and the mandate given to US
by the General Assembly clearly show that we have no
other peaceful course. We advocate an objective and
timely appraisal of the present situation.
41. It would be fruitless for me to repeat facts
regarding the Palestine question that are known and
understood by all of us here. Strange as it may sound
and in full recognition of the complexity of the matter,
I venture to say that it was easier for the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People unanimously to agree on its recommendations than it is to plan in advance and then to
find the most appropriate time and the most productive
approach for the pursuit of agreed recommendations.

47. While the Security Council stands immobilized,
the situation on the spot unfortunately has remained
tense and therefore dangerous. Other events on the
international horizon, and even the internal politics of
influential countries, are distracting attention from
what urgently needs to be done in the Middle East,
Must we therefore wait for another tragic confrontation
before we assume our responsibilities?

42. These recommendations, as will be recalled,
were the logical outcome of an emerging international
consensus on the question of Palestine, considered as
the heart of the Middle East conflict. The danger to
international peace was not only recognized, but had
actually been experienced more than once, particularly
when a nuclear alert was ordered, sending shivers of
apprehension reverberating throughout the world.

48. The provocative actions of the occupying Power
in the face of the manifest desire of the international
community to devise means of restoring peace to the
troubled region are regrettable, illegal and therefore
unacceptable. But it is also sad to witness indifference
and aloofness, when example and diplomatic activity
by influential countries are so obviously desired and
necessary.

43. Subsequently, the nations in the region officially
and publicly declared their yearning for peace-the
protagonists, in particular, and other countries involved, in general. The people were suffering and
economic progress in the region and throughout the
world was retarded as a result of the violence and
tension. The peoples in the region resolutely desired
to turn away from death and destruction.

49, What the Committee is saying, therefore, is that
this question deserves priority. It is an international
responsibility. It is a question of fundamental human
rights. It is and remains potentially a renewed threat
to peace. It is a question which has defied solution
for far too long and it is one which requires a positive
contribution from all quarters. When that is not forthcoming or is being deliberately frustrated, then it
should unequivocally be pointed out in an effort to
correct, in time, courses of action which might otherwise lead to devastating and unimaginable consequences.

44. At the General Assembly, in an historic speech,
an olive branch was offered. That branch has been
held aloft for a number of years. The question before
us, therefore, which is of fundamental importance
equally to respect for human rights and to the prospects
for economic prosperity and world peace, is the
effective response we should give to that gesture. Do
we encourage the aching arm to remain aloft, or do we

50. The question is at a delicate stage. We in the
Committee have been patient and we are ready to be
even more patient. But obviously there is a limit to
the endurance of the people most directly concerned,
6

51. Their future is at stake, but they are being
deliberately kept out of the process. Their future,
against their wishes, is being decided behind their
backs, Would any self-respecting country or individual, present or represented in this chamber, accept
such a state of affairs? Is it conceivable that, in the
year of our Lord 1980, the international community
should remain silent while the destiny of a people is
being decided arbitrarily under occupation by the threat
of imprisonment or exile at best, or at the point of a
gun at worst? Is this our common conception of the
practical application of the sacred principle of selfdetermination of peoples?

56. It is in the common interest of European and
Arab countries in particular that there should be an
equitable solution. And there cannot be an equitable
solution to the Middle East problem unless, as a
fundamental prerequisite, the legitimate interests of
the Palestinian people are taken into account, and
unless their representatives have a say in the unfolding
of their destiny. There should no longer be any doubt
that the Palestinians recognize the Palestine Liberation
Organization as their political spokesman and leaders.
This has been confirmed time and time again both at
the United Nations and in the occupied territories. It
is certainly not for outsiders to tell the Palestinians
who their leaders are.

52, The Committee and other bodies of the United
Nations have watched over events in the region over
.the past decades, always with apprehension and
concern, and have come up with recommendations for
change. None of those recommendations has been
acted upon. But at least the reports provide eloquent
evidence of the peremptory and arrogant way in which
the Palestinian people in the occupied territories
are being treated, and of the way in which creeping
colonization is blatantly being practised by Israel.
Today’s newspapers give further evidence of these
retrograde, inflexible intentions.

57. My own country, Malta, has pointed out what
needs to be done on numerous occasions in the past.
Permit me, in my dual capacity as Rapporteur of the
Committee and as representative of Malta, to do so
once again, at a critical period, before hostile division
becomes an even more pronounced feature of the
turbulent Middle East. The time for objective involvement is fast running out.
58. There are now two major plans for the Middle
East. One is the partial accord, recently signed,
between two of the countries on the spot, with United
States backing. This agreement was recently strongly
condemned by the non-aligned countries, in so far as
it neglected the rights of the Palestinian people. The
second plan is that proposed by the United Nations,
already endorsed by 117countries. Despite conflicting
interpretations, these two approaches should not be
mutually exclusive, and Europe has an important role
to play-and a suitable opportunity for it-if the
Middle East is to be rescued from the clear danger of
more acute confrontation and, instead, drawn towards
the potential of a genuinely peaceful solution. The
opportunities lie ahead; the spadework has already
been done. The question now is at an important
cross roads, and the desire within the region itself for
positive change and peaceful initiatives is probably at
its most acute.

53. In short, the rights of the Palestinian people,
as defined by the international community, are not
being implemented, On the contrary, they are being
denied, despite the international consensus backing
their just cause. This, in simple terms, is what the
Committee is protesting against, and once again we
stress that the Security Council, in this situation and
at this stage, cannot remain aloof, indifferent to the
human tragedy in which the major Powers, besides
the countries in the region, are by force of present
circumstances the dramatis personae.
54. The gap between what is necessary and what is
not being done has to be filled. This task seems to
fall on a minority of countries which so far have
remained uncertain and hesitant. Most of the Western
European countries fall into this category. Apparently
interest has been awakened in European countries,
particularly those of the European Economic Cornmunity, in assuming a more balanced position on the
essential parameters of a comprehensive solution,
judging by recent individual initiatives and collective
policy statements.

59. It is my firm conviction, as Rapporteur of the
Committee, that the United Nations has proposed
an objective and comprehensive solution. There is a
significance in this advocated solution which is often
overlooked in the heat of the debate at the United
Nations, I wish to stress this point because it was on
this basis that, at the latest session of the General
Assembly, I asked for a unanimous vote. I repeat that
plea here in the Council today.

55. On the basis of justice and morality, in defence
of fundamental human rights, and even on the more
narrow basis of self-interest, it seems to me that the
countries of Europe need to assume a much more
active role in helping to achieve the climax of an international consensus for a peaceful and comprehensive
solution, which the recently signed Egyptian-Israeli
peace treaty shows no sign of providing at this stage.
Partial peace has already become very expensive.
While progress continues to elude us, the prospects of
economic chaos and political war loom dangerously
nearer every day.

60. I believe it is of particular significance that, for
the first time, the third world has reconfirmed and
given legal endorsement to a decision taken in the past,
when the membership of the United Nations was only
50 countries. Now international opinion is much more
widely represented and a former decision of farreaching significance, which was objected to previously, has now been,endorsed. In other words, first,
7

30 years must be alleviated and not be allowed to
become more pronounced.

the right of Israel to exist within secure borders has
been repeatedly confirmed by the present United
Nations membership, and, secondly, indirectly,
through their support of the Committee’s recommendations, Israel’s right to an independent existence
has also been accepted by the PLO and its supporters,
as a proposition coming from the prevailing international consensus on this issue. What they could not
accept in the past as an imposition, they can accept
from a more broadly-based international consensus
in which their friends are represented. But the present
uncertainty about the future of the Palestinian people
must be clarified first.

65. The United Nations has provided a comprehensive formula for peace that does not overlook the
interests and preoccupations of any country or
people in the Middle East. However, it remains to be
acted on. The Committee has pointed the way. On
this occasion, with a renewed sense of urgency and
concern, we again urge the Council to lead us
further forward during this important phase in a
determined effort to set a peaceful, comprehensive
Middle East policy that will finally begin to do justice
to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.

62. Public opinion throughout the world, including
Israel itself and the United States, is clamouring for
change, But it is eliciting no governmental action,
and the United Nations can function only if a truly
resolute and unexceptionable international consensus
emerges. This is therefore the year when a major step
forward is needed. But who will provide the impetus?

66. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
67. Mr. BLUM (Israel): This debate was initiated by
the committee known as the Palestine Committee,
which, as everyone knows, is a pliant tool in the hands
of the terrorist PLO. It will be recalled that that Committee was set up by the General Assembly for the
purpose of by-passing Security Council resolution 242
(1967). Nineteen of its 23 members do not have
diplomatic relations with Israel, and some of them do
not even recognize Israel’s right to exist. It is thus not
surprising that the Committee’s recommendations,
which were first set out in 1976, and which ostensibly
are the subject of this debate, accord fully with the
PLO’s aims.

62. The role of European countries during this
delicate phase therefore assumes critical importance in
the shaping of a future course based on justice,
designed to produce genuine prospects for an enduring
and peaceful solution, a solution so long overdue
because of opportunities overlooked in the past. We
cannot afford to make the same mistakes. The international community can no longer afford indifference,
neither can it condone erroneous policies.
63. Among the European countries, those bordering
the Mediterranean have a special responsibility in this
regard, for they are the first to suffer as a result of
the division in the region, which will prevail until an
equitable solution is arrived at. And no solution can be
considered democratic and rational if it fails to provide
the elements necessary for Palestinian self-determination. This fact has been recognized by Mediterranean countries. Malta, for its part, has consistently
encouraged diplomatic dialogue to replace armed
conflict and rejectionist attitudes. Despite the small
size of our delegation, I assumed the time-consuming
task of Rapporteur of the Committee as a genuine
contribution towards a peaceful approach. Other
European Mediterranean countries are members of
the Committee. The other-non-European-Mediterranean countries have consistently followed the
Committee’s work and have contributed to its deliberations. Israel, unfortunately, has been and remains
the only exception, an obstacle to progress.

68. There can be no doubt about those vicious aims.
Indeed, only on 11 February of this year, Yasser
Arafat, in an interview with El Mundo in Caracas,
declared that:
“Peace for us means the destruction of Israel.
“We are preparing for an all-out war, a war which
will last for generations . . . We shall not rest until
the day when we return to our home, and until
we destroy Israel. The unity of the Arab world will
make this possible.
“The destruction of Israel is the goal of our
struggle, and the guidelines of that struggle have
remained firm since the establishment of Fatah in
1965 . . . We know that the intention of some of the
Arab leaders is to solve the conflict by peaceful
means. When this occurs, we shall oppose it.”
[S/13872 of 2 April I980. ]

64. Malta therefore recommends resolute action,
both by the Security Council and in an indigenous
regional approach which we are pursuing indepenidently, backed by the non-aligned movement, We are
now past the time of declarations. What we need is
concrete recommendations backed by determination
to translate words into deeds. Surely we can all agree
that it is high time for the peaceful aspirations of the
Palestinian people to be realized. The oppression of

Moreover, only last Friday, 28 March, Reuters
reported from Beirut that George Habash, one of
A&at’s leading henchmen, “would accept an independent State on the West Bank of the River Jordan
and the Gaza Strip-provided it served as a base for
continued efforts to dismantle Israel”. Habash went
on to explain that he wanted to make that clear,
because “the only way for peace in this part of the
8

world-the

Middle East-is to erase completely the

need or justification whatsoever for the establishment
of a second Palestinian Arab State in what was formerly the Palestine Mandate. The fact is that the vast
majority of Jordanian citizens are Palestinian Arabs;
and, similarly, the vast majority of Palestinian Arabs
are Jordanian citizens. Palestinian Arabs occupy
leading positions in Jordan today too numerous to
mention. They constitute Jordan’s administrative,
intellectual and economic elite and are in fact the backbone and mainstay of the country.

cancerous presence of Zionism”.

69. That is what we are dealing with, no matter how
much the issues are fudged or how much certain
Governments and quarters may try to portray the
PLO and its leaders as moderate and reasonable. The
simple and harsh fact is that when the PLO talks about
peace it means the elimination of the State of Israel.
70. The issue before us has deliberately been overlaid with layer upon layer of myth and distortion. In
the process, the problem of the Palestinian Arabs
has been grossly distorted, especially in recent years,
when the world’s dependence on Arab oil has been
manipulated to further the PLO’s aims. Indeed, if it
were not for the threat of the Arab oil weapon,
there is good reason to believe that many States would
not have adopted the positions they have declared
publicly-particularly of late.

74. The Palestinian Arab State of Jordan is only one
of the 21 separate Arab States, from the Atlantic
Ocean to the Persian Gulf, which the Arabs have
established since the end of the First World War. The
combined area of those 21 States is 5.5 million square
miles-that is to say, 10.3 per cent of the world’s
land surface. The Arab States straddle an unbroken
land mass greater in size than Europe, the United
States or China, and are rich in material resources, not
least of them oil, on which much of modern civilization
is dependent.

71. Here at the United Nations there is a virtual
conspiracy of silence about the link which the Arabs
have asserted between their oil and the question of the
Palestinian Arabs. Here, in this Organization, a series
of myths has been propagated, flying in the face of
history and present-day political realities alike. Among
those myths are the following: first, the Palestinian
Arabs have no State in which they enjoy self-determination today; secondly, only one refugee problem
-the Arab refugee problem-was created as a result
of Arab aggression in 1948; and, thirdly, there is some
mystical connection between the question of the
Palestinian Arabs and the energy crisis and the latter
will somehow go away if the former is solved at
Israel’s expense.

75. On the other hand, the total area of the Palestine
Mandate in 1920, on which a Jewish State was to be
established was about 45,000 square miles-that is,
less than 1 per cent of the enormous territories encompassed by the Arab States today. This, however,
is by no means the end of the story. With the establishment of the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan on
about 80 per cent of the territory of the Palestine
Mandate, the Palestinian Jewish State-Israel-was
left with less than one fifth of 1 per cent of the total
area of the 21 Arab States today. And even this tiny
sliver of land for the Jewish people to exercise its right
of self-determination in its ancestral patrimony has
been begrudged by the Arab world, which is apparently
incapable of countenancing a non-Arab and nonMoslem State in the Middle East.

72. As always, reality is very different from myth.
Stripped of all its artificial encumbrances, the problem
facing us today takes on quite a different aspect. The
simple and incontrovertible facts are as follows.
First, that two States have been established on the
territory which was the Palestine Mandate between
the two World Wars. One is an Arab State-Jordanand the other is a Jewish State-Israel. Secondly, the
Palestinian Arabs have long ago achieved selfdetermination in the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan.
Thirdly, a Jewish refugee problem, in addition to the
Arab refugee problem, was created by Arab aggression in 1948 and, in effect, an exchange of populations
has taken place. And, fourthly, the energy crisis is
unrelated to the question of the Palestinian Arabs;
hence, the solution of one will not resolve the other.

76. Everything that we have experienced in the
Arab-Israel conflict since 1948 flows from one fundamental fact: the unwillingness of Arab Governments
to accept, and coexist with, a sovereign Jewish State,
irrespective of its size and boundaries.
77. This simple fact was recently highlighted once
again by Iraq, which on 20 February circulated as an
official document of both the General Assembly and
the Security Council its “National Charter” as proclaimed by the President of Iraq [S/13816]. In that
Charter, it was specifically stated that Israel is “a
deformed entity” and “is not considered a State”.
The same document goes on to commit Iraq, in no
uncertain terms, to all-out warfare against Israel, and
enjoins other Arab States to participate actively in that
war, employing “all means and techniques”. This
undisguised denial by one Member State of the right of
another Member State to exist characterizes the
position of those Arab States which are relentlessly
opposed to making peace with Israel and which in the
last few years have come to be known as the “rejec-

73. Central to any discussion of the issue before us
is the basic fact which I have just mentioned-namely,
that two States have been established on the territory
of the former Palestine Mandate. One is the Palestinian
Arab State of Jordan, which achieved national selfdetermination, independence and sovereignty in 1946,
The other is the Palestinian Jewish State of Israel,
which became independent in 1948. Hence, there is no
9

tionist States”. It goes without saying that their position is in flagrant violation of the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and in effect
amounts to an outright rejection of the Charter and all
it stands for.
78. This adamant refusal on the part of most Arab
States to recognize Israel’s right to exist has always
been and remains the core and cause of the ArabIsrael conflict, and everything else is pretext or subterfuge. This is the reason why the Arab States have
launched four major wars against Israel with the
express purpose of destroying it. This is the reason
why they have developed a ramified series of battle
fronts and an array of weapons against Israel, These
weapons have involved, for example, an economic
boycott against Israel, which has been extended into
a secondary boycott on third parties trading with
Israel. As is well known, various countries have been
blackmailed into joining this campaign against Israel.
A propaganda war of major proportions, using the
techniques developed by Goebbels and his gang, has
been directed for years against Israel. And the United
Nations has been seized upon, in all its various organs
and agencies as an instrument readily at the disposal
of the Arab States in their relentless political warfare
against Israel. And this is the reason why they have
again come to the Security Council now.

82. These are not abstract propositions but operational principles. Most specifically, articles 9 and 10of
the Covenant declare that “armed struggle is the only
way to liberate Palestine”; and that “fedayeen
action”, the PLO euphemism for indiscriminate terror,
forms “the nucleus of the popular Palestinian war of
liberation’ ’ .
83. The PLO has not hesitated to translate words into
deeds. Attempts at the mass murder of innocent
men, women and children, in Israel and throughout the
world, have characterized the PLO and its activities
since its creation in 1964.Indeed, in the course of the
16 years since then, it has attempted thousands of
individual acts of terror. Over 1,000 men, women and
children-not only Jews but also Arabs and othershave been murdered and more than 5,000 people
have been maimed and wounded. The PLO has openly
boasted of its responsibility for virtually every one of
those outrages.
84. As we all know, the PLO has had no inhibitions
about violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of many Member States and has shown little respect
for the niceties of law, order and public security in
those countries. Because of the active support it
receives from certain Arab Governments, the PLO has
become the linchpin of the “terrorist international”,
which is plaguing society throughout the world today.
It services and supplies the needs of other terrorist
groups in Europe, Latin Amkrica, Asia and Africa,
all of which, for example, train openly on PLO bases
and plan and practise terrorist attacks without let or
hindrance.

79. Within this context, but with even uglier intent,
the Arab States also created the terrorist organization
which came to be known as the PLO. This murder
organization was founded in 1964-that is to say, three
years before the Six-Day War of 1967-at a time when
Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District were under
Jordanian and Egyptian occupation, respectively. In
other words, it is evident that the PLO was created
by the Arab States merely as another weapon in their
serried arsenal for the destruction of Israel, even
before the Six-Day War of 1967.

85. Moreover, in all its criminal activities the PLO is
aided, trained and equipped by the Soviet Union. In
turn, the Soviet Union uses the ‘PLO in its we&known
attempts to destabilize the entire Middle East and
sabotage the peace process. Hence it came as no
surprise when that Soviet stooge rushed to proclaim
its support for the Soviet aggression in Afghanistan,
a non-aligned and Moslem State.

80. The PLO’s so-called Covenant is permeated with
the criminal concept of the elimination of the State of
Israel. That document was originally adopted in 1964,
and subsequently amended in 1968. It has been reaffirmed since, year after year, by all the central institutions of the terrorist PLO, the last time being as
recently as August of last year, when its so-called
“Central Committee” met in Damascus.

86. The grave threat to international peace and
security which is created in this way is further exacerbated by the encouragement which the PLO derives
from the favourable attitudes here at the United
Nations, in violation of the Charter and of the rules of
procedure of its various organs.

81. The members of the Council will be aware that
virtually every article in the PLO’s Covenant calls for
or implies the dissolution of the State of Israel. Article 19 of the document in question declares that “the
establishment of Israel is fundamentally null and void,
whatever time has elapsed”. Article 20 goes on to
assert that “the claim of a historical or spiritual tie
between the Jews and Palestine does not tally with
historical facts”. In other words, with one cavalier
stroke of the pen, the PLO seeks to rewrite more than
3,000 years of the history of mankind. Article 15
grotesquely sets out “to purge the Zionist presence
from Palestine” is a “national duty”.

87. Another aspect of the unremitting acts of Arab
aggression against Israel since 1948has been the creation of two refugee problems of similar dimensions
in the Middle East-not just one, as is commonly
supposed.
88. By the time Arab aggression against Israel had
been successfully thwarted in 1949, some 600,000Palestinian Arabs had become refugees and found themselves in areas controlled by Arab Governments.
Instead of settling and integrating their Palestinian
10

brethren, who speak the samelanguage, share the same
cultural, historical and religious heritage and frequently even have family in the Arab host countries,
those countries forced them to remain in camps and
exploited them callously as a political weapon against
Israel,
89. The thousands of Jews who lived in Judaea,
Samaria and the Gaza District until 1948could not for
10% resist the invading Arab armies. Those of them
who had survived the invasion and prison camps sought
and found refuge in the State of Israel.
90. A much larger problem of Jewish refugees was
caused by the Arab hostility towards the ancient
Jewish communities in Arab lands. Those Jews, who
at the time numbered nearly 1 million and who over
the centuries had contributed so much to the advancement of the Arab world, from the cultural, economic
and many other points of view, had often been treated
as second-class citizens, subject to various forms of
discrimination and persecution. Even before the Arab
aggression against Israel in 1948 and 1949 had been
repelled, they fell victim to violence and further
persecution at the hands of Arabs thirsting for revenge.
Many of them were murdered. Others were thrown
into prison and tortured. Hundreds of thousands were
forced to flee, leaving behind considerable property
and material assets. Homes and businesses were
looted. Bank accounts were frozen. Communal
property and priceless cultural assets were expropriated by Arab Governments.
91. From 1948 to the present day, more than
800,000 Jews have been forced to leave Arab countries. About 650,000 of them have come to Israel, in
most cases with only the clothes on their backs. Hence,
in effect, a de facto exchange of populations has taken
place between the Arab States and Israel, triggered
off by Arab aggression in 1947 and 1948.
92. According to United Nations figures, there have
been anything from 60 million to 100 million refugees
and displaced persons since the end of the Second
World War. Even if one accepts the smaller of these
figures, the Arab refugees in 1948constituted no more
than 1 per cent of the total. The vast majority of the
other refugee problems in the world, including that of
the Jewish refugees, have been solved by the resettlement and integration of those refugees in their new
countries or places of residence. To be sure, that has
already happened for most Arab refugees and their
offspring, the vast majority of whom continue to live
in the territory of the former Palestine Mandate and
are citizens of the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan.
93. Until 1967 Palestinian Arabs constituted an
international problem to the extent that some of them
were still unsettled refugees. Before 1967Israel did not
control Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District. Yet
there was no demand then for the establishment of a
“Palestinian State” in those areas. The Arab coun-

tries which now so sanctimoniously preach the necessity for a “Palestinian State” in those areas did nothing
at the time. The explanation for this is very simple:
the entire world knew that the Kingdom of Jordan is
the Palestinian Arab State, just as the State of Israel
is the Palestinian Jewish State; the entire world also
knew that the vast majority of Palestinian Arabs are
Jordanian citizens and that the majority of Jordanian
citizens are Palestinian Arabs.
94. However, in an attempt to undermine the peace
process called for by the Security Council in its
resolution 242 (1967), Arab strategists searched for
slogans and terms that would catch on in the general
political climate which had developed in the world by
that time. They estimated that they stood more to gain
by promoting the alleged existence of a second Palestinian Arab people, entitled to a second Palestinian
Arab State in the area of the former Palestine Mandate.
The advantages of that tactical sleight of hand were
obvious. It would enable the Arab States to claim that
there was still a Palestinian Arab people deprived of
the rights to self-determination and independence,
and the implementation of those claims would clearly
be at the expense of Israel.
95. Leading spokesmen of the PLO admit that this
bogus thesis was invented to work towards the
destruction of the State of Israel. For instance, Zuhair
Muhsin, the head of the PLO’s so-called military
department until his death last year, was quoted as
follows in the Dutch daily newspaper Trouw on
31 March 1977:
“There are no differences between Jordanians,
Palestinians, Syrians and Lebanese . . . We are one
people e
“It is only for political reasons that we carefuliy
stress our Palestinian identity, for it is in the national
interest of the Arabs to encourage a separate Palestinian identity to counter Zionism. Yes, the
existence of a separate Palestinian identity serves
only tactical purposes.
“The founding of a Palestinian State is a new tool
in the continuing battle against Israel and for Arab
unity.
“Jordan is a State with defined borders. It cannot
claim Haifa or Jaffa, whereas I have a right to
Haifa, Jaffa, Jerusalem and Beersheba. After we
have attained all our rights in the whole of Palestine,
we must not postpone, even for one single moment,
the reunification of Jordan and Palestine.”
96. The meaning could not be clearer, The assertion
of a second Palestinian Arab identity is merely one
more subterfuge designed to bring about the destruction of the State of Israel-if not in one fell swoop,
then in stages.

of the Warsaw Treaty forces. They will,be double that
of NATO, or three times that of the People’s Republic of China. In terms of ground forces, the Arab
States have today almost as many tanks as the United
States, and more artillery than it has.

97. For a number of years now, the PLO has
advocated a programme which is sometimes described
by PLO spokesmen as a two- or three-stage policy.
In essence, it aims in its first stage at the establishment of a second Palestinian Arab State anywhere in
the territories administered by Israel since 1967. The
second stage of the policy is to use this proposed
State as a launching pad for the ultimate overthrow
of Israel. This programme was described with complete candour by Farouk Khaddoumi, another of
Yasser Arafat’s henchmen, in Newsweek magazine
on 14 March 1977:

102. And against whom, one may well ask, is this
colossal array of military power to be used? Perhaps
some members of the Council can take these harsh
military facts lightly. Israel cannot.
103. The rejectionists regard a PLO State in Judaea
and Samaria and the Gaza District as the most important bridgehead through which they might realize
their dream of a war of annihilation against Israel, A
glance at the map will show why. Before 1967Israel
at its narrowest point was less than nine miles wide
-that is, less than the length of Manhattan Island. Half
of Israel’s population is concentrated in the narrow
coastal plain between Netanya and Tel Aviv. Before
1967 all this population was within easy reach of
Jordan’s long guns.

“There are two [initial] phases to our return: the
first phase to the 1967 lines, and the second to the
1948 lines. The third stage is the democratic State
of Palestine. So we are fighting for these three
stages.”
Asked if the PLO had become more moderate,
Khaddoumi replied:
“‘By maderation we mean we are ready , . . to
establish a State on a part of our territory. In the
past we said no, on all of it, immediately, a democratic State of Palestine. Now we say no, this can
be implemented in three stages.That is moderation.”

104. Ever since Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza
District have been under Israeli control, the Arab
rejectionists have tried to reconvert them into forward
bases. In this, they have allotted the PLO a special
role and set it the task of using the territories as a
launching pad for acts of hostility, terror, sabotageand
subversion against Israel and its civilian population.
As part of their “grand design”, the rejectionists
would obviously like the territories leading to the outskirts of Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and every other town and
city in Israel to become a PLO State and be emptied
of any Israeli presence that might stand in their way,
Israel sees no reason to oblige them.

98. That is the cold truth, notwithstanding the wishful thinking and illusions of certain international
figures, in Europe and elsewhere. And yet there are
still some who fall into the trap of considering a plan
to destroy Israel in stages as “moderation”,
99. To implement their sinister designs, the Arab
rejectionist States have created an enormous war
machine and thus an ominous threat to peace. The
rejectionists’ strategy has been to create an eastern
front combining, in the first instance, the armed forces
of Syria to the north of Israel, Jordan and Iraq to the
east, and Saudi Arabia to the south. The combined
military weight of these countries will be supplemented
in times of war with sophisticated weapons available
in enormous quantities from the arsenals of other
rejectionist States. This colossal array of force is to be
mounted against Israel, also through Judaea and
Samaria if at all possible.

105. If we put aside the myths, the political sloganeering and the propaganda, the problem facing
us can be seen to be of manageable proportions.
There is already a Palestinian Arab Statecalled Jordan,
populated by the majority of the Palestinian Arabs. It
is a State in which the national identity and aspirations
of the Palestinian Arabs have already found full
expression.
106. To be sure, there are certain special problems
which concern Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District,
as well as the Palestinian Arabs living there. These
problems cannot readily be settled in any final form at
this stage. The fact is that, because of the Arab refusal
to make peace with Israel, it was not possible for three
decades to conduct serious negotiations about the
Arab-Israel conflict in all its aspects. The possibility
of such negotiations only opened up in 1977, and the
elements for a comprehensive solution of the conflict
only came together at Camp David in the late summer
of 1978. In the course of bringing these elements
together, and in the light of the experience gained in
negotiating the Israel-Egypt peace treaty, we have all
come to recognize how difficult and complex the
process is of reconciling and accommodating the

100. To give some notion of what we are talking
about, I am bound to recall what I said on 27 February of this year in the Council [2202nd jneeting].
101. The Arab States have today 500,000 more men
under arms than has the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and three times the artillery of the
combined NATO forces. They also have 3,000 more
tanks and several hundred more combat aircraft
than NATO. The eastern front alone--that is, Syria,
Iraq, Jordan and Saudi Arabia-is currently equivalent
to NATO in manpower and tanks, and already has
twice as much artillery. In terms of air power, the
Arab armies will this year equal the combined strength
12

legitimate concerns, including the security interests, of
all those involved.

have talks in Washington with Prime Minister Menathem Begin.

107. Given the long record of Arab hostility to and
aggression against Israel, it is inevitable that before
the final boundaries are delineated between Israel and
Jordan there must be a transitional period, a period
which will in itself, in the parlance of the United
Nations, constitute a confidence-building measure.
That is precisely the concept embodied in the Camp
David framework for peace in the Middle East as
regards the future of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza
District and of the Palestinian Arabs residing in those
areas.

112, Thus, there can be little doubt that this debate,
too, was initiated and timed to try to frustrate the
ongoing peace process in the Middle East. Indeed, this
has been the pattern and the purpose of all the debates
held in the Council on the Arab-Israel conflict since
the peace negotiations entered their advanced stages,
and particularly since the signing of the peace treaty
between Israel and Egypt almost exactly a year ago.

168. The Camp David framework is squarely based
on resolution 242 (1967), which to this day remains
the only agreed basis for peace negotiations in the
Middle East, Any attempt to tamper with that resolution can only undermine the whole delicate structure
on which the peace process is based.
109. The Camp David framework sees the solution
of the question of the Palestinian Arab residents of
Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District in terms of
granting those residents full autonomy for a transitional period of five years before reaching an agreement on the final status of the areas concerned. To
that end, it was agreed to negotiate on a principle of
self-government- to be exercised through an administrative council-for the Arab inhabitants of the areas
in question.

113. Even without the forthcoming talks in Washington, the object of this debate was clear well in
advance. Justification for it has been made by reference to General Assembly resolution 34/65 A, which
urged the Council to act on the subject now before it
by 31 March 1980. The choice of this date was deliberate, since at the time that the resolution was drafted
and adopted, it was known that the talks being held on
full autonomy for the Arab residents of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District would not be concluded
before May of this year. Hence, it was decided, with
clearly malicious intent, to lay the ground for a Council meeting before the autonomy talks had run their
course. That malicious intent was also made clearly
evident in, and was reinforced by, resolution 34/65 B,
in which the numerical majority always at the disposal
of Israel’s enemies repudiated the peace process in the
Middle East. Let us therefore not delude ourselves
about the object of the present exercise.
114. As usually happens on occasions such as this,
there will be States, both in the Council and beyond
it, which, while recognizing full well the true nature
and objectives of the present debate, will none the less
find it difficult to resist the temptation of trying to gain
some political advantage or to prove their credentials
by participating in this debate. Such tactics are no
doubt part of the game of politics, but they can scarcely
be regarded as helpful or as contributing to the quest
for peace, which, as we all know, is being conducted in
more serious negotiations elsewhere.

110. The Camp David framework invites the Palestinian Arab residents of Judaea, Samaria and the
Gaza District to play an active role in shaping their
future by calling on them to participate in all aspects
of the negotiations. They have been invited to participate not only in current negotiations to set up a
self-governing administrative council, but also in the
negotiations which will determine the final status of the
areas they live in, as well as in the eventual negotiations on a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan, in
which the delimitation of boundaries between the two
countries will be agreed on. This solution offers the
Palestinian Arabs concerned greater opportunities than
anything they have ever experienced in their history.
It offers them the prospect of governing themselves,
of prosperity and of peaceful co-existence alongside
their neighbours. It offers them a secure future, free
from terror.

115. The question facing the Council is stark, Will
it be supportive of a peace process in the Middle
East that has already yielded a major peace treaty
between two sovereign States, Members of this Organization, and that is now well on the way to providing
the Arab residents of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza
district with much more in the way of self-rule than
was ever on offer in the two decades from 1948 to
1967 when they were controlled by Jordan and Egypt?
Or will the Council jettison its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and join the band waggon of that cacophonous chorus
of States and groupings with deeply conflicting
interests and nothing in common except a willingness
to exploit every opportunity in a deliberate attempt
to thwart the peace process in the Middle East?

111. As everyone knows, the autonomy talks have
been proceeding for just over nine months. This is a
very short period of time in relation to the complexity
of the issues involved. The pace of the talks is, as
it needs to be, slow and deliberate, but progress is
being made and agreement has been reached on a
fairly wide range of issues. To advance this process,
the President of the United States will be holding talks
in Washington next week with President Sadat of
Egypt. The week after that, President Carter will also

116. I mentioned earlier the supposed connection
between Arab oil and the question before us. With the
13

world’s growing dependence on Arab oil, the Arab
petro-hegemonists have asserted this connexion and
have blatantly begun to blackmail the world,
threatening to strangle its economy if the destructive
aims of the PLO are not satisfied. As a result, we
have witnessed in recent months a sorry parade of
nations, great and small, supplicating the Arab oil
gods. These nations seem to think that adopting positions that put Israel’s security at risk is paying a cheap
price in an attempt to placate the Arab petro-hegemonists.

124. We should like at the outset to associate ourselves with the messageof sympathy and condolences
that you, Sir, have expressedto the Vietnamese people
and Government.
125. Once again the Council is meeting to consider
the heart of the Middle East conflict. On several occasions the Council has met to consider derivatives like
Israeli invasions, expansion and occupation. It has
also met to consider derivatives of derivatives, such as
the renewal of the mandate of United Nations forces
along the lines of the occupied territories, the Israeli
policy and practice of creeping annexation, violations
of the inalienable rights of people, violations of the
Charter and United Nations resolutions, violations of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, violations
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949,
and a number of other flagrant violations.

117. Some 40 years ago a small, democratic and
freedom-loving State in the heart of Europe was
sacrificed, ostensibly for the sake of “peace with
honour”. What ensued was neither peace nor honour,
and the entire world paid a heavy price for that cynical
and short-sighted stance. That dismal lesson has not
been lost on Israel, even if others choose to forget it.

126. This meeting of the Council has been convened
to consider the report of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
A request for such consideration was made by the
General Assembly at its thirty-first, thirty-second,
thirty-third and thirty-fourth sessions. Thus the item
is not new.

118. A year has passed since the Israel-Egypt peace
treaty was signed. That momentous occasion was an
historic turning point in the relations between our
two nations. For over three decades a state of war had
existed between us and four bloody wars were fought
in that relatively short span of time.
119. To make peace, Israel made many sacrifices and
took many risks. Israel has preferred these sacrifices
for peace over the sacrifices of war. But the road
before us to complete peace with all our Arab neighbours remains long and tortuous. We are at present
engaged in negotiating the second phase of the Camp
David framework and we are committed to carrying
the peace process through to its end.

127. For more than three decades the Council has
been considering the derivatives and ramifications, but
only in the last few years has it met to consider the
heart of the issue. Meetings held and resolutions and
decisions adopted during more than three decades
have not resolved the problem nor brought the world
any closer to peace. It is our firm conviction that only
by addressing itself to the heart of the issue can the
Council take action conducive to peace.

120. The situation in the Middle East and the international climate in general are far from stable and
reassuring. We know that there will be continued
attempts to try to exploit that situation and, for that
matter, the international community as a whole, to
thwart the quest for peace.

,128. It is relevant to note that the Council is meeting
at the beginning of Holy Week, the week of the Passion, a week that the Christian world observes with
piety and compassion, a week climaxed by resurrection and redemption after the crucifixion. We are all
aware that also during this week members of the
Jewish faith will be observing the Feast of the Passover, and I am sure that the Council will take into
account the religious rites and observances on such
occasions. As of yesterday, Palm Sunday, the
Christians of the world, and in particular the Christians
of Jerusalem, had their thoughts directed to that week.
The City of Jerusalem is this week reliving the glorious
entry of the Messiah. To the Christians, every single
step and every single stone in Jerusalem is holy and
has been so for the last 2,000 years.

121. Israel will not be deflected by the enemies of
peace. It is entitled to expect that the Council will
refrain from giving them support or encouragement.
122. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and I now call on him.
123. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, when you assumed the presidency
on 1 March I am sure you never envisaged that a resolution adopted under your presidency would shock
the world because of the after-effects and the response
of one particular Member State. But that resolution
is still a living resolution that is being dealt with every
day by the press, especially in this country, It has
been used as another commodity in the bargaining for
the position of President of the United States. I am
sure, Sir, that on this last day of your presidency
something as historic will be accomplished.

129. Christians do remember when the Lord stood
on the Mount of Olives and said:
“0 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the
prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee:
how often would I have gathered thy children
together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her
wings, and ye would not!“2
14

“*or the days shall come upon thee, that thine
enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass
thee round, and keep thee in on every side,
“And shall lay thee even with the ground, and
thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in
thee one stone upon another . . .r’.3

not be considered as sacred. So the aim of the Zionist
movement is to destroy the City of Jerusalem but
maintain as much of the architectural style as possible. I take it that Herzl is referring to the beautiful
architectural style of what the Moslems have erected
on the temple area.
133. I am sorry, but during this week the Via Dolorosa means a lot to me. It means a lot to me to walk
those 14Stations of the Cross. What does the Via Dolorosa mean to the Zionists? According to Herzl, the
Via Dolorosa is “a route the Jews shun as something
maleficent”. The Palestinian people has been subjected to different and most barbarous forms of torture.
We have been subjected to visitations and to the
denial of all our rights, including the right to life itself,
but thanks to our perseverance and resolute will to
regain our rights and our homes and thanks to the everincreasing support we receive from the rest of the
world, we are certain that the day of our redemption,
of our liberation-the day we regain all our inalienable rights-is soon coming.

Those are the words of the Master. What the Israelis
are doing is destroying and demolishing the houses of
the Holy City and building those fortresses around the
city, the trenches to which reference has been made.
And then the Lord came into the Old City:
“And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast
out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and
overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the
seats of them that sold doves,
“And said unto them, It is written, My house shall
be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it
a den of thieves.“4
130. That is the Jerusalem in which we believe, the
Jerusalem which is the house of prayer, the Jerusalem
sacred for more than 2,000 years to Christians around
the world and for more than 15 centuries to the
Moslems around the world. The Jerusalem that we
think of is not the Jerusalem that the Zionists think of.

134. A few points at this juncture call for clarification. We all recall that in August 1979 the Council
met to consider the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. That meeting was only one in a series which
should have started in May 1979 in response to a
request from the General Assembly. But in response
to a request by some members, the Council met in June
and again in July 1979when, at the special request of
the representative of the United States, the meeting
was adjourned until August. We all recall the price the
representative of the United States had to pay for
securing what his Government wanted him to obtain,
namely, a postponement of the debate. We all recall the
mood in the Council when a draft resolution [S/131.54
of23 August 19791affirming that the principles of the
Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights also applied to the Palestinian people was not
pressed to the vote. Chairman Yasser Arafat then
responded to requests by ftiends to spare Ambassador
Andrew Young the embarrassment of using the veto
against the issue of the rights of the Palestinian people
and against the Charter. Andrew Young retired with
dignity and honour, true to the image of the American
founding fathers, because for them moral values, freedom and self-determination were principles worth
fighting for-and that is enshrined in the archives and
in legends. But poor Andy still had some idealism and
romanticism in him. I recall this episode to assert that
the time for action, for a decision by the Council on
this matter, is long overdue.

I3 1. The founder of modern Zionism, Theodor Herzl,
refers to Jerusalem in the following way, and I quote
from his diary for 31 October 1898:
“When I remember thee in days to come, 0 Jerusalem, it will not be with delight.
“The musty deposits of two thousand years of
inhumanity,” -and I take it the 2,000 years refer to
the Christian era-“ intolerance and foulness lie in
your reeking alleys. The one man who has been
present here all this while, the lovable dreamer of
Nazareth, has done nothing but help increase the
hate.”
I am sure members know that he is alluding to Jesus
of Nazareth. Herzl continues:
“If Jerusalem is ever ours, and if I were still able
to do anything about it, I would begin by cleaning
it up.
“I would clear out everything that is not sacred,
set up workers’ houses beyond the city, empty and
tear down the filthy rat-holes, burn all the nonsacred ruins, and put the bazaars elsewhere, Then,
retaining as much of the old architectural style as
possible, I would build an airy, comfortable, properfce;ewered,
brand new city around the Holy
,I

135. Specifically, the Council is meeting to decide
on the measures endorsed by the General Assembly in
resolutions 31120, 32140 A, 33/28 A and 34165 A,
which reaffirm

132. Christianity, which according to Herzl is hatred,
could not be considered as sacred. Islam also could

“that a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
cannot be established without the achievement,
15

Should the current negotiations bear fruit and bring
about the positive results they claim, what will the
Palestinian get? Most likely he will be given a paper,
a form in which it is clearly asked, “Where were you
in May 1967?” If he cannot establish his whereabouts,
then his application will be automatically disregarded.
But suppose he does establish his whereabouts in
the West Bank or Gaza: the “continuing committee”
will have to agree on his admission-and here you see
that the right of return is annulled in the accord; they
call it “admission” now.

infer nlia, of a just solution of the problem of Palestine on the basis of the attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the
right of return and the right to national independence and sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations”.
This was the decision of the international community,
adopted by a wide margin of more than 8 to 1.
136. The matter before the Council is defined with
precision: while the international community was
pursuing a constructive approach to a comprehensive
peace, Begin, Carter and Sadat were planting obstacles
along that road. While the international community
was determined to restore to the Palestinian people
its inalienable rights, Begin, Carter and Sadat were
determined to nullify those rights. The so-called framework for peace, which is in fact a new military
alliance converting Egypt as well into an arsenal of
lethal and destructive arms where arms and armaments
are stockpiled, the so-called Camp David accords,
are conceived in such a way as to ignore, infringe
upon, violate and deny the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and to nullify the internationally
endorsed approach to peace, as stated earlier.

140. I think it only appropriate for one to recall that
the Council adopted its resolution 237 (1967), in which
it called upon
“the Government of Israel to ensure the safety,
welfare and security of the inhabitants of the areas
where military operations have taken place and to
facilitate the return of those inhabitants who have
fled the areas since the outbreak of hostilities”.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People recommended that the
Council should request immediate implementation of
resolution 237 (1967) and that such implementation
should not be related to any other condition. I think
it is the duty of the Council to see to it that its resolutions are implemented. However, resolution 237
(1967)is completely ignored in the so-called framework
for peace. Yet the Palestine Liberation Organization
is being approached with a view to giving the current
negotiations another chance. Well, as I have already
said, even if such negotiations prove successful,what
will be in them for the Palestinian people?

13’7. The unholy tripartite alliance negotiating the
future of the Palestinian people and territory has as a
first step usurped the right of the Palestinian people.
The unholy three are determining our future in our
absence and against our will and desire. Assuming that
the current negotiations bear fruit, that fruit will be of
necessity a nullification of all our rights. Should the
world stand with arms folded while Begin, Carter and
Sadat reach an agreement nullifying our rights? Should
the Council stand with arms folded while the conspiracy to eliminate the Palestinians is under way?

141. In effect we are asked not only to abandon our
rights but to become a party to an attempt to violate
the decisions of the Council, including resolution 452
(1979), in which the Council accepted the recommendations contained in the report of the commission
established to examine the situation relating to
settlementsin the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem. I quote:

138. A thorough and close study of the so-called
framework for peace will show that it completely
ignores the right of the Palestinians to return. It is clear
what the result would be in the event of success in the
current negotiations: namely, perpetuation of the state
of dispersion of the Palestinians and perpetuation of the
Palestinians’ status as stateless, and that would definitely call for perpetuation of frustration, and of neces‘sity that would engender resentment, revolution and
violence. It is’ one’s right to fight back and to fight for
the restoration of one’s rights, including by use of
arms.

“On the basis of the conclusion reached, the
Commission would like, therefore, to recommend
that the Security Council, bearing in mind the
inalienable right of the Palestinians to return to
their homeland , . .” [S/134.50 and Add.1 of 12 July
1979, para. 2301.

On the subject of the right of return, section A,
paragraph 3, of the Camp David accord reads as
follows:
139.

That is what the Council accepted: the inalienable
right of the Palestinians to return. Thus the Council,
as well as the General Assembly, has recognized the
inalienable right of the Palestinians to return, But the
Begin-Carter-Sadat accord ignores that inalienable
right.

“During the transitional period, representatives
of Egypt, Israel, Jordan and the self-governing
authority will constitute a continuing committee to
decide by agreement on the modalities of admission
of persons displaced from the West Bank and Gaza
in 1967, together with necessary measures to prevent
disruption and disorder.”

142. Moreover, in the Camp David accord there is a
very clearly marked denial of the Palestinian people
as such. Section A, paragraph 1, subparagraph (c)
16

savisages negotiations
to be conducted “among
Egypt, Israel, Jordan and the elected representatives of
I stress the word “inhabithe inhabitants” -and
tants’l-“of
the West Bank and Gaza”. Clearly, the
high contracting parties who affixed their signatures
to the accord are oblivious of the existence of Palestinians outside the West Bank and Gaza. They are
totally unaware of the presence of a United Nations
agency dealing with Palestinian refugees in territories
outside the West Bank and Gaza. They wish to
ignore the facts and to close their eyes to the ever
present Palestinian
people and its internationally
recognized representative,
the Palestine Liberation
Organization, which has today been invited to participate in this debate. The Camp David accord is
maliciously and criminally
designed to make the
Palestinian people extinct. Almost 2 million of us have
been denied the right to return and by force prevented
from exercising our inalienable right to return. Should
the current negotiations bear fruit and prove successful, almost 2 million Palestinians will be condemned
to perpetual exile. Their fate does not seem to disturb
the consciences of Begin, Carter or Sadat. It is the
fate and the future of the Palestinian people and territory that constitute the main factor that will decide the
future of peace in the Middle East.

the West Bank and Gaza in the determination
of
their own future through negotiations with Egypt,
Israel and Jordan, negotiations to achieve agreement on the final status of the West Bank and Gaza.
Perhaps a mathematical clarification could help. Of
the almost 4 million Palestinians, only 1.5 million live
in the West Bank and Gaza. Thus the inhabitants of
the West Bank and Gaza, including the part of Jerusalem occupied since 1967, will represent something
like 37 per cent of the Palestinian Arabs, According
to the Camp David agreement, the representatives
of the inhabitants will have one part in four in the
negotiations. The net result: the Palestinians will have
a 9 per cent share in the participation. That is not selfdetermination; it is permitting others to share and, in
this case, giving them a more than 90 per cent advantage. I agree that this is a rather complex and
complicated matter, but in effect it means no selfdetermination.
146. National independence and sovereignty in Palestine is another inalienable right of the Palestinian
people. I am sure we all know the destiny of that
right. President Carter is constantly assuring White
House visitors that “We do not favour an independent
Palestinian State; we have constantly opposed this
prospect”. Begin and the world Zionist movement
have a clear stand on the existence and the survival
of the Palestinians in Palestine, not to mention their
sovereignty and independence. Well, I do not really
know what Sadat has in mind, but by deduction he,
too, opposes-and very militantly-the
prospects of
national independence of the Palestinian people and
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
in Palestine.

143. Not only did the Camp David accord fragment
the Palestinian people into inhabitants of the West
Bank and Gaza and others, but the National Security
Adviser to President Carter, a certain Mr. Zbigniew
Brzezinski, in Washington,
on 12 March, told the
National Press Club:
“There is a question with Gaza, specifically
whether it is Palestinian or Arab or what. The issue
is being negotiated.”

147. Thus the determination of the unholy tripartite
alliance does not in any way discourage us or lead us
to despair. Their attempts are doomed, because, on
29 November 1979-the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People-the
General Assembly
declared in resolution 34/65 B

I cannot attribute this to ignorance or lack of elementary education; it is definitely an integral part of
the Sadat-Carter-Begin
plan to eliminate the Palestinian people and further to trample on its rights.
Are we really in need of further additional symptoms
to allow us to read the designs of the Begin-CarterSadat accord correctly?

“that the Camp David accords and other agreements
have no validity in so far as they purport to determine
the future of the Palestinian people and of the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967”.

144. The Council is also called upon to take a decision on the recommendations
regarding the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty in Palestine. The report of
the Committee includes recommendations
endorsed
on several occasions by the General Assembly, and
by an overwhelming majority of 8 to 1, as was reflected
in the voting on resolution 34/65 A.

That resolution, as we all know, was adopted by more
than a two-to-one majority.
148. Only in September 1979, the Sixth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries decided “to condemn the Camp David
agreements and the treaty between Egypt and Israel”.
The Summit Conference of the Organization of African
Unity had earlier condemned energetically “all the
partial agreements and separate treaties which constitute a flagrant violation of the rights of the Arab
nation and of the Palestinian people”. That Conference
also reaffirmed that the Zionist occupation and usurpation of Palestine and of the rights of its people were

145. What the unholy tripartite alliance is attempting
to do is to nullify the will of the international cornmunity. The so-called framework for peace does not in
any of its provisions envisage the Palestinian people
as being enabled to exercise its inalienable right to selfdetermination. What the accord envisages is the participation of the representatives of the inhabitants of
17

“In pledging its full support and determination
to continue to work for a lasting and just peace in
the Middle East, Africa, speaking in Monrovia,
condemned all partial agreements and treaties which
violate the recognized rights of the Palestinian
people and contradict the principles of just and
comprehensive solutions to the Middle East
problem.

the core of the Middle East conflict and, consequently,
rendered any solution to that conflict impossible
without the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights, including the right to return, to
attain self-determination and to establish an independent Palestinian State in Palestine.
149. President Fidel Castro, the Chairman of the
non-aligned movement, carried this message in his
statement in the general debate of the General Assembly. He stated, among other things that:

“If current peace initiatives in the Middle East
are to lead to a comprehensive, just and durable
settlement, it would seem imperative, in our view,
that the framework of negotiation be expanded to
include the Palestinian people, represented by the
Palestine Liberation Organization. For the Palestinian people alone are entitled to speak for themselves, and their participation is indispensable to
the success of any peace initiative in the Middle
East.“?

“The basis for a just peace in the region starts
with the total and unconditional withdrawal by
Israel from all the occupied Arab territories and
provides for the return to the Palestinian people
of all their occupied territories and the restoration
of their inalienable national rights, including their
right to return to their homeland, to self-determination and to the establishment of an independent
State in Palestine, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX).“5

152. On 25 September the Foreign Minister of
Ireland, speaking on behalf of the nine members of
the European Community in the General Assembly,
said regarding the elements essential to the negotiation
of a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East that
in the establishment of a just and lasting peace:
“ . . . it is essential that there be respect for the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. These
include the right to a homeland and the right, through
its representatives, to play its full part in the negotiation of a comprehensive settlement.“8

150. But it was of the greatest significance that in
his statement to the General Assembly on 2 October,
His Holiness Pope John Paul II said:
“It is my fervent hope that a solution also to the
Middle East crises may draw nearer. While being
prepared to recognize the value of any concrete
step or attempt made to settle the conflict I want to
recall that it would have no value if it did not truly
represent the ‘first stone’ of a general overall peace
in the area, a peace that, being necessarily based on
equitable recognition of the rights of all, cannot fail
to include the consideration and just settlement
of the Palestinian question. Connected with this
question is that of the tranquility, independence and
territorial integrity of Lebanon within the formula
that has made it an example ofpeaceful and mutually
fruitful coexistence between distinct communities,
a formula that I hope will, in the common interest,
be maintained, with the adjustments required by the
developments of the situation. I also hope for a
special statute that, under international guarantees
-as my predecessor Paul VI indicated-would
respect the particular nature of Jerusalem, a heritage
sacred to the veneration of millions of believers of
the three great monotheistic religions, Judaism,
Christianity and Islam.“6

He reiterated that, in the opinion of the Nine, a
comprehensive settlement would meet the legitimate
rights and interests of all parties, including the Palestinian people
“who are entitled, within the framework set by a
peace settlement, to exercise their right to determine
their own future as a people.“g
He did not hesitate to stress that the participation of
the Palestine Liberation Organization in the peace
process was essential.
153. The constant and clear position of the socialist
countries needs no recalling. The socialist countries
in -Europe, Asia and elsewhere have extended to our
cause and our struggle both moral and concrete
support. They know that, in their efforts for peace,
peace in Palestine comes first.

151. The free African continent made its position
more than clear in the statement of Mr. William
Tolbert, the President of Liberia. In his address to the
General Assembly on 26 September, he said:

154. As for the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the League of Arab States, Sadat’s rhgime
has been expelled from these intergovernmental
organizations.

“Regarding the grave danger to international
peace and security inherent in the Middle East
crisis, Africa reaffirmed in Monrovia its unrelenting
support and unswerving commitment to the struggle
of the Palestinian people for the full realization and
exercise of all of their national rights.

155. Only the other day, on the first anniversary
of the signing of the Washington pact, the Minister
for External Affairs of India told Parliament that his
Government had accorded full diplomatic recognition
to the PLO representative.
18

-

;

1“”

156, And when 1 stated that we are. not in despair
&ad that the just cause Of the Palestmian people is
getting further support, I had in mind also the visits
of Chairman Yasser Arafat to Vienna, Madrid and
Lisbon and the reception accorded him at a popular
level as well as by governmental authorities,

taken from a report of the Jewish Telegraphic Agency
dated 13 March. I think that Her Majesty’s Government has had plenty of warnings and threats from the
Zionists: Begin, Shamir, and now Yadin.
161. Even the United States has recognized that there
would be no comprehensive peace in the Middle East
until the Palestinian problem, in all its aspects, is
resolved. That was a statement made by my colleague-if he permits me to call him so-the representative of the United States, on 1 March

157. In this context, it is most important to recall
that on 3 March, in a joint communiqui
of Kuwait and
France,President Valery Giscard d’Estaing expressed
his conviction that the question of Palestine is not a
refugee problem but that of a people that should be
enabled to exercise its right to self-determination,
aadthat peace can be established only after the withdrawalof Israel from the Arab territories occupied in
1967.On 5 March President Giscard d’Estaing made
this even clearer in a joint communique
during his
visit to Qatar, where he said that Israel should withdrawfrom all the Arab territories it has occupied since
1967,and that the Palestinian people, like all other
peoples, should have the right to determine its own
destiny in its own homeland within the framework of
a comprehensive settlement.
’

[2203rd meetitlg].

162. By recalling all these positive and sincere
developments, developments and positions which are
constructive and will definitely help the peace process,
we wish only to register our great appreciation for
these moves and endeavours. As a matter of fact,
Chairman Yasser Arafat expressed his high esteem
for the moves by President Giscard d’Estaing and
by Chancellor Kreisky.
163. However, these positive and constructive
moves and positions of the international community.
are obstructed by the Camp David process and, in
particular, by the United States as the engineer in
planting mines along the road to peace. President
Carter is not satisfied with constantly denying its
inalienable rights to the Palestinian people; his Administration is financing the execution of its plans
against peace. After the vote on 1 March on resolution 465 (1980), when the United States voted together
with the rest of the world and in conformity with its
declared position that Israeli practices obstruct peace,
President Carter immediately tried to disavow the
United States position. I honestly wish he had the same
courage to apologize to the Iranian people for the
complicity of the United States, and in particular of
the Central Intelligence Agency, in the crimes committeed by the Shah against the Iranian people. He
would have spared everybody, especially the hostages,
all that anxiety and secured their freedom. What is
more, he would have liberated himself from his selfimposed solitary confinement in the Rose Garden and
could have taken an active role in his campaign.

158. Mr. Brian Lenihan, Minister for Foreign Affairs
ofIreland, came out even more clearly on 10 February
in a joint communique
issued in Bahrain, which
readsas follows:
“The two sides stressed that all parties, including
the Palestine Liberation Organization, should play
a full role in the negotiations for a comprehensive
peace settlement. In this regard, Ireland recognizes
the role of the Palestine Liberation Organization
in representing the Palestinian people.
“Both parties agreed that an essential aspect of
a solution to the Palestinian
problem was withdrawal of Israel from all territory occupied since the
1967 conflict, including Jerusalem, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.”
159. Foreign Minister
Hans-Die&h
Genscher
spelled out the position of the Federal Republic of
Germany in a statement made in Cairo in March. The
Position of the Federal Republic of Germany is based
on the idea that the Palestinian people have a right to
self-determination and a right to a homeland and that
the Palestinian people alone are entitled to decide
about their future and who is to represent them.

164. I seem to have deviated from the subject of the
financing of the anti-peace projects. After 1 March,
the House Foreign Affairs Committee in the United
States rewarded Israel on 25 March for its obstruction
of peace. It adopted an amendment to the foreign
aid bill by which Israel would receive $200 million
in
additional military credits and an increase in its tXOnomic grant. That $200 million was in addition to
another $200 million granted a month earlier, I think
at the time of the visit of the War Minister, Weizman.
President Carter felt that it was in the interest of his
campaign to affirm that Israel had been granted more
than $10 billion during the short period of his tenure
of the presidency.

160. I think that it will be sufficient to recall here
that the Foreign Secretary of State for Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, Lord Cat-rington, told the House of Lords on 17 March: “It would
be a great mistake to think you can get a settlement
without account being taken of the Palestine Liberation
Organization”, That was said even after Yigal Yadin,
the Deputy Premier of Israel, had “warned Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher on 12 March that any
outside interference in the Arab-Israeli peace process
would have ‘very crucial effects’ “. This quotation is

165. On 1 March the Council adopted an historic
resolution, resolution 465 (1980), by which It unam19

and the world will be drugged by beautiful words of
hope, while more and more Israelis and other Jews are
transferred to residence in Arab homes and while more
and more Palestinians are subjected to persecution and
deportation.

mously accepted the conclusions and recommendations of the Security Council Commission established
under resolution 446 (1979). The Council unanimously
accepted the fact that the Israeli policy in the occupied
territories, particularly in the West Bank, had largely
contributed to a deterioration of the situation and that
it was incompatible with the pursuit of peace in the
area. The Council also unanimously accepted the
following conclusion, which is to be found in the Commission’s report:
“In complete disregard of United Nations resolutions and Security Council decisions, Israel is still
pursuing its systematic and relentless process of
colonization of the occupied territories. This is
evidenced by the stated policy of constructing
additional settlements in the most viable parts of
the West Bank and by the expansion of others
already in existence, as well as the long-term
planning of still more settlements.” [S//3679,

168. An official at the White House is reported to
have summed up Begin’s policy as “throwing carpet
tacks on the road”. Thus again, while the world is
moving in the right direction, Begin is financed by
Carter in throwing carpet tacks on the road, with Sadat
an encouraging onlooker. The latter is happy with
the bilateral treaty, happy to have his flag on the
Egyptian Embassy in Israel. But certainly, I do not
think he was really happy to see a million Palestinian
flags in Cairo the day he received the credentials of
Begin’s envoy. The Egyptian people were there to tell
Sadat, loudly and clearly, “we shall not betray the
cause of the Palestinians”.

para. 461.

169. The Security Council has a duty, a responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security. It is empowered to redress injustice. It is legally
committed to restoring their rights to the Palestinians
and has the power to do so. It is in a position to
decide on the recommendations of the General
Assembly. This is Holy Week and the Council cannot
permit itself to sit on the pavement and play the role
of Pontius Pilate. It must not. It must act. It is entrusted
with the task of sparing humanity the scourge of war,
and peace starts in Jerusalem and in Palestine.

This Council is now of the opinion
“that the Israeli Government has to bear responsibility for the settlement programme, which is being
implemented as an official policy” [ibid., para. 481.
166. After the unanimous adoption of resolution 465
(1980), the immediate reply by Begin and his gang
-and I am not referring to the Gang of Five in the
United States, but to the criminals in Tel Aviv-was
the seizure of 1,100 acres of Arab property in Jerusalem
and the authorization to establish a new settlement
in Arab Hebron. Whether it is a question of a yeshiva
or a college or whatever it is called, that move in
fact means the transfer of a hundred new Jewish
families to residence in the homes of Arab Palestinians, who are Moslems guarding the sanctity of a
shrine, the tomb of the Patriarch Abraham. To top it
all, another criminal, another Zionist racist criminal,
who did not approve of even the Camp David accords
because they contained too many concessions-I am
referring to Shamir, this notorious leader of the criminal Stern Gang-is now the Foreign Minister of racist
Zionist Israel, I am sure that Count Bernadotte is
now turning over in his grave. We all know who killed
the United Nations Mediator.

170. Before concluding, I wish simply to rebut and to
deny what has been attributed to Chairman Arafat as
reported in El Mundo and read out today by the repre.sentative of Tel Aviv.
The meeting rose at 2.30 p.m.

NOTES
t Of$cial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtylfirst to Thirw
fourth Session, Supplemen! No! 35.
2 Luke 13:34.
3 Luke 19:43&i.
4 Matthew
21:12,13.
5 Ojjiciai Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth ses*
don, Plenary Meetings, 31st meeting, para. 23.
6 Ibid., 17th meeting, para. 24.
7 Ibid., 10th meeting, paras. 35 to 37.
s Ibid., 8th meeting, para. 27.
9 Ibid.,
para. 29.

167. Yes, while the world is moving in the right
direction for the achievement of peace, racist Zionist
Israel is nullifying even so-called autonomy-and that
is very important. Even this so-called autonomy is
being nullified through the practices and policies in
the occupied territories. Time will drag on and on

20

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et Its agences dtpositaires
du
monde entier. Inf’ormez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous I : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.

li3namff
JHHaX
BaUIeM
HawB,

OpraHlf3aqm
06zeAmferfHblX
Haqdf
MOH(HO
KY~HT~
H areHTCTBaX
~0 mex
pailmax
wfpa.
HasoAwTe
CnpaBKu
KHWfufo~
ParamHe
wrrf nwuwre
no aApecy
: OpraHHJaqHR
Cexqun
no npcgawte
mAawfR,
HblO-HopK
wnf ~ewsa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones

B

WHHxHbfx

06 H3AaHHRX
ObZeAHHeHHbIX

Mara-

8

UNIDAS

de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes dcl mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Nacioncs Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400
