Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
771 (VIII). Acceptance by the specialized agen•
cies of the jurisdiction of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal in matters involving
applications alleging non-observance of the
regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the interim report 17 presented by
the Secretary-General, pursuant to paragraph 4 of
General Assembly resolution 678 (VII) of 21 December 1952;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report further through the Joint Staff Pension Board on the
action taken by the appropriate governing organs of
the specialized agencies concerned in response to the
recommendation of the General Assembly that they accept the jurisdiction of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal in matters involving applications alleging
non-observance of the regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
772 (VIII). Amendments to the Regulations of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendations 18 proposed
by the Joint Staff Pension Board in pursuance of article
XXXVII of the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund, with respect to amendments
and additions to be made to articles V, VII, XI, XVI
and XXVII of the Regulations,
1. Approves the amendments and additions to articles V, VII and XVI of the Regulations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund as set forth in the
annex to the present resolution and decides that the
articles so amended shall take effect as from 1 January
1954;
2. Approves the amendment to article XXVII of
the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund as set forth in the annex to the present
resolution and decides that the article so amended shall
take effect as from 1 January 1955 ;
3. Decides that article XI of the Regulations of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund shall be retained in its present form for the time being and requests the Joint Staff Pension Board to re-examine its
provisions and to report to the General Assembly at its
tenth session.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
ANNEX

Revi•ed Regulation. of the United Nation.
Joint Staff Pen•ion Fund
REVISED AUICLE

V

Disability benefits
Subject to the provisions of articles X, 1 (b) and XVI, a
participant, who, before reaching the age of sixty, has, in the
opinion of the Joint Staff Pension Board, become unable to
Perform his duties owing _to serious physical or mental im17 See document A/2463.
1 8 See document A/2422.

37

pairment shall be entitled, subject to article IX, while such
disability continues, to a disability benefit payable in the same
manner as a retirement benefit and equal to nine-tenths of onesixtieth of his final average remuneration multiplied by the
number of years of his contributory service not exceeding
thirty years. This disability benefit shall be not less than the
smaller of:
(a) Three-tenths of the final average remuneration;
or
(b) Nine-tenths of the retirement benefit to which he would
have been entitled if he had remained in service until he had
reached the age of sixty and his final average remuneration
had remained unchanged.
REVISED ARTICLE

VI I

Death benefits

1. Subject to the provisions of article XVI, if a married
male participant dies, his widow shall be entitled, subject to
article IX, to a widow's benefit amounting, except as provided
in paragraph 3 below, to half of the benefit which would have
been paid to the participant had he qualified for a disability
benefit at the time of his death or, if such deceased participant
had attained the age of sixty, to one-half of the benefit which
would have been paid to the participant had he retired under
the provisions of article IV at the time of his death. This
benefit shall cease on the widow's re-marriage.
2. (a) If a married man who is a recipient of a retirement
benefit as provided under article IV dies, his widow, provided
she was his wife at the time of the cessation of his service with
the member organization, shall be entitled, except as provided
in paragraph 3 below, to a widow's benefit half as large as the
benefit which was being paid to the deceased at the time of his
death. However, if the deceased at the time of his retirement
had received a lump sum as provided in article IV, in lieu of
part of the retirement benefit to which he was entitled, the
widow's benefit shall be half of the total retirement benefit to
which the staff member was entitled at the cessation of his
service. This benefit shall cease on the widow's re-marriage.
(b) If a married man who is a recipient of a disability
benefit dies, his widow, provided she was his wife six months
before he qualified for a disability benefit, shall be entitled,
except as provided in paragraph 3 below, to a widow's benefit
half as large as the benefit being paid to the deceased at the
time of his death. This benefit shall cease on the widow's remarriage.
( c) Notwithstanding sub-paragraph ( b) above, when the
disability of the deceased was the result of an accident or of
damage to health arising from service in an unhealthy area, his
widow, provided she was his wife at the time he qualified for
the disability benefit, shall be entitled to a widow's benefit half
as large as the benefit which was being paid to the deceased at
the time of his death. This benefit shall cease on the widow's
re-marriage.
3. If a widow eligible for a benefit under paragraph 1 or 2 is
younger than the deceased by more than twenty years, the annual
amount of the benefit shall be reduced so that the value of the
benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent of the benefit which
would have been payable to a widow twenty years younger
than the deceased.
4. Upon ceasing to be entitled to a widow's benefit by reason
of re-marriage, the widow shall be entitled to a lump-sum payment equal to twice the annual amount of her widow's benefit.
5. Upon the death of a participant who does not leave a
widow entitled to a widow's benefit, there shall be paid to his
designated recipient a sum equal to:
(a) His own contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2¾ per cent per annum, plus
( b) Such amount as may have been transferred on his account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund of a member organization at the time of his entry into the Pension Fund,
without interest.
If a designated recipient does not survive a participant or
