!

,,.

~,~.!i’..~.:

‘I.

.I

tt1

MEETING:

I OCTOBER 1976

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1958) . . . . . . . . . , . , , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , , . . . . , . . . 3. , , . , . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . , . , . . . . , . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . , , I.. . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . 1.. . . . . . . . . .

1

s/w.

19.58

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbo! S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly SupplementLs of the Ojfi:cial Rccortls of ~IIP Serwrity Corrmil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resol~~rio~~s
cr/rd
DL~L’I’sI’oI~sof’ i/?e Sec.lr~.if)) Conrail. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1958th MEETING
Held in New York, on Friday, 1 October 1976, at 3 p.m.
president:

Mr. Iqbal A. AKHUND

(Pakistan).

present:
The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
OfGreat Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agcnda/l!M)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT:
In the first place, I should
like to pay a tribute-and
I think in so doing I speak
on behalf of all members-to
my predecessor in office,
the representative of Libya, Mr. Mansur Kikhia. In
the month of September the Council had on its agenda
two most important matters, on one of which-namely,
Namibia-the
Council is continuing its debate. The
other was the. admission of Viet Nam. Both issues
are of great sensitivity, especially in the light of the
current situation and developments and, hence, they
required in their consideration the utmost care and
diplomatic ability and skill. The Council w’as fortunate
in having at its head Ambassador Mansur Kikhia, a
man with the very qualities which the occasion called
for. In the many informal consultations we held
during the month of September, we all learned to
admire Ambassador Kikhia’s
patience. his understanding and his good humour. On my own behalf,
alnd on behalf of the Council, I place on record OLII
appreciation of his very constructive contribution to
the Council’s work during the past month.
Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Namibia

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
Previously taken by the Council [IYWt/r,
/Y.Mt/r
rr77tl
IY5i’t/7 777wti/7,q,s], 1 shall now invite the President and
other members of the United Nations Council fol
Namibia, and the representatives of Algeria, Cuba.

Democratic Kampuchea, Egypt, Ghana, Guinea.
Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Yemen and Yugoslavia to participate in the Council’s
discussion without the right to vote.
At thr
i/7lv’tc7tio/7
qf’ tl7c Prcsitlr/7t,
Mr.
Kon7o1rrr
(President
qf’thc
U/7it~~d Ntrtions
Cor/nr*il,fiv
IVrrllrihirr)
t/lltl tllc 0tlWr
/l/C//7h~~I’Ls of’ the d~~I~ypitiot7
took plr7r~c.s
trt tha Scwrity
Co7,77c-il tohlc> (717cl Mr. Rtrh7l
(Alprirr),
Mr.
AIn~*crin
(C//ha),
Mr.
Krot
Chl701r
(Dr/mwrrtic~
Ka117p1/ch~rr),
Mr.
Aldcl
Mrg/rid
(Egypt),
iMr. Fvlli
(Cl/~///t/), /VI/+. Ct///~tt/~/ (C//i/7ca),
MI*.
Wrri~+c/l;i
(Kc/7~(7),
Mr.
R(7hctt!f?l<(7
(Mt7tl(1g(7.~~*t7~),
.+I/+. .\ZI/11’r7/17hr/ (Mulrrll$,
Mr. R~7/77pl~//l (Mt///riti//.s),
.Vr. BcJ7,~rllo///l
(Mo,vJwJ),
Mr.
Clii,s.st//io
(Mo~tri~7lJiq7rc),
Mr.
Crrrhtr
(Nigzri~r),
Mr.
Brrrootly
(Strr/tii
Awhirr),
Mr.
Mi/7olr
(Sionr
Lc~o7rr),
Mr.
S~rlltr771, ( )i~/r7cjnj
t777tl
Mr.
Prtric:
( Y/r~~o,slt/~*i~/)
tool; tl7r pltrw.s
~~c~srmd
.fiJ/
tlir//i
rrt tl7c side rftlir
Co/i/rt*il
c~l7r7//7l1c1~.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, 1 have received
a letter from the representative of Zambia who also
requests to be invited to participate in the debate.
I therefore propose that the Council agree. in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to invite the representative of Zambia to
participate in the debate without the right to vote.
At tlrc
i/riVtt/tiolr
(!I’ llrc’ Pwsitk77t,
(%rrrrlhi~/)
tOOk tI70 plr7W /~i~slJ/~l~lJ~l.fiJ/~ Iii/Jr
the Co//7rcil
c~l7t7/77lxv~.

.Mr.
~1111~1~~
171 tl7LJ hsiiILs c!/’

4. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Ghana. the Commissioner for Foreign
Affairs, I welcome him to the Council and invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
_5 . Mr. FELLI (Ghana): Mr. President, I should like
first of all to express to you, and through you to the
other members of the Council, my sincere gratitude
for this opportunity to address the Council this afterIWOII.
I am particularly happy that I am doing SOunder
the presidency of the representative of a country with
which Ghana shares the same historical past and has
so much in common.
6. This meeting of the Council is taking place at a
time when the hitherto latent turmoil in southern
Africa threatens to explode into iI racial conflict with

dire global consequences. It is the hppe of my delegation that it is no longer necessary to convince anyone
of these consequences. The result of this meeting will
determine whether the United Nations is equal to the
challenge which the situation in southern Africa poses,
or whether through inactivity, emanating from selfish
considerations, we are prepared to reject the principles
and values upon which this Organization is founded.

Nations as a whole should tolerate South Africa’s
defiance of the United Nations in ,the belief that its
respect for our Organization shall prevail.
11. It is no secret that during the intervening period
between the adoption of Council resolution 385 (1976)
and now, South Africa has strengthened its military
build-up in Namibia, thus increasing its hold on
the Territory and posing a threat to neighbouring
independent African countries. There is no one in the
Council who is not aware that large sections of the
African population in the northern part of Namibia,
bordering on southern Angola, have been forcibly
removed from their homes and herded into inhospitable
areas in order to create a so-called “no-shooting
land”. They have been forced out of their ancestral
homes and traditional farming lands on which they
have depended for food and nurture for over three
centuries. Perhaps it is only an African who would
understand the emotional strain such an inhuman act
implies.

7. The meeiing of the Council has been called in
accordance with resolution 385 (1976) of 30 January
of this year. The object is to ascertain whether South
Africa has complied with the terms of that resolution,
and if not, to consider “the appropriate measures to
be taken under the Charter”.
8. What were the terms of resolution 385 (1976)?
In that resolution, the Council recalled its resolutions
264 ( 1969), 269 (I 969) and 366 ( 1974), and called on
South Africa to take the necessary steps to transfer
power to the people of Namibia with the assistance
of the United Nations. What was even more significant,
the Council declared that in order for the people of
Namibia to be able freely to determine their own
future, it was imperative that free elections under
United Nations supervision and control should be
held for the whole of Namibia as one political entity.
That resolution, my delegation would like to believe,
was adopted after considerable soul-searching by some
permanent members of the Council. I say this, because
members will recall that an earlier meeting of the
Council failed to adopt a draft resolution which would
have had the Council determine, under Chapter VII
of the Charter, that the illegal occupation of Namibia
by South Africa constituted a threat to international
peace and security [S//17/S r?f’ 6 JMULJ197.51. My
delegation is happy to note that events since then,
not only in Namibia but within South Africa itself,
have amply justified that assertion.

12. Where they have complained, they have been
labelled Communists, arrested and detained; where
they have resisted in silence and refused to move,
they have been shot on sight; and, again, to court the
sympathy of the capitalist world, labelled communist
insurgents. You, members of the Council, demand:
“Where is your evidence?” Need I remind you of the
cases of Aaron Muchimba, Henrik Shikongo and
other valiant Namibians
who were arrested and
detained in May of this year at Swakopmund?
13. In the face of all this overwhelming evidence of
bad faith, there are some who would want us to
believe that South Africa has had a change of heart
and that we only need to wait and see. Have we not
over so many years understood what South Africa
means by “good faith”?

9. Whatever we felt about the use of the veto to
block action then, and however inadequate we considered resolution 385 (1976) to be, we should like to
believe that those who cautioned patience and moderation at the time believed that South Africa would, in
the very near future, co-operate with the United
Nations in arriving at the only viable, reasonable and
justifiable
solution of the Namibian
problem. They
believed South Africa would renounce its defiance of
the United Nations and genuinely co-operate in the
processes lending to the independence and sovereignty
of Namibia
under the supervision of the United
Nations, which alone has the legal responsibility
to
that Trust Territory.

14. Ghana is accustomed to being generous. I shall
therefore briefly examine what others would want us
to accept as South Africa’s good faith.
15. On I8 August of this year, the representative
of South Africa addressed a communication
to the
Secretary-General and requested him to issue il as a
Security Council document, The communication was
faithfully issued as a Security Council document
[S//Z/SO]. Whatever the cost of issuing it, it was paid
for out of the United Nations budget. The document
referred to was a statement issued by some organization which describes itself as the “Constitutional
Committee of the South West African Constitutional
Conference”. I shall not go into what the document
said because it is irrelevant to the issue before the
Council. What is relevant is who issued that document
and under whose mandate.

IO. It is relevant to look at the performance of South
Africa in Namibia since Council resolution 385 (1976)
was adopted, first, to evaluate whether South Africa
sincerely wishes to co-operate with the United Nations
in implemeting the decisions of the General Assembly
and of the Security Council:
and secondly, to
determine how much longer the Council and the United

16. So far as my delegation is concerned, the only
body which represents South West Africa is the South
Wes’t Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO). That is
2

so [7,&tt~se it is the only
body
rccognized
by
the
Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations
l,s representing
South West Africa or Namibia,
To
LIs, no other body has crcdcncc,
and WC do not think
;iny other body should have credence within the United

20. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker
is the
Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia.
I welcome
him and invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

N;l(jons.

21. Mr. MWALE
(Zambia): This series of meetings
of the Council started under the presidency of Ambassador Kikhia, the representative
of the Libyan Arab
Republic.
On behalf of my delegation,
I should like
first of all to congratulate
him most sincerely
for
the excellent
manner in which he presided over the
Council
and for the thorough
preparatory
work he
carried out with skill and zeal in connexion
with the
meetings.

III

any

event,

in

the

view

of

my

delegation,

if that document
is South Africa’s
response to resolution 385 (1976), it does not meet the terms of that
resolution, and we do not consider that it should meet
the terms of that resolution
for ally
member of the
Council.
17. That is the Ghana Government’s
position.
However, our desire for a peaceful solution of the Namibia
situation impels us to some flexibility.
In keeping
with that flexibility
and willingness
to find a peaceful
solution to the issue, we give our full supporl to the
conditions
spelt out by Mr. Nujoma,
President
of
SWAPO, on 28 September
1976 before the Council
[/Y%//I l~rr~~ingj,
IIS follows:
first, that South Africa
agree to talk with SWAP0
regarding
the modalities
of transfer of administrative
power to the people of
Namibia under the leadership
of SWAPO,
without
prejudice to the constitution
of South Africa’s
delegation to the talks; secondly,
that those talks must be
under the auspicbs of the United
Nations;
thirdly,
that before the talks all Namibian
political
prisoners
must be released;
fourlhly,
that all South African
armed forces should be withdrawn
before the talks.
18. If South Africa refuses to accept those conditions aimed at a peaceful settlement
of the issue, my
delegation would consider
that the end of the road
has been reached and that the Organization
should
take the appropriate
action in keeping with ourcommitmerits to the Charter of the United Nations.
In this
regard, my delegation
proposes:
first, that the Council
recommend that South Africa
should
forthwith
be
expelled from the United
Nations
‘and, remain so
expelled until it decides to comply with the decisions
of the Council and the General Assembly
with regard
to Namibia; secondly,
that the Council recommend
to
the General Assembly
that ali measures be taken to
enable the United
Nations
Council
for Namibia
to
discharge its responsibility;
thirdly,
that the General
Assembly reaffirm its recognition
of SWAP0
as the
only legitimate
organization
representing
the whole
of Namibia and give it every support to establish its
control over that Territory,
with the assistance
of
the Council for Namibia;
fourthly,
that the Council
decide to take action against
South Africa
under
Chapter VII of the Charter.
19. The Organization
faces a serious threat to its
credibility in Namibia.
If we act with resolution
and
single-mindedness
in accordance
with the Charter,
we shall outlive the League of Nations,
if our selfish
considerations deter us from resolute action, our fate
Wnot be any different
from that of the League of
Nations, which, although
well conceived,
lacked the
courage and the political wiII to live up to its principles.

22. It gives my delegation great pleasure to note that
the Council continues to meet under your able presidency,
Ambassador
Akhund.
You have already
distinguished
yourself as a skilful diplomat
with a
unique understanding
of contemporary
international
problems.
Your country, Pakistan, is a reliable ally
of the people of Namibia and, indeed, the rest of the
people of southern
Africa who are engaged in the
struggle for self-determination
and independence.
23. Let me at the outset make it quite clear that, in
the view of my delegation,
this meeting of the Council on what, to some, must have become the perennial
*question of Namibia,
is of critical importance.
This
Coun&l
has debated
the question
of Namibia
on
numerous occasions,
it has adopted many important
resolutions.
The most recent of these resolutions
were adopted unanimously,
a significant
fact which
shows the collective will of the Council and, indeed,
of the international
community
to liberate Namibia
from the illegal South African occupation,
I need not
stress. that the decisions of this all-important
organ
of the United Nations have fallen on deaf ears. South
Africa has not only refused to comply with, but has
treated with contempt, the resolutions
of the Council, as indeed it has done with the resolutions
of the
General Assembly and other relevant United Nations
bodies. In short, for too long South Africa has defied
and ridiculed
the United Nations on the question of
Namibia.
24. This meeting of the Council has been specifically
convened in order to consider whether or not South
Africa has complied with resolution
385 (1976). That
resolution
is clear and unambiguous.
Its thrust was to
obtain from South Africa a solemn declaration
of
intent to withdraw
from Namibia and a commitment
to co-operate
in the holding of free national elections
in the Territory
under United Nations
supervision
and control. This was yet another opportunity
offered
to the racist regime of South Africa to vacate Namibia
peacefully.
The choice of South Africa is clear. As
before, it has rejected and treated with contempt a
meaningful
United
Nations
initiative.
It has not
complied with resolution 385 (1976).
25. As if this ridicule of the United Nations was not
enough,
South’ Africa has had the arrogance
and

’

confidence in the ability of the United Nations to
resolve the question of the illegal occupation of (hei)
country by South Africa, are already, under the leadership, of SWAPO, waging a gallant armed struggle.
The struggle, which is bound to intensify, can only
be halted by the capitulation of the enemy and the
emergence of Namibia as a sovereign and independent
State under a SWAP0 government.

audacity to communicate to the Council, in document
S/12180 a statement of the so-called Constitutional
Committee of the South West African Constitutional
Conference. That statement is not even worth the
paper on which it is written. Its only significance is
that it confirms the fact that the puppets and stooges
of South Africa who participated in the so-called
constitutional
talks in Windhoek were engaged in
nothing but a sell-out scheme. This is what we have
known all along. But to the extent that those who
believed that anything reasonable and honourable
could come out of the so-called Constitutional
Conference convened with the exclusion of SWAP0 have
now learnt better and are ashamed, the statement
could be considered useful.

30. We in Zambia recognize and appreciate the
important contribution of the United Nations to the
liberation of Namibia. The United. Nations Council
fdr. Namibia, the General Assembly and the Security
Council, to mention a few United Nations bodies,
have in various ways made important contributions.
If the racists in Pretoria could be motivated by reason,
the commendable efforts of the international community, through the United Nations, would have long
resulted in an amicable solution to the problem of
Namibia.

26. What should be clear to all and sundry is the
f&t that the future of Namibia cannot and will not be
resolved without the participation
of SWAPO, the
authentic representative of the Namibian people. Any
serious and genuine effort to resolve the question of
Namibia peacefully must involve SWAP0 and be based
on SWAPO’s own reasonable and justified conditions.
The President of SWAPO, Comrade Sam Nujoma,
spelled out these conditions clearly and unequivocally
in his statement before Council on Tuesday [iAi(l.].

31. This meeting of the Council is of unique
importance because the time has come for the United
Nations to change its approach in the search for a
solution to the problem of Namibia.
Appeals to
reason have been made; ultimatums have been issued.
They have not had any positive effect on South
Africa. They have been rejected. I submit that to
continue them would be ridiculous. South Africa
would have the right to conclude that the United
Nations was not serious,

27. South Africa is occupying Namibia illegally. It
is under obligation to withdraw from the Territory.
It is therefore reasonable that any talks with South
Africa must be only for the purpose of agreeing on
the modalities of the transfer of power to the Namibian
people and for no other purpose. SWAP0 is the
authentic representative of the Namibian
people,
recognized by the Organization of African Unity, the
non-aligned
movement and the United Nations.,
Therefore, SWAP0 and South Africa are the principal
parties. Any worth-while talks must be between
SWAP0 and South Africa. The United Nations, which
has been seized of the problem of Namibia for many
years and which has direct responsibility
for the
Territory, also has a Vital role to play. The United
Nations Council for Namibia, in particular, which is
the Administering Authority for Namibia, has a special
responsibility
in this regard. The essential issue
involved is political and the Council for Namibia has
a mandate from the General Assembly which makes
its competence indisputable.

32. The challenge of the moment is addressed to
the Council. The time is now for the Council to apply
the full force of Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter against the racist rkgime of South Africa. The
Council must now live up to its responsibilities under
the Charter. There is every reason to justify invoking
Chapter VII of the Charter. The statement by the
President of SWAP0 last Tuesday was an eloquent
testimony in this regard. Apart from the very fact of
the illegal occupation of Namibia in utter defiance of
the decisions of the United Nations, South Africa, as
the President of SWAP0 made it clear, is guilty of
acts of terrorism and genocide against’ the Namibian
people. Mass arrests, detentions,
imprisonment,
harassment and brutal murder of the Namibian people
have become the order of the day. Namibia today is
a perfect example of a police State. There is a massive
South African military build-up in the Territory,
Military bases are flourishing.

28. It is also reasonable for SWAP0 to insist that
before any tafks begin, South Africa must unconditionally
release all Namibian
political prisoners,
including those sentenced to death by the illegal
regime. That would show the good faith of the racist
rigime and a serious intent on its part to negotiate
an orderly termination of its illegal administration
in
Namibia. In any case, what would be the purpose of
the continued detention of the Namibian patriots if
South Africa genuinely intended to withdraw from
Namibia’?

33. In addition to all this, Namibia has become a
launching pad for South African acts of aggression
against independent African countries. As is well
known, the People’s Republic of Angola has been a
victim of South African aggression committed with the
use of Namibia as a base, South African acts of
provocation against Angola continue to this day. MY
own country, Zambia, has suffered repeated acts of
aggression committed by South Africa. Many lives
have been lost and a great deal of property has been

29. The alternative is a holocaust in Namibia. The
people of Namibia, who for many years have placed
4

destroyed, Hardly two months ago, Council considered
my country’s complaint against South African aggresdon and adopted a resolution [-?93 (/Y?‘(j)] in which it
condemned the racist r6gime for the aggression.
34. To assure this Council that Zambia will continue
to support SWAP0 and the people of Namibia until
final victqry is to state the obvious. What my delegation considers it important to stress is the fact that time
has run out for South Africa, and that an all-out war
against the rkgime is imminent. The racists must be
totally isolated until sanity dawns on them. We have
ca]]ed for action against South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter. This, we hope, will be possible
with the political will of all the members of the Council.
In additian, we wish to appeal to all States which
genuinely believe in the noble ideals of liberty and
justice, and which therefore support the cause of the
Namibian people, to increase material assistance to
SWAP0 in order that it may better execute its armed
struggle against the illegal occupier. The enemy must
be fought on all fronts until it is compelled to withdraw from Namibia and to scrap that evil system
of ~prr~heitl. There is a popular uprising in South
Africa which, we all know, is being suppressed with
characteristic South African brutality. The people of
Namibia have intensified their armed struggle. More
than ever before, there is now need for greater international solidarity with the oppressed people. They
need every encouragement. They need cdncrete and
practical forms of assistance.
35. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mozambique, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs. I welcome him and invite him lo take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
36. Mr. CHISSANO
(Mozambique):
We listened
with due interest and attention to the statements
delivered here by various delegations at the first
neetings on the item under consideration, in pnrticulal
that of the President OF the United Nations Council
for Namibia [/9.5(,//r /rrc~~!illl: ] and the President of
SWAP0 [ihirl.]. The;’ spoke without reservations and
in eloquent terms. Their statements were important
contributions for the Council in that they gave us a
very lucid picture’ of how the situation has developed
in southern Africa since the Security Council last met
on the question of Namibia in January last. We have
Ueatly benefited from their curnest efforts to clarify
their respective positions vis-&-vis this question of
Namibia, which has once again led to the Council’s
meeting and cxnmining the situation.
37. My Government is deeply concerned about and
interested in whatever is taking place today in Nnmibk as WCII as in Rhodesia, South Africa and elsewhere
ill the area. This debate, which was decided upon last
h\nlW’, has been awaited with ;I great deal of interesl
bY Our people and ]ekbclersand throughout the world.
38. The entire world is following rhc debate in the
Council with interest and some anxiety because of the

events that occurred as a result of the upheavals in
southern Africa. That is so because the world is less
and less inclined to believe that there will be a peaceful
solution of the problem of Namibia. In fact, there can
no longer be a peaceful solution, for the liberation
war is on. What remains now is to find the necessary measures to shorten this war and spare the lives
of the Namibian people.
39. There has been much talk in the world about
developments in southern Africa, But what are the
main components of these developments’? A mere
good will of the minority racist and illegal rigimes to
bring about change’? The answer is obviously no. Is
it the political and diplomatic init’iarive carried out
by some allies of the minority rigimes? The answer is
also
no. Neither is it any progress in the mind OI
understanding of Vorster with respect to the necessity
of following the path of justice. The development
fundamentally consists of two elements: firts, there is
a serious intensification and development of the armed
struggle of the people of southern Africa, which cannot
be restrained unless Mr. Vorster comes to a realistic
idea of the situation. For instance, in Zimbabwe the
people are waging guerrilla warfare and in Namibia
the situation is as we have heard Mr. Nujoma. the
President of SWAPO, say:
“In conclusion, I should like to reiterate SWAPO’s
position that we are more than ever committed.
determined and resolved to carry out the armed
liberation struggle with intensity, to liberate every
inch of Namibia, including Walvis Bay.” [Ihill.,
/1(11’(1.89. ]
The people of Namibia are committed and determined
to carry out this armed struggle. In South Africa.
waves of constant strikes and violent demonstrations
are devastating the South African rrptr,/hcrit/ structures
and deepening the deterioration of the situation,
particularly relnrions among the races: secondly.
there is. on the other hand, increasing international
suppc?rt for the freedom struggle being waged by the
people of Namibia, led by SWAPO.
40. These arc the elements that motivated the sudden
apparent change in South Africa’s attitude. In Namibia. SWAPO’s constant victories have obliged the
illegal rigime of Vorster to modify its striltegy
:llld
its
forms of action, though it is fur from seeing reason.
41. Against this background, the minority rigime’s
allies, who see their vested interests threatened, felt
o[?]iged lo recognize reality. it is the people’s national
s[rLlpg]e that is the principal initiative for the solution.
That is why we strongly feel that this struggle must
he supported by the international community. Having
said that. we believe that we have helped the Council
to decide to whom belongs the merit of what .is
happening in southern Africa and, in partictllar.
Namibia.

used in the past by notorious Fascist r8gimes. There is
therefore no need to enumerate the type of measures
the Council should take at this juncture to reinforce
the authority of the United Nations over the Territory,
lo reiterate the recognition of SWAP0 as the sole
legitimate representative of the people of Namibia,
recognized by the Organization of African Unity as
well, as by the non-aligned movement and by other
international and peace-loving organizations the world
over.

42. Now what our delegation would like to know is
what South Africa’s rigime has done to implement
th,e contents of resolution 385 (1976). We have
observed and closely watched South Africa’s attitude
since this important resolution was adDpted in January
this year, and our analysis leads us to conclude that
South Africa has not implemented any of it. What,
then, did South Africa do with regard to the serious
call contained in resolution 385 (1976)? Nothing.
Nevertheless, it has not remained inactive. South
Africa has been busy creating situations in Namibia,
aimed at deliberately deceiving public opinion in order
to perpetuate its presence in the Territory. It engirieered delatory manceuvres and skilfully created
dangerous situations in order more and more to
confuse the issue, without, however, paying the least
regard to the demands of the United Nations.

47. We shall not, however, hesitate to outline what
we deem it necessary for the Council to do to help
solve the problem peacefully, as we view it. We shall
do that as our modest contribution to the efforts the
United Nations has been making on this old problem
since its inception. We are aware of the nature of the
difficulties surrounding the question of Namibia. But
we are also aware that there is nothing that can hold
back indefinitely the exercise of the sacred rights of
the people.

43, The demands of the United Nations, which is
the legal administrative authority of Namibia, were all
defied by the South African illegal rkgime. The
deliberate misrepresentation
carried out by South
Africa, its flagrant failure to comply with the pertinent
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
and its utter defiance of the advisory opinion of the
international Court of Justice,’ as well as its gross
violation of the rules of interantional law-all this, in
our opinion. constitutes an insult and an open challenge to the United Nations. If all South Africa is
doing is openly to challenge the power and authority
of this august international body, then one cannot
help feeling that we must act against this, for it is not
the first time that South Africa has behaved in such a
manner. Therefore, serious action has to be taken
against such a calculated negative attitude on the part
of a State Member of the Organization.

48. In our opinion, it is important:
-First, that the Council recognize that South Africa
poses a serious challenge to the fundamental principles
of the United Nations Charter.
-Secondly,
that rhe Council apply Chapter VII
against South Africa, in parti’cular with regard to the
mandatory arms embargo.
-Thirdly,
that the Council should not limit itself
to deploring, condemning or urging South Africa
-+tlthough that is no less important-but,
now that
SWAP0 has been recognized and its struggle has been
legitimized, it should encourage by all means and give
substantial material aid to SWAP0 to enable it to cope
with its enemy, who is at the same time the enemy
of the United Nations.

44. We think it is unnecessary to review the prevailing
situation, which is characterized by the criminal acts
of atrocity that South Africa is now flagrantly and
arrogantly committing against the people of Namibia,
and in particular the members of SWAPO.

-Fourthly,
that, meanwhile, since the Council is
sitting at a crucial stage of the Namibian question,
concerning which Mr, Vorster is reported to have
alleged a willingness to recognize the independence
of Namibia, the Council should decide to give a full
mandate to the Secretary-*General to convene a real
constitutional conference, in which the main participants would be the United Nations, the Republic of
South Africa and SWAPO. In that constitutional
conference SWAP0 must participate as the party
primarily concerned. SWAP0 must be the determining party in regard to any solution to be foutld.
In other words, SWAP0 will be the decisive factor.

45. It was not merely by accident, or for the pleasure
of it, that a few days ago the President of SWAPO,
speaking here, expressed his and his organization’s
doubts concerning the rumours that Mr, Vorster and
his Government are now willing to negotiate for the
independence of Namibia. In fact, the military buildup and the militarization
of Namibia without the
consent of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
the sole legal authority, have turned an international
Territory into a complete police State, with a view
to brutalizing and terrorizing the Namibians. A doubt
cast in such circumstances sounds positive. South
Africa is confused, and now it is trying to confuse the
whole world also.

49. In our experience, a constitutional conference is
always between the colonial Power and the legitimate
representative of the colonized people. With that
principle in view and recognizing that South Africa is
the colonial Power in Namibia, that the United Nations
is the legal authority over Namibia, and that SWAP0
is the representative of the colonized people in Namibia, we think that the aforementioned three parties

46. Unfortunately
for South Africa, almost the
entire world is well aware of the realities today in the
Territory. It will not be easy to affect world opinion
by the outdated methods which were ineffectively
6

L,l’e the oll]y
()nes
thill
sholl~d
p~lrticip~lte
in the constitu~i()nal c()nf~rence for Namibia’s
independence.
It has
heel, reported that SWAP0
has made it clear that it
will not take :I scat, in any
circumstances,
in the
eonfercnee if SWAPO’s
comrades who are languishing
in the prisons of the Republic
of South Africa WC not
,.eleasc~l. Therefore,
the release of SWAP0
members
from prison becomes a priority
condition.

the subject will undoubtedly
enahk you to guide our
deliberations
to a successful conclusion.
Wc also wish
to Pay il tribtitc
to your predecessor,
Ambassador
Kikhia of the Libyan Arab Republic,
under whose
guidance this debate commenced
:I few
days ago.
56. Despite the fact that the Security Council and the
General Assembly have adopted ;I number of resolutions, culminating
in resolution 385 (1976), and despite
the advisory
opinion
of the International
Court of
Justice of 1971 on South Africa’s continued
illegal
presence
in Namibia,’
the South African
Govcrnment has stubbornly
refused to adhere to or implement
the terms of those resolutions.
A close study of rcsolution 385 (1976) reveals that the Council meticulously’
outlined
specific terms and conditions
with which
the South African
Government
should comply
by
31 August 1976. As we expected, South Africa again
deliberately
ignored the demands of the Council and
failed to adopt any significant measures to implement
those demands, Our duty now is to determine
what
action should be taken by the Council
under the
Charter
against a recalcitrant
Member
State which
has persistently
and deliberately
refused to implement
the Organization’s
decisions.

50, Having given that outline,
WC should
like lo
retrffirm our unconditional
support
for the people of
Namibia, led by its vanguard organization,
Similarly,
we should like to pay a tribute to the United Nations
alld express once again our resolute
position
with
respect to the decisions
contained
in the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security
Council, in particular
resolution
385 (1976).
51. The People’s
Republic
of Mozambique
rejects
:tnYconference about Namibia which may be convened
by the Government
of South Africa. Our Government
and
people categorically
repudiate
and regard as
illegal the so-called
Windhoek
Conference.
We
strongly reject the idea that SWAP0
should participate
in a constitutional
conference
on an equal footing
with individuals
or puppet groupings
forged by the
South African
Government.
In our view, SWAP0
is the determining
and decisive factor in the question
of Namibia. If there arc some nationalists
within the
country-or
even outside it-who,
for one reason or
another, were unable to participate
in the struggle
for national independence
all these years, they should
now join with SWAPO.

57. Since the adoption of resolution 385 (1976) every
attempt to liberate the people of Namibia from the
oppressive
jurisdiction
of South Africa has proved
futile. In fact, instead of improving,
the situation in
Namibia
has deteriorated
through
the calculated
obduracy of South Africa. That country has reinforced
its military
strength in Namibia and has created a
I ,OOO-foot-wide
buffer zone along the NamibianAngolan
border in order to prevent the movements
of liberation
fighters. In this major offensive, known
as Operation
Cobra, the instructions
given to the
South African troops were “to shoot anyone who ran
away and to arrest those who stayed”. In fact, those
arrested were ‘brutally tortured during interrogation,
and the entire area has been placed under the most
rigid and coercive martial law since May of this year.
The result of Operation
Cobra has been widespread
arrests and imprisonments
and indiscriminate
torture
and murder of the Namibian people, particularly
the
liberation
fighters of SWAPO. These inhuman acts by
South African troops have reinforced the conviction
of the liberation
movement of SWAP0
that the only
road to freedom is by armed struggle. In response
SWAP0
has inevitably endeavoured
to close its ranks
and intensify the guerrilla
struggle against the bloodthirsty troops of racist South Africa.

52. Before I conclude. my statement,
Mr. President,
allow me to express my delegation’s
pleasure at your
accession to the presidency
of the Council. We should
like to transmit our salutations
through
you to the
previous President,
who conducted
the beginning
of
this debate, the representative
of the Libyan
Arab
Republic, brother Kikhia.
My delegation
is confident
that your experience,
combined
with the wisdom of
the other representatives
in the Council, is a guarantee
that the Council
will overcome
the difficulties
and
that its work will be crowned
with complete success.
53. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker
is the
Minister for Foreign Affa’rs of Sierra Leone. I welcome
him, and I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
54. Mr. MINAH
(Sierra
Leone):
Mr. President,
Permit me at the outset to express my appreciation
to You and, through
you, to the members
of the
~~I.hl for allowing
my delegation
to participate
in
this debate, which is of the utmost importance
to my
Government.

58. At the same time, however, SWAP0
has made
it clear that it is ready at any time to hold constitutional talks with South Africa provided certain preconditions arc fulfilled.
They are: first, the recognition
of SWAP0
by South Africa as the sole representative
of the Namibian
people; secondly, the release of all
political prisoners
and the guarantee of a safe return
to Namibia
of Namibians
now living in exile elsewhere; thirdly, supervision
of elections by the United

55. I avail myself of this opportunity
also to congratulate YOU on your assumption
of the high office of
President of the Council
for the month of October.
Your diplomatic
experience
and personal
interest in
7

derive from South Africa’s illegal presence in Namibia
to emphasize why it has not been easy for certain
countries openly to condemn South Africa’s attitude
and pressure it into vacating the Territory.

Nations prior to independence; fourthly, acceptance
of the territorial
unity and integrity of Namibia;
fifthly, the invalidation of all criminal charges against
freedom fighters, dead or alive; sixthly, the withdrawal
of South African troops from the Territory; seventh!y,
the formulation of a specific and early date for independence.

63. South Africa’s presence in Namibia has become
a danger not only to the Namibians themselves but
also to neighbouring States such x Angola and
Zambia. It was only a few months ago that in the
Council Zambia’s complaint [S/1147] about South
Africa’s violation of its sovereignty and territorial
integrity was fully discussed. South African soldiers
took off by helicopter from the “prohibited area”
on the Zambia-Namibia
border, landed on Zambia’s
territory, destroyed property and killed and wounded
scores of people. It is also well known that South
African troops have been transforming that newly
created buffer zone into a base for the invasion of
Angola should the need arise.

59. In our view, it would be an act of wisdom if
South Africa were to accept these conditions and
agree to have constitutional
talks with a view to
reducing the human suffering and the loss of lives
resulting from the present armed confrontations. But,
as I stated yesterday in the General Assembly,
“Perhaps South Africa has reasons for being so
stubborn and impervious to reason. Facts have
revealed that South Africa has decided to delay its
withdrawal from Namibia as long as possible in
nrder to continue the exploitation not only of the
mineral resources of that country but also of the
services of the African population, a regular source
of cheap labour.“”

64. From the above analysis, it is evident beyond
a shadow of ,doubt that South Africa’s presence in
Namibia is a threat to international peace and security.
As the Council is t.he only organ which is entrusted
with the responsibility of maintaining
international
peace and security, it should, once and for all, adopt
appropriate measures under the Charter to put an end
to the persistent defiance of its decisions by this
recalcitrant Member State.

60. It is common knowledge that Namibia is rich
in minerals, It produces diamonds, copper, lead,
uranium, zinc, tin, and iron ore, to name only a few,
and all in no small quantities. South Africa now
obtains from Namibia its main supplies of these
minerals, which were hitherto imported from other
sources at a very high cost in foreigq exchange. It
is an open secret that in recent years mining enterprises have considerably increased because of the
mineral wealth of Namibia and the availability of
cheap African labour. A recent survey has revealed
that the area covered by mining concessions comprised about one third of Namibia. Consequently,
Namibia’s mineral wealth is becoming more and more
a deterrent to its political freedom. The exploitation
of uranium, for example, has increased Namibia’s
strategic importance not only to South Africa but
also to other potential auclear Powers. It is also
evident that South Africa’s main objective in Namibia
is to continue to exploit the mineral resources of that
Territory
and, in the process, to frustrate every
attempt to hand over the reins of government to the
Namibians.

65. On about 15 August, this year, in order to beat
the deadline of resolution 385 (1976), which stipulates
that the Council should meet on or before 31 August
to review South Africa’s compliance with the terms of
that resolution, the South African Government made
a statement to the effect that it was not prepared to
vacate Namibia before 3 1 December 1978, when independence would be granted to a puppet rtgime which
will no doubt adhere to the colonial doctrines of
exploitation, suppression and repression of the indigenous Namibians.
66. SWAP0
rightly rejected that proposal as
unacceptable. My delegation fully associates itself
with SWAPO’s reaction to this surreptitious move by
South Africa. My Government has on several occasions declared its commitment to Namibia’s right to
self-determination
and independence, and it strongly
supports the stand of the Organization of African
Unity, which recognizes SWAP0 as the sole legitimate
representative of the people of Namibia devoted to
the self-determination
and independence of the
Territory. SWAP0 must therefore play a major role
in any talks or dialogue affecting the future of Namibia
if such talks or diaIogue are to be productive.

61. African labour is also equally exploited, with the
Africans receiving miserably law wages while completely unprotected by law. They are not’ allowed
to form trade unions, to strike or even to change jobs
without
permission.
A comparison
between the
earnings of the whites and those of the blacks for
doing the same jobs is, to say the least, shocking.
On the average, whites receive 18 times the wages
paid to Africans for doing the same jobs. This does
not include other benefits, such as housing, free
schooling,
and hospital and recreational facilities,
which only whites enjoy.

67. The Council has been specifically summoned to
meet at this time in compliance with paragraph 12
of its resolution 385 (1976), which states that the
Council:

62. I have taken the trouble to dilate on the economic
benefits which South Africa and other allied countries

“Decides to remain seized of the matter and to
meet on or before 31 August 1976 for the purpose of
8

reviewing South Africa’s compliance with the terms
of the present resolution and, in the event of noncompliance by South Africa, for the purpose of
considering the appropriate measures lo be taken
under the Charter.”

74. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Democratic Kampuchea, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
75.

Mr. KEAT

CHHON

(Democratic Kampuchea)
Sir, allow me to extend
to you our warmest congratulations on your accession
to the presidency of the Council. The delegation of
Democratic Kampuchea would also like to voice its
satisfaction at seeing an eminent representative of a
friendly country, Pakistan, a country devoted to the
cause of the national independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, as well as to the right
of peoples to be maslers of their own destinies and
the destinies of their countries, playing an important
and active role in the Council.
(illtClp/‘et(rti(~/l fwm

68, I have attempted to analyse the situation that
has continued to exist in Namibia sin’ce the adoption
of that resolution, and the result is indeed very’
disappointing. In our view, South Africa has not
complied with the terms of that resolution. Indeed,
it has attempled to divide Namibia into “homelands”
governed by racially discriminatory
and repressive
laws aimed at maintaining the slal~s q//o and perpetuating the system of trpcrrtlleiti in the Territory.’
6Y3 That is why I must associate myself with my
brothers of SWAP0 to appeal, through the Council,
to Member States and the specialized agencies to
render every material and moral support which will
enable them to continue relentlessly their armed
struggle, which now remains the only path to the
attainment of self-determination,
freedom and independence.

Fwnch):

76. At the same time, we should like to express o11r
appreciation to your predecessor, the representative
of the Libyan Arab Republic, 0111;friend Mansttl
Kikhia, the outgoing President, for the description
he gave yesterday of the feelings of dignity of a small
country faced with those who practise interference.
tiiktut, intervention.
aggression, expansionism and
annexation.

70. In particular, it is the solemn responsibility of
the members of this Council to be honest with themselves and adopt. with imparliality
appropriate
measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter,
consistent with the defiant attitude of South Africa,
a Member State which has regularly and persistently
ignored decisions of the Organization,
and of the
Council in particular.

77. Mr. President. we should also like to express OUI
heartfelt thanks to you and to the other members of
the Council for giving us the opportunity to speak in
order to set forth our viewpoints and to reaffirm OUI
position on the question of Namibia.
78. Although geographically distant from Namibia.
the people of Democratic Kampuchea feels a fighting
and fraternal solidarity with the courageous struggle
of the people of Namibia under the leadership of
SWAPO. It is firmly devoted to the noble cause fol
whose success the people of Namibia have been
inoved Lo great sacrifices. We are firmly and more
Ihan ever convinced that. regardless of the obstacles
and difficulties to be overcome, the people of Namibia.
as it resolutely and persistently pursues ils liberation
struggle, will surely regain its independence and
freedom.

71. Mr. President, members of Council, Lhe decision
is yours. We call upon all members-and
I mean
“all members”-of
the Council to atlopl “appropriale
measures” to rectify this intolerable situation in
Namibia which is fast becoming an incurable disease
in the body politic of the internationnt community.
72. The Council cannot, however, confine itself to
Punitive measures. There should bc ;I corresponding
move towards positive solutions which recognize and
Protect the righls ,of indigenous Namibians, and in
this exercise the initiative
must come l’rom the
Olganization, whose responsibility ihe Territory is,
at the moment. To this end, we would urge the
Gmcil to give ;I mandate to the Sect+etary-General
to organize immediately ;\ preliminary tripartite conference involving the lJnitccl Nations, SWAP0 and
South Africa to work out the modalities for a full
constitutional conference which will itself lend,
Wikmt delay, to the fult and comptete transfer of
Power to SWAPO.

7Y. The flames of the struggle for national and
popular liberalion which is iI fore-runner of the total
libelation of ;lll Africn from the last entrenched
vesliges of colonialism, racism and clj1rlHllcJi~l. ilre
currently sweeping over Namibia. Zimbabwe and
Azania. Thanks lo their persevering struggle. the
cour;\geous peoples of Namibin, Zimbabwe and Aznnia
are ;\boul to sweep awuy the minority colonialist and
racist r@gimes. Sensing the approach of their inevitnblc end. the regimes of Vorster and of Inn Smith
and their supporters are feverishly shriving to ilssllre
their surviv:rl for 21little longer. In Namibia, Vorster.
wbilc intensifying his bilrbilric repression alld criminal
massncres rind latlnching nrmed attacks to intimidate
neighbouring counlrics, is esci\li\titlg his evil mitnct’uvres in order to prolong his colonialist and wist
domination.

7Js We. on our part. hold ourselves ready to rendei
everY Possible assislance, for WC remain firm in the
belief that only II total, global effort can ensure the
indePendence of N;\mibi;l and bring peace and stabilily
tc)southern Africa.
Y

Charter would further isolate the colonialist and r~,ist
rCgime of Pretoria and would &courage the Namibian
people in the decisive phase of its couragetous
struggle.

80. We firmly support the position of SWAPCI in
denouncing the manoeuvres of Pretoria. We resolutely
support the determination of the people of Namibia to
pursue its armed liberation struggle to complete and
final victory,
so that Namibia
may regain real
sovereignty and independence.

82. The Council has been a witness of the great
upheavals which have occurred in the world situation
since the founding of the United Nations. National
independence, the sovereignty
of States and
the
right of every people to be master of its OWII and
its
country’s destiny acquired through arduous political
and armed struggle in Asia, Africa and Latin America
now constitute a powerful tide of history which IIothini
can hold back. The delegation of Democratic Kampu.
chea is convinced that in the face of these filets,
the
Council will shoulder its responsibilities. For our Part
we are convinced that the courageous struggle of t&
people of Namibia will end in victory.

81. In this decisive phase of the struggle, our duty
is to stand shoulder to shoulder with the courageous
people of Namibia, as with those of Zimbabwe and
Azania, and to give them our firm support. For that
reason, in the case of Namibia, given the continuation
of the illegal and insolent occupation of Namibia by
the South African r&gime, and bearing in mind resolution 385 (197h), vigorous measures must be taken
against that rigime. Those vigorous measures should
be such as to contribute
effectively to the prompt
realization of the centuries-old
sacred aspirations of
the people of Namibia. All measures adopted at the
current stage of the struggle of the people of Namibia must respect the Namibians’
independence,
sovereignty
and their right to be masters of theil
own and their country’s
destiny. Furthermore,
when
Namibia becomes independent. the measures taken
must respect the independence and the sovereignty
of its people and its right to be master of its own and
its country’s destiny. Action under Chapter VII of the

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00300

83-60801-February

1 9ss--.?.‘*’
