S/PRST/2001/3

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 January 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4270th meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 January 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Strengthening
cooperation with troop-contributing countries”, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has given further consideration to the question of
strengthening cooperation between the Council, the troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. In this connection, the Council stresses the
importance of full implementation of provisions of resolution 1327 (2000) of
13 November 2000 and in the statements of its President of 28 March 1996
(S/PRST/1996/13) and 3 May 1994 (S/PRST/1994/22). The Council takes note
of the views expressed at its debate on the subject ‘Strengthening Cooperation
with Troop-Contributing Countries’ at its 4257th meeting on 16 January 2001.
The Council recognizes the scope for further improvement in its relations with
troop-contributing countries and the need to work together with a common
purpose towards shared goals.
“The Security Council recognizes that in view of the increasing
complexity of peacekeeping operations, there is a need for a transparent threeway relationship between the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troopcontributing countries that will foster a new spirit of partnership, cooperation
and confidence.
“Recognizing that the experience and expertise of troop-contributing
countries in theatres of operation can greatly assist the planning process, the
Security Council reiterates its agreement to hold consultations with troopcontributing countries in a timely manner at different stages of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation, in particular when the Secretary-General has
identified potential troop-contributing countries for a new or ongoing
peacekeeping operation, during the implementation phase of an operation,
when considering a change to, or renewal of, or completion of a peacekeeping
mandate, or when a rapid deterioration in the situation on the ground threatens
the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
“The Security Council will seek to ensure that all private meetings as
provided for in resolution 1327 (2000) between members of the Council, the
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat are substantive, representative,
meaningful and provide for a full exchange of views. The Council stresses the
importance of full participation by all those involved and encourages troop01-23427 (E) 310101
`````````

S/PRST/2001/3

contributing countries to take the initiative to call for meaningful exchanges of
information. The President of the Council will provide, where appropriate, a
detailed report of consultations with the troop-contributing countries to the
Council.
“The Security Council stresses the usefulness of full and comprehensive
briefings by the Secretariat at private meetings with the troop-contributing
countries, including, where appropriate, military factors.
“The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to improve coordination and cooperation on peacekeeping issues within
the United Nations system and the Secretariat.
“The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to raise public
awareness globally of the positive contribution of peacekeeping operations and
the role played by peacekeepers from various troop-contributing countries.
“The Security Council acknowledges that the Secretariat must be able to
rely on sufficient human and financial resources to respond to the demands
placed on it. It underlines the importance of follow-up to the report of the
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2000/809) with a view to strengthening the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other relevant departments of the
Secretariat involved in peacekeeping.
“The Security Council reiterates that the problem of the commitment gap
with regard to personnel and equipment for peacekeeping operations requires
the assumption by all Member States of the shared responsibility to support
United Nations peacekeeping.
“The Security Council acknowledges that the delay in reimbursement
causes severe budgetary constraints to troop-contributing countries. It urges all
Member States to pay their assessed contributions in full and on time, so that
peacekeeping operations can stand on a solid financial basis.
“The Security Council decides to establish a Working Group of the
Whole on United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Working Group will
not replace the private meetings with the troop-contributing countries. The
Working Group will address both generic peacekeeping issues relevant to the
responsibilities of the Council, and technical aspects of individual
peacekeeping operations, without prejudice to the competence of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. Where appropriate, the Working
Group will seek the views of the troop-contributing countries, including
through meetings between the Working Group and the troop-contributing
countries, with a view to their views being taken into account by the Council.
“As a first step, the Working Group is tasked to undertake an in-depth
consideration of, inter alia, all the proposals made in the course of the
Council’s public meeting on 16 January 2001, including ways to improve the
three-way relationship between the Council, the troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat and to report to the Council by 30 April 2001. An
indicative list of all the ideas and proposals arising from the meeting on 16
January 2001 will be forwarded to the Working Group for its consideration.”

2
