UNITED NATIONS
.

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

2mr

NEW

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR
MEETING:

23 FEBRUf$j

\!&Pn,,

MAR2 5 1982

YORK

Uris&, COLLECTION

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/21 14) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President ......................
Adoption of the agenda ....................................
The situation in South-East Asia and its implications for international peace and
security. [Letter dated 22 February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America to the President of the Security Council (S/13111)].

1
1
1

2

S/PV.2114

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol ,indihtes a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January ‘1965, became fully operative on that date.
.
,..rri d$
CJ’if
-tr:&.,j
$4-j

2114th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 23 February 1979, at 5.30 p.m.
Presidenr:

Mr. Abdalla Yaccoub BISHARA

(Kuwait).

4. I should also like to express my gratitude to the
President of the Council for January, the representative of
Jamaica, Ambassador Mills, who, in a most difficult
situation, displayed the greatest possible diplomatic skill.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, -Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

5. The incursion of Chinese troops into Viet Nam represents a flagrant act of aggression. The actions of the Peking
leadership run counter to the principles of the United
Nations and flagrantly violate international law. The
invasion of Viet Nam is one more step towards the
implementation by Peking of its expansionist plans in
South-East Asia. It once again shows how irresponsible is
the attitude of the Chinese leadership with regard to the fate
of international peace and security.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2114)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international peace and security. [Letter dated 22
February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America to
the President of the Security Council (S/131 1l)]

6. The heroic Vietnamese people are properly and
worthily resisting the Chinese aggressor on their own soil.
They are relying on the help of their friends, all people of
goodwill and all peace-loving States. By no attempts or
devices will the Chinese leadership succeed in concealing
their criminal acts or avoiding responsibility for those
actions.

The meeting was called to order at 6.10 pm
Expression of thanks to the retiring President

7. The Security Council must make its contribution to
bridling the Chinese aggressors, and condemn the Chinese
aggression and call for the immediate withdrawal of
Chinese troops from the territory of Viet Nam.

1. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the members of the
Council, I should like at the outset to place on record the
appreciation -and admiration of all of us, and my own
personal thanks, for the able, skilful and efficient manner in
which my predecessor, Ambassador Mills, conducted the
business of the Council. Indeed, his successful imprint on
the work of the Council will remain indelible. The only
problem I have is that the work could not be finalized
during his term of office but has been left as a legacy for me.

8. On the basis of what I have said, the Soviet delegation
objects to the proposal of the delegation of the United States
and a number of other countries for consideration of the
situation in South-East Asia. Obviously, this proposal
cannot in any way facilitate the implementation of the tasks
facing the Council. Quite the contrary, it can only divert the
attention of the Council from the Chinese aggression and
thus make things easier for the aggressor in its attempts to
justify and shirk the responsibility for its actions.

Adoption of the agenda
2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them the provisional agenda for this meeting,
contained in document S/Agenda/21 14. Does any member
wish to comment on that agenda?

9. The Soviet delegation believes that the Council must
deal exclusively with the question of Chinese aggression
against Viet Nam. Only in this way can the Council measure
up to the tasks it faces and discharge its responsibilities in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

3. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, I
should like first of all most cordially to congratulate you, an
outstanding Kuwaiti diplomat, upon your discharge of the
important. functions of President of the Security Council.
Your well-merited authority and great diplomatic talent
and experience will undoubtedly facilitate the successful
performance of the important tasks that are facing you. I
should like also to express my conviction that the friendly
relations between the Soviet Union and Kuwait will be
successfully developed in the future too for the benefit of
bolh our countries and in the interests of the establishment
of a lasting and just peace on earth.

10. The PRESIDENT: The views just expressed by the
representative of the Soviet Union will be reflected in the
records of this meeting.
i 1. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (inteqvretation from Chinese):
The Chinese delegation holds that the Vietnamese
aggression against and occupation of Kampuchea has
gravely menaced the survival of a sovereign State and is the
root cause of the threat to the stability and peace in SouthEast Asia. Therefore, it should be considered with priority
1

as a separate item. However, in order not to devote too
much time to the discussion of the agenda item, and taking
into account the fact that under the present item the
question of Vietnamese aggression against and occupation
of Kampuchea will be considered anyhow, the Chinese
delegation will not oppose the present item and holds that
the question of Vietnamese aggression against and
occupation of Kampuchea should be considered frrst.

19. It was my impression during the informal meetings of
the Council that such an agenda commanded the consent of
the general majority of the members. If I hear no objections,
may I take it that the majority is in favour of such a
formulation and that therefore the agenda is adopted7
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in South-East Asia and its implications for
international peace and security. [Letter dated 22
February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America to the
President of the Security Council (S/13111)]

12. The PRESIDENT: The views of the representative of
China will be reflected in the records of this meeting.
13. Mr. HULINSKP
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from Russian): Mr. President, I should like first of all
cordially to congratulate you on your assumption of the
important post of President of the Security Council for
February. The Council has heady availed itself of your
qualities as an experienced diplomat, and will no doubt
have occasion to do so again. It is also a pleasure for me to
highlight the mutually advantageous relations between
Kuwait and Czechoslovakia, particularly in the economic,
scientific and technological fields, and the fact that these
relations are constantly developing and expanding in the
interests of the peoples of both countries.

20. The PRESIDENT:
I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Canada, Cuba, Democratic
Kampuchea, the German Democratic Republic, India,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Poland, Singapore, Thailand and
Viet Nam, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in conformity with the provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

14. I should like to express my gratitude to your predecessor, the representative of Jamaica, Mr. Mills, for his
skilful and highly responsible leadership of the Council last
month.

21. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, in
connexion with the request of the so-called representative of
Democratic Kampuchea to take part in the work of the
Council, the Soviet delegation would like to draw your
attention to document S/13090 of 16 February. That
document contains a statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea,
Mr. Hun Sen, to the effect that only the People’s
Revolutionary Council has the right to appoint representatives of Kampuchea to the United Nations. That being the
case, it is clear that the person claiming to represent
Democratic Kampuchea here in fact represents no one and
has no right to take part in the work of the Council.

IS. The Czechoslovak delegation cannot agree with the
provisional agenda as formulated in document S/Agenda/
2114. The state of affairs in Asia, which has arisen as a result
of the dastardly act of aggression of China against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, requires only one thing as a
matter of urgency: the immediate cessation of the Chinese
aggression. This is precisely what should be clearly spelled
out in the wording of the agenda item to be taken up by the
Council today. This precisely is what the Council should be
dealing with immediately. Otherwise it will only be accommodating the efforts at covering up the Chinese aggression
and even encouraging it.

22. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to restrond to the
observations of the representative of the USSk by saying
that his views and reservations will be reflected in the
records of this meeting.

16. In so far as concerns the attempts of the representative
of the People’s Republic of China to involve the Council in a
discussion of the internal affairs of the People’s Republic of
Kampuchea, surely everyone in this room knows that their
clear goal is to cover up the expansionist aims of_<=hina in
Asia. Surely everyone here must understand that the gentleman who presents himself as the representative of Kampuchea is acting on the directives of Peking in calling for a
meeting of the Council to consider the so-called Kampuchean question on the very eve of the invasion by Chinese
troops of the territory of the heroic Republic of Viet Nam,
sowing death and destruction. The purpose of this move
was clearly to help the leaders of China cover up the crime
they were preparing and their threat to world peace.

Mr. CHEN Chu (China)(interpretafionjFom
Chinese):
It is totally unreasonable for the representative of the Soviet
Union to raise the question of the so-called representation
of Kampuchea. As is known to all, Democratic Kampuchea is an independent sovereign State, a Member of
the United Nations and of the non-aligned movement.
The Government of Democratic Kampuchea is the sole
legal government of Kampuchea, and this has been confirmed by the General Assembly at its thirty-third and
previous sessions. The credentials of the delegation of
Democratic Kampuchea to the thirty-third session have
been examined by the Credentials Committee and
approved by the Assembly. In the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 11 January 1979 [s/13021], the credentials of
the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea to theSecurity
Council are considered in order. The legal status of Democratic Kampuchea was reaffirmed during the Council meetings held from 11 to 15 January(2108th-2112thme~tingsjto
consider the question of Viet Nam’s aggression against
Kampuchea. Now the representative of the USSR is again
making trouble in an attempt to prevent the delegation of
23.

17. Reverting to the auestion of the agenda for today’s
meeting, my &legation-believes that it should clearly spell
out the sole task before us: that of calling for the cessation of
Chinese aggression and the withdrawal of Chinese troops
from the territory of Viet Nam.
18. The PRESIDENT: The reservations and observations
of the representative of Czechoslovakia concerning the
agenda will be reflected in the records of this meeting.
2

should like to take the opportunity
to express my
delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
diligent and patient efforts during the past week in the
extensive consultations you have conducted with Council
members. Your skill and devotion to the principles that
should guide our work here have been amply demonstrated
already and, I am sure, will be of great assistance to us as we
continue our efforts towards peaceful solutions of difficult
problems during the rest of this month. I would add that,
though you will have served in a month of only 28 days, I
am-sure that you have utilized many more hours of the
month than most of us are called upon to do in our terms as
President. You have also spanned the globe in the scope of
your efforts as our President.

Democratic Kampuchea from participating in the meeting.
This is crude trampling upon the Charter of the United
Nations and gross contempt for the Security Council. The
Chinese delegation is firmly opposed to it. In our view, the
Council should invite the representative of Democratic
Kampuchea to participate in the deliberations of the Council in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and the provisional rules of procedure of the Council.
24. Just now, the representative of the Soviet Union
mentioned the so-called puppet organizations of Kampuchea known as “the Salvation Front”, “the People’s
Revolutionary Council” and “the People’s Republic”. This
is a political scheme on the part of the Soviet Union and Viet
Nam to use the United Nations to foster their puppets. As is
known to the whole world, the puppet organizations in
Kampuchea are all hired tools created single-handedly by
the Vietnamese authorities. Those who have now shown up
on the stage in Phnom Penh are nothing but a handful of
national scum and traitors of Kampuchea shielded by the
bayonets of the Vietnamese aggressor troops. The purpose
of the representative of the USSR in raising such a preposterous question is to invent a “legal” cover for Viet Nam’s
armed aggression and occupation of Kampuchea.

31. It is also a pleasure to take public note of the very
competent manner in which your predecessor, the representative of Jamaica, guided the Council’s business during the
month of January. He set a tine example for the rest of us to
follow throughout the year.
32. We presented to the Council the agenda now before it
because we felt that the very integrity of the Council wasat
stake, that there was a massive demonstration of military
power in South-East Asia and that the Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace under Article 24
of the Charter of the United Nations wasbeing placed very
much in question by what seemed to be inaction. I should :
like to say that we did not view this as inaction. We knew of
the tremendous private negotiations which you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-General were conducting. We
,
knew, in fact, of the bilateral consultations that were taking
place in many, many quarters both here and in capitals. We
certainly appreciate those efforts to mould a body of world
opinion privately on behalf of the peace and security of the
nations of our Organization.. But we still felt that it was
important to have a public discussion of this issue, and we
sought to cast it in the most objective terms possible. No
nation is named, nor can any inference be drawn from our
presentation of thii agenda item. We simply want to find
ways to limit the present bloodshed, the disaster, in SouthEast Asia.

25. This shows that the Soviet Union is the behind-thescenes boss of Viet Nam’s aggression against Kampuchea.
Those puppets can represent no one in Kampuchea but are
real agents of the Vietnamese authorities. Therefore, we are
firmly opposed to the Soviet attempt to impose the puppet
organizations of Viet Nam on the Security Council and to
create a legal cover for Viet Nam’s aggression against
Kampuchea.
26. The PRESIDENT: The views of the representative of
China will be reflected in the records of this meeting.
27. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I shall not reply to
the Chinese statement. It does not deserve our wasting any
time on it. I should merely like to make the following point:
If we are looking for puppets, they are sitting in Peking. It is
from there that they send telegrams to the United Nations in
the name of so-called Democratic Kampuchea.

33. The Charter charges the Security Council with primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. My Government has joined in the call
for the Council to meet because serious breaches of peace
have occurred in South-East Asia and because the threat of
broader conflict looms in that area. We firmly believe
that in such circumstances the Council must exercise its
responsibilities.

28. The PRESIDENT: We are now discussing procedural
matters. Everyone will be able at a later stage to dwell on the
substance of the item.
29. With the concurrence of the majority of the members
of the Council, I invite the representatives of Australia,
Canada, Cuba, Democratic Kampuchea, the German
Democratic Republic, India, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Poland, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

34. That the situation is dangerous cannot be denied. If we
cut through the rhetoric, the propaganda, the charges and
counter-charges of those involved, we are left with a simple,
but ominous, fact: over 100,000 Vietnamese troops remain
engaged in heavy fighting on the territory of Cambodia ’
despite all efforts of the international community to bring
an end to the conflict. As foreseen by many of us, this
situation has led to greatly increased tensions throughout
the region. And now we find an equal number of Chinese
troops engaged in military action on the’territory of Viet
Nam. The blood of soldiers and innocent civilians is being
shed on all sides. These actions have wide and dangerous
implications for the peace of Asia and indeed the whole
world.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Anderson (Australia).
Mr. Bar-on (Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Thiounn
Prasith (Democratic Kampuchea), Mr. Florin (German
Democratic Republic). Mr. Jaipal (India), Tmt Sri Zaiton
Ibrahiti’(Malqvst@, Mr. Francis (New Zeal@, Mr. Jaoszek
Cpokmc$, ~Mr. Koh (Singapore), Mr. GwuXawm
(ThaiIan
and Mr. ,Le Anh Kiet (Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor
taemyhe
sill?of the CouJlcildlamber.

30. Mr.. YOUNG (United States of America): Before I
addressmyself to the question before the Security Council, I
3

*

community with regard to the violations of peace that have
occurred. It can encourage the parties to move the dispute
to the negotiating table, and it can help persuade the parties
that military action is not a solution to existing problems.

35. Only a few weeks ago the Council was called together
to hear a complaint about the Vietnamese attack on
Cambodia. Thirteen members of the Council expressed the
will of the international community that foreign forces
should be withdrawn from Cambodia and that further
efforts were needed to reduce the tensions in the area to
prevent a still broader conflict. A veto prevented the
Council from acting. Today we see the results of the more
profound failure-the failure of those involved to heed the
call of the overwhelming majority of the Council.

42. What action should the Council therefore take? In our
view, it should call for the following measures: an
immediate cease-fire between the forces in conflict; the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from the territories of Viet
Nam and Cambodia; a commitment by all parties to settle
their differences by peaceful means and the beginning of
practical diplomatic processes to that end; international
efforts to assist the parties in reaching a more lasting
resolution of their dispute, perhaps under the auspices of
the Secretary-General. In this connexion the United States
welcomes the Secretary-General’s offer to make his good
offices available. We believe that during our discussions the
Council should explore this and other possible efforts which
might lead to an end to the conflict.

36. The United States has done everything possible to
head off the dangers posed by the conflict. We have spoken
out publicly. We have expressed our concerns directly to the
Governments of Viet Nam, the Soviet Union and China
about the dangers of continued and perhaps expanded
fighting.
37. In our earlier deliberations, I pointed out that the
Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia brought into play a
number of provisions of the Charter, including the
following: one State must not use force against the territory
of another; a State must not interfere in the affairs of
another State; if there is a dispute between States, it must be
settled peacefully.

43. We urge the Council, as well as Member States not on
the Council, to give serious consideration to ways in which
the international community can assist. We urge the parties
directly involved to act with restraint and in accordance
with the principles of the Charter. We urge all others to
exercise similar restraint in order to ensure that passions will
not be further inflamed and the con&t not further
broadened. We fervently hope, and we believe, that the
Council can play a key role in the solution of this serious
and dangerous situation, so that there can be an end to the
fighting and suffering that have plagued the region of
South-East Asia for far too long.

38. These provisions apply to the present attack by China
on Viet Nam’just as they apply to the earlier invasion of
Cambodia by Viet Nam. The new conflict, coming so soon
after the overwhelming majority of the Council expressed
their strong views on the Vietnamese invasion, is a further
serious blow to the proposition that Member States are
bound by their participation in the Organization to live up
to the precepts of the Charter.

44. The PRESIDENT: I appreciate the reference of the
representative of the United States to the efforts that have
been exerted since the beginning of this week.

39. We are aware that there have been many incidents
along the frontier between Viet Nam and China and that the
two countries have been in serious disagreement for some
time. But this in no way gives China the right to attack Viet
Nam, any more than Viet Nam’s dispute with Cambodia
gave Viet Nam the right to overrun that country. In both
cases the obligation of China and Viet Nam was to involve
the mechanisms for peaceful settlement provided under the
Charter.

45. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation porn Russian): The whole world
has witnessed the flagrant crime committed by the Maoist
rulers of China against a sovereign socialist State, a Member
of the United Nations. Divisions of Chinese aggressorswith
artillery support, tanks and aircraft have undertaken a
massive invasion of the territory of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam. They began and are continuing to wage an
unprovoked aggressive war, sowing death and destruction
everywhere.

40. My Government’s position has been to urge restraint
and the peaceful resolution of outstanding issues. This
position applies also to the conflict between China and Viet
Nam. We have stated firmly that we will not take sides in
thii conflict. We seek peace and a stable system of
independent States in South-East Asia. We want to see an
end to the present fighting, an end to the threats to regional
peace and, above all, an end to the suffering of innocent
people in the region. In this connexion, I should like to
restate our concern for the human rights of all the,peoples of
Indo-China, peoples that have suffered both from outside
military
action and from repression from within.
Concerning Cambodia, the United States position remains
that the country should be one which is truly independent
and neutral, with a freely chosen Government which
represents the will of the Cambodian people and respects
their human rights.

46. In connexion with this criminal act of aggression on
the part of China, the Government of the Soviet Union
issued a statement on 18 February reading as follows:
/The speaker read out the statement contained in the annex
to document S/13OPP.j
47. The Peking rulers who have sent troops against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam have trampled on the
Charter of the United Nations. With contemptuous
disregard, they have rejected the serious warnings of
progressive and peace-loving world public opinion.
Instigated by international reaction, they have plunged into
an escalation of armed adventures, and it is precisely this
step that clearly demonstrates to everyone that the heirs of
the piratical, chauvinistic policy of the “Great Helmsman**
are in the same ranks as the most diehard enemies of peace,
freedom and the independence of peoples, and the enemies
of the whole of mankind.

41. It is the view of my Government that the Council,
backed by the fundamental principles of the Charter, to
which all Members of the Organization are committed, can
and should express the senseof concern of the international
4

48. As is rightly pointed out in the statement issued on 17
February by the Government of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam:

to prepare for the unleashing of armed aggression against
the Vietnamese people. It is quite futile for the Chinese
authorities to attempt, as it were, to use “problems” they
have themselves fabricated to justify their aggressive
actions. No one invaded China. No one violated its frontier.
The armed incursion by Chinese troops into the territory of
Viet Nam is the logical result of a policy of provocation and
expansion that the present Chinese rulers, who have
inherited the great-Power policy of Mao Tsetung, have now
been pursuing for many years with regard to South and
South-East Asia as a whole, and with regard to Viet Nam in
particular.

“It is obvious that the Chinese rulers, after repeated
failures in their hostile policy against Viet Nam, have
stepped into the ruts of the Chinese feudalists, the
imperialists and the colonialists in launching an
aggressive war against Viet Nam, an independent and
sovereign country.” [S/13097, annex/
49. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and its people
only recently, after shedding their blood in a long, arduous
and heroic struggle, won the right to an independent
existence and to peaceful development. And now once
again they have been subjected to aggression, this time at
the hands of the Peking hegemonists.

55. The memorandum of 14 February from the Foreign
Ministry of Viet Nam states clearly that the Chinese side
began to violate the territorial integrity of Viet Nam as far
back as 1957. Those provocative acts increased perceptibly
in 1974. Between 1974 and 1977 there were 2,158 casesof
violation, including 1,355 provocations on the part of
armed Chinese patrols. From 1957 to 1977, Chinese vessels
made more than 1,500 incursions into the territorial waters
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. As far back as 1974,
Chinese armed forces seized the Vietnamese Paracel
Islands, Further escalation of atrocities by the Peking
hegemonlsts continued in 1978, when they undertook 583
armed incursions into Vietnamese territory. In January and
during the first week of February this year, the number of
such cases rose to 230.

50. The memorandum of 14 February from the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam bee S/23093] adduces facts
which show that the armed invasion by Chinese troops of
the territory of Viet Nam was prepared beforehand. That
invasion is a constituent element of the general over-all
expansionist policy of Peking with regard to neighbouring
States, and primarily with regard to the developing
countries of South and South-East Asia. The aggression
against the So&hit Republic of Viet Nam has created a
direct threat to peace in that area and throughout the world.
51. The Chinese aggression against Viet Nam confiis
the accuracy of the statements of those who exposed the
great-Power chauvinistic and truly hegemonistic essenceof
the policy of the Peking rulers and warned of the dangers of
the expansionist and provocative line they adopt in
international affairs, including their attitude towards Viet
Nam and other neighbours of China.

56. At the same time, using their puppets in Kampuchea,
the Peking leadership opened a new front in southern Viet
Nam two years ago. Units of the Pol Pot army equipped
with Chinese weapons and aided by thousands of Chinese
instructors have been attacking the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam. What they were banking on wasthat the Pol PotIeng Sary clique would involve Viet Nam in a wearying war
of attrition and, when the bloody pro-Peking Fascist regime
of Kampuchea collapsed, there collapsed along with it the
Chinese plan to impose on Viet Nam a war on two fronts; it
was then that Peking decided to go all out.

52. What else could we expect of rulers who attempt to
put into practice the inhumane Maoist concepts of the
usefulness of a new world war, of the need for China to seize
neighbouring territories, to impose through violence
Maoist models of bloody Fascist tyranny such as the
tyranny of Pol Pot? What good could we expect from those
who dream of the gradual expansion of the Celestial
Empire, that is, China, beginning first of all with their
neighbours and in the long run, as was put by Mao Tsetung,
continuing with the conquest of the whole world.

57. In all this we clearly discern one consistent line, a line
that is typical of any aggressor. According to the American
press, on the eve of China’s invasion of the Socialist
Republic of Vit Nam there were concentrations of Chinese
troops amounting to 180,000 men at the Sine-Vietnamese
frontier supported by units of tactical air and tank forces.
The increase of the Chinese armed forces along the border
was recognized openly in the American press, and that
increase went so far that the escalation of border crossings
and even direct Chinese incursions became almost
inevitable. The inevitability of the attack by the Chinese
aggressor against Viet Nam was forecast by the American
press, not only in connexion with Peking’s military
preparations along the border but also taking into account
the unbridled statements made by the guest from China, in
particular his cynical threats to teach Viet Nam a “bloody
lesson”.

53. If anyone still is not inclined to take seriously these
truly insane ideas and practices of the Chinese leadership, in
particular their recent acts of reckless provocation, and
finally the unleashing of an aggressive war against Viet
Nam, surely this must give anyone who wants peace pause
to reflect on the real danger of the piratical designs of the
Peking militarists. The most urgent and decisive measures
must be taken to erect a reliable defensive screen against the
armed adventures of the Chinese expansionists, so as to
repulse any attempt by them in future to encroach on the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of other countries and
peoples.

58. Was it an accident that these events led to the attack by
China against Viet Nam? It was no accident. The hostile
aggressive policy of the Peking leadership with regard to
Viet Nam did not begin today or yesterday. Its roots lie in
the expansionist and annexation& ideology of Maoism,
and this is true not only with regard to Viet Nam. There is
no country neighbouring on China against whose territory
the Peking hegemonists would not unleash their force. It is

54. Surelv evervone realizes now that the militarv
prcparatio& by Peking along the Chinese-Vietnames’k
frontier and its ever-growing aggressive actions have one
definite purpose: to exert crude military pressure on the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, to intimidate its people, to
fan the rampant chauvinism in China itself and, in this way,
5
‘i

the Peking authorities, for the purpose of further increasing pressure, started to place those deceived, misled
people right along the frontiers with Laos and Viet Nam.
Now it is obvious to all that the fuss raised by Peking about
the problem they invented, necessarily led to armed
provocations and subsequently to the unleashing of war
against Viet Nam.

not only a matter of the expansionist statements of Mao
Tsetung and his heirs or of maps published in China on
which whole countries in South and South-East Asia are
marked as “lost Chinese territories”. Long ago the Maoist
“defenders” of the small and medium-sized countries
turned from written or verbal aggression to concrete
aggression. There are many facts. It is certain that China has
seized and occupied other territories. It is certain that China
has created and maintained armed anti-governmental
groups in other countries. One has to be a die-hard
chauvinist, a thorough hypocrite, a hegemonist and totally
without shame to maintain official relations with a given
country assuring its Government of friendship and good
intentions, as Peking has done, and at the same time
instigate armed struggle and warfare against that Govemment in order to implant an obedient r@ime acceptable to
China.

61. We learn from information agencies that military
units have been thrown into this war which have been
specially formed by Peking from the ethnic Chinese who
had been provoked into leaving Viet Nam. Attempts are
being made to turn those confused people into cut-throats.
Instead of receiving the promised paradise they are actually
being given the role of cannon-fodder. Who can say now
that these new campaigns with regard to the Chinese from
beyond the frontier will not be used by Peking also against
other countries.

59. As reported recently in the press, the Chinese special
services have carried out an operation the purpose of which
is to create a “corridor” in South and South-East Asia
which would serve as a channel for intervention in the
internal affairs of States situated there. It wasalso reported
that Thailand had been chosen as a door to that “corridor”,
which, according to the designs of Peking wilI run from
Thailand through Burma to the Indian states and then,
when they have seized large parts of the state of Assam, it
will border on Tibet. That plan is also connected with the
training of gangs which are infiltrating neighbouring countries. Asia Week, for example, in an article entitled ‘What is
Brewing” reproduced reports of Rangoon papers that are
reminiscent of the frontier clashes of the time of the Second
World War. In an article written in 1978 we find reference to
to&y’s activities, to an undeclared war waged by Peking for
a number of years against certain neighbouring countries.
The press agency of a neighbouring country described the
true intentions of the Peking hegemonists in South-East
Asia in the following terms:

62. The recent Chinese guest of the United States in the
course of his visit to the United States and Japan openly
uttered arrogant threats against the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam. That was just a sounding out of the political
situation.
63. The Chinese are of the opinion that international
standards are for others and that the Chinese leaders can
take it upon themselves to act as world policemen, to teach a
lesson to Viet Nam, to teach a “bloody lesson” to Hanoi. It
was the typical device of an aggressor when the Chinese
authorities, after the invasion of Viet Nam, asserted that the
fighting was on the territory of China. Then, contradicting
their earlier fabrications, they talked about the so-called
beginning of the withdrawal of Chinese troops from the
territory of Viet Nam while all the time the Chinese
aggressors were continuing their offensive on Vietnamese
territory. That is typical gangsterism in international affairs.
64. After all. are these not the same actions on the part of
the aggressor-as we witnessed in 1962 when the Chinese
militarists seized a part of Indian territory which they still
occupy. The same Chinese leader was delighted with the
encouragement he received from the speeches delivered in
the West in connexion with his invasion of Viet Nam. The
piratical intrusion of ffie Chinese militarists into Viet Nam
has shown once again that Peking views South-East Asia as
a zone in which it would like to establish its own domination
so as to use it as a spring-board for the conquest of the
whole of Asia. Such plans are easier to implement when
permanent tension exists in the region, when countries are
weak, helpless and hostile to each other. Peking is trying to
do everything in its power to create that state of affairs in the
area.

“At the present time Chinese military potential is
insufficient for Peking to establish its military control
over this region. But the Maoists have by no means
renounced the fundamental principles of their greatPower policy.,The Peking strategists do not conceal their
desires for and claims to more than 200 islands in the
southern seasso that, having seized them, they can lord it
over the seaways which are of vital importance to so
many countries.‘*
The authors of these words quite naturally have come to the
conclusion that the ambitions of the Maoists are contrary to
the interests of the peace and security’ of the peoples,
particularly in Asia. The aggression in Viet Nam is just the
logical result of those reactionary ambitions.

65. By reason of its expansionist ambitions, the Peking
leadership did not want the creation of a unified Viet Nam.
The liberation of the south and the formation of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam undermined the designs and
calculations of the Chinese leadership to bring under its
control the whole of Indo-China and from there to begin the
realization of the dream of Mao Tsetung: to reach the
Straits of Malacca in 8 to 15 years. Peking has exerted crude
pressure in its attempt to impose its own policy on Viet
Nam. When it became clear that the Vietnamese people had
no intention of being a tool for the implementation of
Maoist policy but was actually liable to become a powerful
obstacle to the aggression of Peking in South-East Asia, the

60. In Peking’s plans for expansion to the south by no
means the least important place is occupied by the use of the
Huatziao, persons of Chinese descent. The peoples of the
countries of South-East Asia, where more than 20 million
Huatziao live, once again have realized from the example of
Viet Nam what such-a policy leads to. In order to unleash
the anti-Vietnamese campaign, to attempt to influence the
independent policy of Viet Nam, to interfere with the
constructive labour of the Vietnamese people, Peking has
resorted to lying assertions about the “persecution” of
persons of Chinese descent. After these subversive actions
had provoked the exodus of so many Huatxiao into China,
6

Chinese rulers began to create difficulties for the socialist
changes and reforms undertaken in .Viet Nam and
attempted to exert pressure on Viet Nam. They cut
economic and other ties completely and began to stir up
around Viet Nam an atmosphere of hostility and, with the
help of the bloody Pol Pot clique, to intensify military
provocations including their unleashing of an aggressive
war against Viet Nam.
66. In order to justify its actions, the Chinese leadership,
like any aggressor, has had to resort to lying, slander and
fabrications. China attempts to accuse Viet Nam of frontier
incidents, and so on. But who here or anywhere else could
possibly believe such fallacious nonsense? Let them not
attempt to mislead people or treat them as fools. An
extremely dangerous situation has been created in SouthEast Asia by the Peking aggressors who have invaded Viet
Nam. After the launching of that aggression and after the
numerous acts of criminality against other peoples,
particularly after the barbarous, Maoistic genocide in
Kampuchea, one does not need to be endowed with much
imagination to understand how great a nightmare or
tragedy might befall the peoples who live in the close
vicinity of China if the Chinese adventures are not properly
resisted and the aggressor severely punished.
67. The whole world is indignant and up in arms at the
unbridled actions of the Maoist rulers of China. All of
progressive mankind condemns the Chinese aggressors and
expressessolidarity with the Vietnamese people, which has
quite a few reliable friends in the world. The friends of Viet
Nam will not leave it in the lurch. They will help it in its
struggle against the totally unprovoked aggression of
China. It would be an unforgivable error in this situation to
take a neutral position with regard to the reckless, senseless
policy of Peking and to wait until such times as the danger
acquires irreversible and deadly proportions. All people
who really cherish peace and the freedom and independence
of peoples and who want calmly to engage in creative labour
must combine their efforts and call a halt to the exceedingly
dangerous adventures of the Maoists and other instigators
of war who are playing into the hands of Peking in its
hegemonistic ambitions.
68. I should like with the utmost seriousness to draw the
attention of all the members of the Council to the fact that
the Chinese aggression has created a serious threat not only
to peace and security in that region but throughout the
world. The aggression of China is an act of defiance against
the whole of the international community. Any connivance
at such a policy is connivance at violence and d&tat,
connivance at attempts on the part of the Chinese leaders to
plunge the world into the abyss of a new deadly war.
69. The Security Council, which bears such important
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security,
must categorically condemn the Chinese Government,
which has ‘flagrantly violated the Charter of the United
Nations by the aggressive war it has launched against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The Council must take
decisive measures to put an end to the aggressive actions of
the Chinese Government. The Council must demand the
immediate withdrawal of the aggressive forces of the Peking
militarists from the territory of Viet Nam and must demand
unswerving respect from China for the independence,
_ sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam. The Council should call upon all Member

States to ceaseall supplies of arms to the People’s Republic
of China as. well as the transfer of any technology which
may be used for military purposes., The Council should also
demand that China should make full reparation for the
material damage inflicted on the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam as a result of the armed invasion of Vietnamese
territory by Chinese troops.
70. Guided by our duty immediately to halt the aggression of China against Viet Nam, the delegation of the Soviet
Union intends, together with the delegation of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, to introduce for the
consideration of the Council a draft resolution [S/I31171
containing the points which I have just enumerated. The
delegation of the Soviet Union expresses the hope that
members will support that draft resolution. Those who are ’
directing the policy of Peking must stop war. Peace and not
war-that is what the peoples of the world, including the
,Chinese people, have a vital interest in. The Council must
do its duty and force China to cease its aggression and to
withdraw its troops from Viet Nam.
71. Mr. &GIRD
(Norway): Mr. President, I shouldlike
to congratulate you on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council and to assure you of the
full co-operation of the Norwegian delegation. The Council
is in good hands under your leadership, as has been
demonstrated so clearly during the last week.
72. I should also like to take this opportunity, to
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Mills of
Jamaica, for his admirable conduct of the Council’s work
during the month of January.
73. For decades the seeds of violence sown in Indo-China
have generated further violence and brought endless
suffering and destruction to that region. Less than two
months ago, the Council was actively seized of Viet Nam’s
armed intervention in Kampuchea and interference in the
internal affairs of that country in violation of the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The present armed conflict between China and
Viet Nam is yet another manifestation of this vicious cycle
of violence The continuation of armed hostilities in SouthEast Asia may lead to a widening of the conflict with
unpredictable repercussions in the region and beyond. It
may thus endanger international peace and security.
74. For these reasons, the Government of Norway
considers it appropriate that the Security Council should
react and take immediate action to secure the restoration of
peace and stability in South-East Asia. Norway has
therefore joined other countries in requesting an urgent
meeting of the Council.

.

75. The Norwegian Government wishes to reiterate its
firmly held view that the threat or use of force cannot be
accepted as a meansfor solving disputes between nations. It
wishes to re-cmphasize the obligation of States Members of
the United Nations to resolve disputes by peaceful means.
76. Today, we repeat our appeal to Viet Nam to withdraw
its forces from Kampuchea.
77. We appeal to China to cease forthwith all military
operations against Viet Nam and to withdraw its forces
from that country. These operations are in clear violation of

’

an end to the vicious cycles of violence referred to by the
Secretary-General in his statement of 18 February as a first
step towards allowing the parties to begin settling their
disputes through peaceful means, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter.

fundamental principles of international law and of the
Charter of the United Nations. They cannot in any way be
justified.
78. An end to all hostilities in South-East Asia is urgently
required. At the same time, it is imperative to lay a
foundation for a peaceful settlement. Thii requires the
unconditional withdrawal of all foreign forces from the
respective areas of conflict and full respect for the territorial
integrity and political independence of the States involved.
The withdrawal of all forces is of paramount importance,
and delays by any party for whatever reason will further
intensify the existing tensions.

85. Having in mind this primary aim, we appeal to all
countries outside the area to continue to exercise the
restraint they have been showing,in dealing with the present
situation and to avoid taking any action that might lead to a
widening of the conflict. We also address the most pressing
appeal for the immediate cessation of hostilities and the
withdrawal of all foreign troops to their own internationally
rewgnized boundaries.

79. In the present situation, the utmost restraint is called
for on the part of all countries. The Norwegian Government
urges all States to do their utmost to restore peace in SouthEast Asia.

86. In the present circumstances we believe that the good
offices offered by the Secretary-General would be of
invaluable importance.

80. Mr. FU’ISCHER
PEREIRA (Portugal): Mr.President, I should like to begin by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
present month. You have succeeded a highly qualified
President, the representative of Jamaica, whose endeavours
towards the fulfilment of our common goals we all admired
during his arduous term of offrce. Your task has been no
easier and I should like to commend you, on behalf of my
delegation, for the highly competent manner in which you
have conducted the long and very difficult consultations
that preceded the present meeting of the Council.

87. Violence only breeds violence. Let the Council make it
clear, on behalf of the United Nations, that the use of force
will never be condoned nor accepted as a means for settling
disputes between States.
88. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (inrerprerurionfrom Chinese):
Mr. President, first of ail allow me to extend you my warm
congratulations on your assumption of the offrce of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current month.
At the same time, I should like to take this opportunity to
extend warm congratulations
to Ambassador Mills,
President of the Council for the last month, for the
outstanding way in which he performed his duties.

81. Sharing the deep concern of the international community, Portugal decided, together with other members, to
request an urgent meeting of the Council, for it seemed clear
to us that the world conscience would never understand or
condone our failure to meet and openly discuss the situation
prevailing in South-East Asia since January last.

89. Now, I should like to make the following observations
on the relevant questions.
90. First. last Januarv. at the reauest of Democratic
Kampuchea, the Security Council heid urgent meetings to
consider the grave situation of Viet Nam’s armed
aggression against Kampuchea with Soviet support. At the
meetings, all the representatives who spoke, except for the
Soviet Union and a handful of its followers, strongly
condemned Viet Nam’s serious crimes of flagrant armed
aggression against Democratic Kampuchea, sternly refuted
the absurd argument of a so-called civil war in Kampuchea
invented by Viet Nam to cover up its armed aggression
against Kampuchea, pointed out the absolute inviolability
of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Democratic Kampuchea and called on the Vietnamese
authorities to put an immediate end to the aggression and
withdraw all their aggressor forces from Democratic
Kampuchea without any delay. All the non-aligned
members of the Council co-sponsored a draft resolution to
this effect [S/13027]. As a result of the veto arbitrarily used
by the Soviet representative, this draft, which had won the
overwhelming majority of 13 votes, was not adopted.
Consequently, the Council was rendered impotent vis-a-vis
the extremely grave situation of Viet Nam’s undisguised
armed invasion and military occupation of Democratic
Kampuchea, a sovereign State and Member of the United
Nations.

82. The most recent developments in that area seem,
unfortunately, to confirm that what we had feared would
take place after the Vietnamese intervention in Kampuchea
is actually taking place, that is, an increasing escalation of
hostilities that will have unpredictable consequences. A
month ago in this very chamber we expressed our deep
dismay at the endless and ever-growing process of
disagreement and friction between countries which until
quite recently appeared to be friends and allies, friction
which degenerated into border incidents and finally
culminated in military invasions.
83. Since then the whole situation in South-East Asia has
only deteriorated still further with the military action taken
by China against Viet Nam, and it has now become
increasingly evident that the situation is fraught with danger
not only for those directly involved but also for the
neighbouring countries and indeed for world peace, the
defence and maintenance of which is the primary
responsibility of this body.
84. However, I should like to point out that we do not
look upon the Security Council as a judicial organ, to be
called upon only to pass judgement on a certain complaint
or question and hence bound to confine itself to that
question. No matter how distant we are from the affected
area or how little involved in the conflict and no matter how
uncomfortable our task may be, we are all here on behalf of
the whole community of nations to try to find ways to put

91. Thereafter, the Vietnamese authorities felt emboldened and continued to expand their aggression against
Democratic Kampuchea with the full backing of the Soviet
Union. Recently, the Vietnamese authorities have sent
another three divisions to Kampuchea to reinforce their
8

armed aggression against Democratic Kampuchea and to
suppress the resisting Kampuchean soldiers and civilians.
The Vietnamese aggressor forces have occupied large tracts
of Kampuchean territory and have raped, burned, killed
and committed all sorts of crimes wherever they have gone.
With their homes burned and destroyed, the Kampuchean
people have been plunged into misery and suffering and
even the women and children have not been spared. The
great losses inflicted upon the Kampuchean people in terms
of life and property are beyond measure. The Vietnamese
authorities’ flagrant and expanded armed invasion and
military occupation of Democratic Kampuchea and their
large-scale bloody slaughter of Kampuchean soldiers and
civilians who are resisting them constitute a gross violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and of the elementary
norms of international law seriously threatening the peace
and security of various countries in South-East Asia, of the
Asia-Pacific region and of the world as a whole. This is an
insolent challenge to humanity’s cause of peace and justice,
to the Security Council and to the entire membership of the
United Nations. All this has aroused the utmost indignation
of the people of the world and of those countries and people
that uphold justice.

95. An abundance of irrefutable facts have already
demonstrated that this war was started single-handedly by
the Vietnamese authorities and that it is a war of aggression
and annexation against Kampuchea where Viet Nam has
thrown in about 15 divisions of its regular forces. The.
notorious so-called United Front for the National Salvation
of Kampuchea and the puppet regime, the so-called
People’s Republic are nothing more than a fig-leaf, hastily
patched together and full of holes, designed to cover up the
truth about Viet Nam’s aggression. The Vietnamese
authorities painstakingly painted the insignia of the
Kampuchean puppet regime on their tanks, but this will in
no way change the irrefutable fact of Viet Nam’s aggression
against Kampuchea. The Vietnamese authorities’ attempt
to cover up the bloody truth by means of clumsy political
tricks can only produce the opposite result of further
revealing their guilt.
96. Thirdly, we pointed out long ago that it has been the
long-premeditated plan of the Vietnamese authorities to
annex Democratic Kampuchea. Their military aggression
against Democratic Kampuchea is an important step in
their efforts to establish an “Indo-Chinese federation” and
in their quest for regional hegemonism. After the war of
resistance against the United States, relying on its military
supremacy over the weak neighbouring States and relying
on the massive support lent by the Soviet Union, Viet Nam
got carried away by its inflated ambition and immediately
embarked upon the road of external expansion. It first of all
brought Laos under its complete control by means of a large
army of 50,000 men and hundreds of thousands of advisers
of various descriptions, and at the same time stepped up its
subversive activities against Kampuchea before openly
launching a war of aggression. Moreover, it is making
further efforts to realize its wild scheme of achieving
dominance in the entire South-East Asian region. And the
so-called treaty of peace and friendship signed by Pham
Van Dong and Viet Nam’s puppet in Kampuchea is
precisely a further exposure of Viet Nam’s ambition to
bring Kampuchea formally into its “Indo-Chinese
federation” and to use it as a stepping-stone for expansion
towards other countries in South-East Asia.

92. In the face of such grave crimes committed bv the
Vietnamese aggressors, whit should be the course of action
for the Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security7 Thii is an extremely serious test. We hold that the
Council would be seriously remiss in its duties should it fail
to continue its consideration of thii matter and adopt
measures in earnest. Therefore, the Chinese delegation
firmly supports the just demand of the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea to hold an urgent meeting of the
Council and to continue the consideration of Viet Nam’s
aggression against Democratic Kampuchea. In our view,
the Council should take swift and effective measures to halt
the Vietnamese authorities’ armed invasion of Democratic
Kampuchea and put an immediate end to their military
occupation of Kampuchea.
93. Secondly, it should be pointed out that, while
expanding their aggression against Kampuchea, the
Vietnamese authorities are resorting to political tricks in an
attempt to legalize their crime of aggression. This is, of
course, futile. Recently, Viet Nam’s Premier Pham Van
Dong led a large delegation of military and civilian otJicials
to Phnom Penh for an “official visit” and hastily concluded
a so-called “Treaty of peace, friendship and co-operation*’
of which the master dictated the terms and which the lackey
duly signed. The criminal intention of this treaty is to
deceive the public and to legahze Viet Nam’s annexation
and permanent military occupation of Kampuchea.

97. On the other hand, it is because of the aid and
abetment of the Soviet hegemonists that the Vietnamese
authorities have become so reckless and frenzied in pushing
external expansion and regional hegemonism. The one
seeks the patronage of the big hegemonists in order to
achieve its own regional hegemonism; the other wants to
use the small hegemonists to serve the needs of its .global
hegemonism. Therefore, impelled by their respective selfinterests, the two have swiftly joined in an alliance and
colluded in all sorts of crimes. Though flaunting the
signboard of non-alignment, Viet Nam has in fact long
degenerated into a pawn of the Soviet hegemonists and
another Cuba, in Asia. In its global strategy, the Soviet
Union has long cast a covetous eye on South-East Asia,
which occupies the important position of being the link
between the Pacific and the Indian Ocean. In order to
control this strategic region, the Soviet Union has in recent
years drastically augmented the strength of its Pacific fleet,
increased its standing fleets in the Indian Ocean, and put
together and energetically .peddled the “Asian security
system**. Viet Nam invaded Kampuchea by using the
planes, artillery and tanks provided by the Soviet Union,
and the Soviet Union wants to control South-East Asia
through Viet Nam. In so doing, it will link up the activities

94. In a different sense, the Treaty amounts to a voluntary
admission by the Vietnamese authorities that it is the
Vietnamese aggressor forces which carried out the armed
invasion and military occupation of Democratic Kampuchea and that they intend permanently to occupy
Kampuchea. The Treaty has also shown that the puppet
regime installed by the Vietnamese authorities by means of
tanks, guns and bayonets cannot survive a single day
without the protection of the Vietnamese aggressor forces.
This is the essence of the so-called “Treaty of peace,
friendship and co-operation”. No one in the world will
believe the outrageous lies spread by the Vietnamese
authorities about the war in Kampuchea being a “civil
war”.
9

of the Soviet Union in seeking hegemony in the Pacific with
those in the Indian Ocean, thus seriously threatening the
peace and security in the vast area of Asia, the Pacific and
the Indian Ocean. Such a state of affairs naturally cannot
but cause serious concern among the countries in SouthEast Asia and the Asia-Pacific region, as well as among all
the countries and people that uphold justice and cherish
independence.
98. It should also be pointed out that, since the war of
resistance against the United States, the Vietnamese
authorities, in disregard of the sufferings of their own
people, have not adopted a policy of national rehabilitation
and peaceful development, but have instead immediately
embarked upon a road of militarist adventures abroad,
invading Kampuchea, opposing China and threatening
South-Fast Asia. At home, they have brutally suppressed
the people and levied excessive taxes on them and, as a
result, the national economy is in grave difficulty. There is a
shortage of grain, people do not have enough to eat and lead
an unstable life, and many of the inhabitants have gone
abroad and become refugees. The outrageous acts of the
Vietnamese authorities have further deepened the already
extremely serious political and economic crises they are
facing at home. The conduct of the Vietnamese authorities
also runs counter to the interests of the Vietnamese people.
99. Fourthly, the Chinese delegation strongly condemns
the serious crimes committed by the Vietnamese authorities
with the support of the Soviet Union in their continued
escalation of armed invasion and military occupation of
Democratic Kampuchea, and unswervingly supports the
just struggle of the Kampuchean Government, soldiers and
civilians in valiantly resisting the Vietnamese aggressors.
We hold that, faced with such an extremely serious situation
caused by Viet Nam’s invasion of Kampuchea, the Security
Council, proceeding from the interests of ‘defending the
Charter of the United Nations and maintaining world peace
and security, should, without delay, adopt urgent and
effective measures, so as to halt Vietnamese aggression,
uphold justice and ensure the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Kampuchea.
100. The Chinese delegation entirely supports the fourpoint appeal contained in the telegram addressed on 12
February 1979 by Khieu Samphan, Chairman of the State
Presidium of Democratic Kampuchea to all heads of State
and Government [S/13089J:
(a) To continue to expose and condemn Viet Nam for
its aggression and invasion of Democratic Kampuchea, call
on Viet Nam to stop such actions and withdraw all its
armed forces from Kampuchea, and respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kampuchea and the right of the Kampuchean people to decide
their own destiny;

leadership of the Government of Democratic Kampuchea,
the sole legal Government of Kampuchea.
101. The Chinese delegation maintains that the Security
Council should take immediate action in accordance with
the above-mentioned four-point appeal to condemn sternly
the Vietnamese authorities’ crimes of aggression and
demand an immediate end to their military actions of
aggression aghinst Democratic Kampuchea and withdraw
forthwith all their military forces from Kampuchean
territory.
102. Although the Vietnamese aggressor forces have
temporarily occupied a great number of cities and towns in
Kampuchea, this does not mean the end of the war. The
Kampuchean people’s war of resisting the Vietnamese
aggressors and defending the country has entered a new
stage. Under the leadership of the Government of
Democratic Kampuchea, the heroic Kampuchean people
and revolutionary army holding high the banner of great
national unity and patriotism, will form the broadest
national democratic and patriotic united front and wage a
protracted people’s war. The Kampuchean people are
united as one in their fearless fight against the common
enemy. Every day, everywhere, they are dealing heavy
blows to the Vietnamese aggressorsand scoring ever greater
victories. They have both the determination and the ability
to drive the Vietnamese aggressors out of Kampuchea.
Truth and justice are on the side of the Kampuchean people.
The sympathy and support of the peace-loving and justiceupholding countries and people in the world are with the
Kampuchean people. The Vietnamese authorities will most
certainly come to the ignominious end of complete defeat.
Final victory surely belongs to the Kampuchean people,
who cherish the independence of their country and who are
valiantly resisting the aggressors.
103. With reference to the question of the SinoVietnamese border conflict, which is the sole making of the
Vietnamese authorities, the Chinese delegation deems it
necessary, first of all, to stress that Viet Nam’s massive
armed aggression and military occupation of Democratic
Kampuchea is a question entirely different in nature from
China’s being compelled to make a limited counter-attack
in defence of the Chinese frontier, as a result of the wanton
provocation of border conllicts on the Sin&Vietnamese
border by the Vietnamese authorities. The former-namely,
Vie1 Nam’s aggression against Kampuchea-constituted
a
gross violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
norms of international law and poses a serious threat to
international peace and security. The latter-namely,
China’s self-defensive counter-attack-however, is a necessary action of self-defence taken by any sovereign State in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter. Any attempt to
confuse the two and treat them equally only serves to
confound right and wrong and condone the real aggressors,
and is therefore inadmissible.

@) To continue to oppose Viet Nam’s scheme to obtain
recognition for the regime installed by it at Phnom Penh;

104. Now I should like to present the true picture of how
Viet Nam wantonly provoked the conflicts along the SinoVietnamese border, and to expound our position and views
on the relevant questions.

(c) To stop all forms of aid, including so-called
humanitarian aid, to Viet Nam, as it will use such aid to
expand its aggression against Democratic Kampuchea and
commit new crimes;

105. First, the present grave situation on the SinoVietnamese border is wholly the making of the Vietnamese
authorities. For a long time they have deliberately pursued a
hostile policy towards the People’s Republic of China. Over

(d) To provide various forms of support and aid to the
Kampuchean people in their just struggle under the
10

a periorin
addition to large-scale persecution and
expulsion of Chinese nationals residing in Viet Nam, the
Vietnamese authorities have massed a large number of
troops in an organized and planned way along the SinoVietnamese border, ceaselessly creating incidents and
carrying out armed provocations and hostile acts there.
According to incomplete statistics, in 1974 Viet Nam
provoked over 100 incidents on the Sino-Vietnamese
border, in 1975 the figure rose to 400 or more, in 1976 it
dramatically increased to over 900, in 1977 to 752, and in
1978 to a total of 1,108. In the past six months alone, the
Vietnamese authorities have encroached upon the Chinese
border in 162 places, carried out armed provocations
against China on more than 700 occasions and killed or
wounded more than 300 Chinese border guards and
inhabitants. Recently, the Vietnamese authorities have
frequently sent armed troops to encroach upon Chinese
territory, and attack Chinese frontier personnel and
inhabitants, thus seriously menacing the peace and security
of China’s border. These are grave armed provocations and
aggressive acts against China committed by the Vietnamese
authorities.
106. NOW we would only enumerate a number of
incidents that have occurred this year, which will suffice to
show the bloody crimes committed by the Vietnamese
aggressors.
107. In early January, taking advantage of midnight
darkness and morning fog or under the cover of gunfire,
Vietnamese armed personnel intruded into 10 Chinese
border areas of Hekou and Maguan Counties in Yunnan
Province and Longzhou of the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region on more than 50 occasions. They laid landmines, disrupted communications,
attacked and even
attempted to kidnap sentries of Chinese frontier troops.
108. On 11 January, Vietnamese troops even opened fire
with machine-guns and heavy machine-guns on the
Longbang area, Jingxi County, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region of China and threw hand-grenades. This
lasted as long as 10 hours and 5,000 bullets were expended.
Many houses were damaged and great losses were inflicted
upon the peaceable inhabitants.
109. From 11 to 17 January, four Chinese villages
belonging to Longbang Commune, were subjected to
shooting by Vietnamese armed personnel on 27 occasions.
As a result, houses of Chinese border inhabitants were
seriously damaged, many commune members had to leave
their homes and large tracts of farmland were left unsown.
All this has aroused the utmost indignation among the local
population.
110. On 28 January, at dawn, when the Chinese people
wizrehaving happy Spring Festival gatherings, Vietnamese
armed personnel suddenly strafed a large Chinese area in
Hekou County of Yunnan Province, causing damage to
many civilian houses.
111. On 29 and 30 January, while patrolling in Ningming
and Jmgxi Counties, Guangxi, 20 Chinese frontier guards
were killed or wounded by mines planted within Chinese
territory, byI_ Vietnamese armed personnel.
112. Ori‘ 1 February, at 2.20 p.m., when four commune
membersof the vegetable brigade in Chengguan Town,
Hekou County, Yunnan Province, were working in the

field, one of them was killed and another wounded in a
Vietnamese surprise attack.,
113. From 15 January to 7 February, in rabid provocations made by Vietnamese armed personnel, more than
70 Chinese frontier guards and border residents were killed
or wounded.
114; In a short period of five days, from’8 to 12 February,
Vietnamese armed personnel encroached upon Chinese
border areas on nearly 30 occasions in Fangcheng,
Ningming, Longzhou, Jingxi and Napo counties of the
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region and Funing,
Maguan, Malipo and Hekou Counties of Yunnan Province,
killing 6r wounding 34 Chinese personnel. Ten of them were
killed and 18 wounded by mines laid by Vietnamese
personnel who stole into Chinese territory; the other four
were killed and two were wounded by gunfire.
115. On 12 February, at 5 p.m., trains 8704 and 2992 of
the Kunming Railway Sub-Administration, running from
Hekou to Kaiyuan, Yunnan, came under heavy rifle and
sub-machine-gun fire from Vietnamese armed troops at a
point 2.5 kilometres away from Hekou. The trains were hit
by many bullets and seriously damaged. Chinese railway
transport in this section was thus suspended and the
people’s economic life and the safety of passengers gravely
threatened.
116. These bloody crimes were by no means accidental
but were committed deliberately by the Vietnamese authorities. Over a period, the Vietnamese leaders have been clamouring about fighting a “new war” with China as the target.
They have whipped up war hysteria throughout the country
and stepped up arms build-ups and the recruitment of
troops. At the same time, they have intensified their socalled acts of “clearance” and “purification” in the various
provinces near the Sine-Vietnamese border. They have
deployed large numbers of troops, built fortifications and
carried out frequent military manceuvres with China as the
target along the Sino-Vietnamese border. On 20 December
last year, the newspaper &an Doi Nhan Dan carried an
article openly clamouring for “carrying forward the offensive strategy ready at all times to attack enemy with superiority”. The Vietnamese Defence Minister, Vo Nguyen
Giap, also clamoured for “identifying the new target of
fighting” and for “preparedness to wage a large-scale war”.
On the other hand, the Vietnamese authorities have been
playing the trick of a thief crying “catch the thief’ in the
international arena. They have made statements or presented memoranda in an attempt to confuse right and
wrong, falsely accusing China of “threatening Viet Nam’s
security”, “creating tension*‘, and so on. Yet how can one
palm shut out the sky? There are abundant facts and evidence about the despicable deeds of thevietnamese authorities in launching large-scale anti-China campaigns, inciting
national hatred, provoking border incidents of bloodshed,
ceaselesslyencroaching upon China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and worsening the relations between the two
countries. They are known to everyone. Lies and denials are
of no avail.
117. Secondly, the above-mentioned acts of aggression on
the part of the Vietnamese authorities have been long premeditated. Following the ending of the anti-United States
war and the realization of unification, Viet Nam quickly
embarked on the path of aggression and expansion abroad.

To begin with, it placed Laos under its control; then it
launched a massive war of aggression against the one-time
ally Kampuchea, occupying the capital, Phnom Penh, and
large tracts of other territories, in an attempt to realize its
wild ambition of a “Greater Indochinese federation”. At
present, Vietnamese aggressor forces are expanding the
flames of war to the Kampuchea-Thai border, thus greatly
menacing the peace and security of South-East Asia
and the Pacific region as a whole and subjecting the
countries and peoples in this area to the threats of Soviet
and Vietnamese hegemonism. It is only natural that the
Vietnamese authorities should have been opposed by the
Chinese Government and people for committing external
aggression in such an unscrupulous way. The Vietnamese
authorities have regarded China as the main obstacle to
their pursuit of expansionism. They have regarded China as
their “No. 1 enemy”, the country they piously called
“comrade and brother” previously, thereby showing their
bad faith. As a result, while waging a massive armed
invasion of Kampuchea, they have become more and more
rampant by repeatedly provoking and escalating border
conflicts. Their frenzied acts of aggression have been aimed
at inciting military conflicts on the southern border of
China, intensifying tension and sabotaging China’s
programme of socialist modernization. The facts show that
Viet Nam’s invasion and harassment of Chinese border
areas are closely linked with its acts of aggression and
expansion against its neighbours in Indochina and other
parts of South-East Asia. The Vietnamese authorities are
the root cause of the grave situation prevailing along the
Sine-Vietnamese border.

carrying out aggression and expansion in South-East Asia
and Asia as a whole. With the backing of the Soviet Union,
Viet Nam wants to form the so-called “Indo-Chinese
federation*‘, become its master and dominate the whole of
South-East Asia through the use of force. The Soviet Union
and Viet Nam, the greater and lesser hegemonists, working
hand in glove with each other, are the root cause of the
threat to peace and tranquillity in the Asia-Pacific region.
120. Fourthly, over the past two years and faced with the
continued armed provocation and acts of hostility by the
Vietnamese authorities, the Chinese Government and
people, treasuring the friendship between the Chinese and
Vietnamese peoples, have always exercised the maximum
restraint and forbearance and given repeated advice and
warnings to the Vietnamese authorities about their
incessant armed provocations and hostilities along the
Chinese border, so as to avoid aggravation of the situation.
That was why, in spite of the Vietnamese side’s arrogant
resort to the use of force along that border, the Chinese
frontier troops and civilians, witnessing the killing and
wounding of their kith and kin, strictly observed orders for
a long time and refrained from shooting or fighting back. In
a spirit of conciliation, . they hope the Vietnamese
authorities will repent and mend their ways. We have
always stood for the reasonable settlement of disputes
between States through negotiations on an equal footing
and in adherence to the purposes of the United Nations and
the five principles of peaceful coexistence without resort to
force. But, as the Chinese saying goes, “The tree may prefer
calm, but the wind will not subside**. With Soviet support,
the Vietnamese authorities have felt emboldened and have
mistaken the Chinese restraint and desire for peace as a sign
of weakness, turning a deaf ear to the mild advice and
warnings of the Chinese side. They have gone from bad to
worse, asking for a yard after getting an inch and wantonly
escalated their acts of armed aggression in the Chinese
border areas. The facts show that, in dealing with the
Vietnamese aggressors, conciliation and forbearance no
longer work. The Vietnamese authorities have gone too far
in bullying others. Driven beyond forbearance, Chinese
frontier troops have been forced to rise in limited counterattacks in defence of their own border. Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations stipulates that Member
States have the inherent right of self-defence if an armed
attack occurs against them. The counter-attack made
by the Chinese frontier troops, who are driven beyond
forbearance, is in full accord with the principles of the
Charter and is a just action. This is also an action which any
sovereign State would be forced to take in similar
circumstances.

118. In order to cover up their features of regional
hegemonism and evade criminal responsibility for their
armed provocations and attacks on China, the Vietnamese
authorities have cynically capitalized on the question of a
“small nation” and “big Power”, as stated earlier by the
Soviet representative, trying to confuse the public by
disguising themselves as a “victim” with the status of a
“small nation”. The Vietnamese authorities think that, as
long as Viet Nam claims to be a “small nation”, sympathy
will naturally go to it irrespective of what evil it has done.
Whether or not a nation has ambitious designs, whether or
not it is carrying out aggression and expansion, depends not
on its size but on its political line and foreign policy. While
history has seen instances of a big Power committing
aggression against a small nation and bullying it, there is no
lack of instances of a big nation being the victim of
aggression and being bullied by a small one. Is it not true
that a small island State, Cuba, hiring itself out to Soviet
social-imperialism, has dispatched tens of thousands of
mercenary troops across the ocean to become the
hatchetmen of the USSR? Viet Nam is following in its
footsteps and has even surpassed it. In order to realize its
ambition of dominating Indo-China and South-East Asia,
Viet Nam is bullying all its neighbours, whether big or
small. Today, Viet Nam is bullying China in the north and
invading Kampuchea in the -west. Is this not a most
powerful rebuttal of its false accusation against China?

121. The Chinese Government and people have been
consistently guided by the principle that “we will not attack
unless we are attacked; if we are attacked, we will certainly
counter-attack”. The Chinese people ardently love peace.
We want to build up our country and need a peaceful
international environment. We do not want to resort to
armed force. We do not want a single inch of Vietnamese
terrritory, but neither will we tolerate wanton incursions
into Chinese territory. All we want is a peaceful and stable
border. After counter-attacking the Vietnamese aggressors
as they deserve, the Chinese frontier troops will return and
strictly keep to defending the border of their own country.

119. Thirdly, it is by no means accidental that Viet Nam’s
acts of aggression have all along been backed and abetted
by the Soviet Union. Viet Nam’s aggressive and
expansionist activities abroad and armed incursion into
China have suited very well the needs of Soviet greater
hegemonism. The Soviet Union uses Viet Nam as a pawn
and accomplice in establishing its spheres of influence and

122. Fifthly, sharing the same border, the people of China
and Viet Nam have gone through thick and thin. In their
12

iong revoutionary struggles, the Chinese and Vietnamese
peoples, sympathizing with and supporting each other,
have forged a profound friendship. The Chinese Govemment and people, under the leadership of Chairman Mao
Zedong and Premier Zhou Enlai, made world-known
national sacrifices for the liberation of the Vietnamese
people, and after the war they actively assisted the
Vietnamese people in their national reconstruction and
rehabilitation.
Unfortunately, the profound friendship
forged by the peoples of China and Viet Nam through their
long revolutionary struggles has now been wilfully
undermined by the Vietnamese authorities. This pains
the Chinese people profoundly. However, the Chinese
Government and people still treasure and uphold the
friendship between the peoples of China and Viet Nam.
They have done so and will continue to do so in future. The
Chinese Government appeals to the Vietnamese authorities
to treasure the friendship between the peoples of China and
Viet Nam, to stop on the precipice, to retract from the
wrong path and not to go any farther.

the entire Vietnamese-Chinese frontier. In spite of the wave
of indignation aroused throughout the world by this
arrogant adventure of China’s present leaders, the attacks
are still going on.
127. The Security Council must take steps immediately to
see to it that the irresponsible game of the current Chinese
leaders in playing with fire which may engulf the whole
world is immediately halted. Chinese aggression against
Viet Nam is a constituent part and a logical result of the
expansionist and great-Power policy which the Chinese
rulers have been carrying out for many years, not only with
regard to Viet Nam but throughout South-East Asia. On
this subject the statement of the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam in document S/13097 reads as
follows:
“It is obvious that the Chinese rulers, after repeated
failures in their hostile policy against Viet Nam, have
stepped into the ruts of the Chinese feudalists, the
imperialists and the colonialists in launching an
aggressive war against Viet Nam, an independent and
sovereign country.

123. Sixthly, the purpose of the United Nations is to
maintain international peace and security. Faced with the
grave situation of threat to and destruction of peace and
security caused by Viet Nam’s acts of aggression, the
Security Council has the unshirkable responsibility to
condemn sternly the acts of aggression committed by the
Vietnamese authorities, to call upon them to stop at once
their armed incursions, provocations, attacks and sabotage
in the Chinese border area, to withdraw all their armed
personnel form Chinese territory and to respect for ever
China’s sovereignty and terrritorial integrity.

“By invading Viet Nam, the Chinese rulers have
totally revealed, their expansionism, big-Power hegemonism and reactionary policy, which run counter to the
interests of the Chinese people.‘*
128. Having committed that criminal act of aggression,
encroaching directly on the sovereignty and security of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Peking in its propaganda
has been hypocritically asserting, in cynical disregard of the
facts, that the Chinese People’s Republic only carried out a
counter-attack after Viet Nam, as it claims, had invaded
Chinese territory.

124. The Chinese Government has always stood for a fair
and reasonable settlement of the disputes between the two
countries through peaceful negotiations. Past negotiations
have all failed because of lack of good faith on the
Vietnamese side. The Chinese Government now proposes
again that the two sides should speedily hold negotiations at
any mutually agreed place between representatives of an
appropriate level to discuss the restoration of peace and
tranquillity along the border between the two countries and
proceed to settle the disputes concerning the boundary and
territory. The Chinese Government is prepared to enter into
concrete negotiations on any constructive measures that
can ensure peace and tranquillity along the border between
the two countries. The foregoing position of the Chinese
Government is entirely reasonable. We believe China’s
position will enjoy the sympathy and support of all the
countries and people who love peace and uphold justice.

129. The representative of the Chinese People’s Republic
spoke just before me in that same spirit. Whom does he
think he is going to convince with this talk about the selfdefence of China? Unfortunately, I do not have the records
of the League of Nations to hand, but I am sure that the
same kind of words were used in justification and selfdefence by the representatives of Fascist Germany in regard
to Czechoslovakia, as are now being used in regard to Viet
Nam. The falsity and absurdity of these statements are
obvious also in the light of the visit of the Deputy Prime
Minister of the State Council of the People’s Republic of
China Teng Hsiao-ping, to the United States and Japan. In
the course of that visit he haughtily asserted that “Viet Nam
must be taught the necessary lesson** and that “Viet Nam
must be punished”. It is obvious to everyone that the
Chinese guest even in the course of his visit to the United
States had in mind the launching of an open act of armed
aggression against Viet Nam. The cynicism and irresponsible adventurism of the Chinese leaders are clear. In
particular there is their assertion that they are ready to
punish Viet Nam “even if that involves a certain risk”.

125. Mr. HULINSKq
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
jkom Russian): For some years now the ruling circles of
China have been systematically stepping up their dastardly
provocations against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, in
general, and their military activities on the border with Viet
Nam, in particular.
126. China’s feverish preparation for war against the
heroic Socialist Republic of Viet Nam ended a few days ago
in the open aggression and incursion of Chinese troops into
its territory. In a message addressed to the President of the
Security Council /s/13095], the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, comrade Nguyen Duy Trinh stated that several
Chinese divisions of infantry, armoured vehicles and
artillery with air support launched massive attacks along

130. We in Czechoslovakia are verv sensitive to that kind
of assertion. Those words in the lexicon of Teng Hsiao-ping
remind us of the period of the second half of the 1930s when
the Nazis of Fascist Germany were preparing the ground
for the seizure of Czechoslovakia in 1938. Those words and
their consequences also remind us that they are trying to lull
world public opinion with assertions that the goals of the
Peking expansionists in Viet Nam are limited ones.
13

13I. The risk which the Peking expansionists are ready to
assume and to have on their own conscience is an extremely
high risk affecting not only Viet Nam but all of us, because it
affects peace and security throughout the world. The
absurd “motivation”
which the Chinese representatives
have been using to justify their aggression against Viet Nam
is totally out of place and contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations. China has no right to teach any lessons to
anyone, still less by means of armed aggression. It is time for
the Peking leaders to recognize the fact that we do not live in
the Middle Ages. It is time for them to remember the
gloomy fate of Hitler’s supporters.

through their own experience to the other peoples of Asia.
There is hardly any need here to remind members of the
recent experience of the peoples of India, Burma, Nepal,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Afghanistan and other countries. The
invasion by Chinese troops of Viet Nam demonstrates not.
only the unslakeable thirst of Peking to determine the fate of
the Asian peoples and to teach them lessons in how to
conduct themselves, but also demonstrates how irresponsible is th,e attitude of the Peking leadership to the future of
peace and security. The aggressive actions of China are a
flagrant violation of the elementary principles of international relations and an arrogant defiance of all
progressive forces, advocates of peace and international
detente. It also proves that Peking is guided only by its
great-Power interests and has not given up its dangerous
nihilistic and destructive concepts of Maoism in international relations.

132. The open aggression committed against Viet Nam
had its beginnings in the varied but hostile anti-Viet Nam
policy of the Peking leaders. When it became clear to the
leaders in Peking that a free Viet Nam would not allow itself
to be used as a tool for the implementation of Chinese
expansion in South-East Asia, they light-heartedly sold out
their ally and friend and quickly forgot their eloquent words
which not so long ago they had hypocritically uttered with
regard to the Vietnamese people, words about a “firm and
long-standing friendship” and to the effect that “China and
Viet Nam are as close to each other as are the lip and the
tooth”.

137. The aggression of China against Viet Nam is also a
warning to its “new friends” who, as they put it, together
with China want to defend Asia against “hegemonism”.
For the moment, the first country to be defended is Viet
Nam.
138. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic condemns the
military aggression committed by the Chinese ruling circles
against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. We view it as an
extremely serious threat to international peace and security.
The. fraternal Vietnamese people, which for decades waged
a heroic struggle against colonialism and imperialism and
which has once again had to take up arms to defend its
independent sovereignty and territorial integrity has, in
the Czechoslovak people, a true friend and ally. Czechoslovakia wishes to assure the Vietnamese people of its total
solidarity and support. We should like to express our firm
conviction that this ordeal will form one more heroic page
in the history of their just struggle against foreign
annexationists.

133. Everyone knows that the Peking leaders did not
welcome the victory won by the Vietnamese people at such
a heavy cost and did not want it to create a unified State.
After all, the war in Indo-China was still not concluded but
the Chinese leadership had already begun to take steps
designed to weaken the position of Viet Nam. The Chinese
occupied the Paracel Islands, fabricated border incidents
and stepped up subversive activity among the Chinese
minority in Viet Nam. Without wishing to recognize the
true state of affairs, the Peking leadership exerted crude
political, economic and military pressure on Viet Nam in its
attempts to impose upon it its own policy. As an example of
that pressure the Peking ruling circles exploited the antipeople and bloody clique of Pol Pot and Ieng Sary. In the
final analysis what Peking could not achieve by threats,
pressure or provocation it is now trying to achieve by direct
aggression.

139. Czechoslovakia is convinced that all the peace-loving
forces in the world which in the past have supported the
heroic struggle of the Vietnamese people for freedom and
independence will now most vigorously come out in sup
port of its struggle against the Chinese aggressors.

134. The principal task of the Security Council is to halt
Chinese aggression against Viet Nam. Attempts to divert
the attention of the Council by slandering Viet Nam and by
distorting the true state of affairs in Kampuchea constitutes
connivance with the aggressor and, in the concrete political
context, the virtual encouragement of the aggressor to
continue his actions.

140. The Czechoslovak delegation is seriously concerned
about the aggression committed by China against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Together with the delegation of the Soviet Union, we have submitted for the consideration of the Council the draft resolution contained in
document S/131 17. In the interests of averting the threat to
peace and security, the Council should take an urgent decision categorically condemning the Chinese.aggression and
calling for the immediate withdrawal of Chinese troops
from Vietnamese territory. It should also call upon all
States to cease all arms deliveries and the transfer of military
technology to China and demand that China should scrupulously respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and also
make full reparation for the material damage inflicted on
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam as a result df the Chinese
aggression.
,.* :

135. The Chinese aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has once again demonstrated that
Peking views South-East Asia as an area in which Chinese
domination should be established so that it may serve as a
spring-board for the long-term conquest of the whole of
Asia. They would like to see the countries of that region
weak, helpless, hostile to each other and unable to repel
China’s aggressive actions. It is precisely for that reason that
Peking was so worked up about the recent changes in
Kampuchea, where the people took their fate into their own
hands and rejected the feudal Maoist experiments of the
Chinese advisers carried out by the bloody Pol Pot regime.

141. The ruling circles of China must bear.‘;btal responsibility for the consequences of the aggression committed by
them against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

136. In the final analysis, Chinese expansionist ambitions
and the subversive activities of Peking are becoming known
14

142. Mr. ROLON ANAYA (Bolivia) (interprefation from
Mr. President, my delegation is pleased that you
are presiding over the Security Council in these difficult
circumstances, and we support all your actions, whose wisdom we acknowledge because we have witnessed them
personally.

Spa&h):

143. We also wish to pay a tribute to Ambassador Mills of
Jamaica, for the very wise and able manner in which he
presided over the Council last month.
144. Bolivia has witnessed with great concern the regrettable evolution of the fighting in South-East Asia. Our
interest, like that of all third-world countries, is free from
any material or economic expediency. We are moved by
human solidarity and we merely wish to promote peace and
understanding among peoples, especially among those who
have been victims of colonialism and who have been caught
up in the competition among the major Powers for spheres
of influence. We sincerely want peace to reign everywhere in
the world. But we are particularly concerned, and indeed
dismayed, when war accentuates the backwardness and
dependence of the poor peoples of the world. In such cases
our solidarity is complete, for we cannot help but feel that
we too have been attacked.

would also be ‘to challenge the entire international legal
system, which is based on international peace and security.
149. Bolivia once again’ expresses its solidarity with all
dependent peoples and small countries of the world, whose
sovereignty and self-determination we will defend as if it
were our own. We wish to make common cause with the
non-aligned members of the Security Council. In the caseof
Democratic Kampuchea last January, my country was a
sponsor of draft resolution S/13027, which received a
majority of the votes of the Council. But unfortunately the
Council was then paralysed, thereby bringing about a
dangerous pause which only favoured the continuation of
war.
150. Guided by our full support for the principles of the
Charter, we are prepared to join in any draft resolution
which rcaffhrns the effectiveness of the Charter. Notwithstanding the seriousness of events, my delegation does not
wish to act as a judge or an arbiter of the actions of other
States. With that thought in mind, we hope that the spirit
that will guide our decisions will be the same that produced
the draft resolution last January; that is, we hope that we
shall shun condemnations which, far from having a calming
effect and promoting solutions, can only stir up resentment.

145. No sooner had violence broken out in South-East
Asia than my delegation received express and concrete
instructions from the Government of Bolivia to take an
active part in the urgent task of promoting an immediate
cease-fire, the withdrawal of the invading troops from all
areas and the restoration of peace and security in that
region. As a genuinely non-aligned country, Bolivia has as
its primary aim strict respect for the principles of nonintervention and the non-use of force in the settlement of
international disputes.

151. For that reason, the delegation of Bolivia would
appeal for a full understanding of the problem and of the
possible grave consequences for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We propose that the
Council should call for an immediate cease-fire and
withdrawal from all territories invaded by force in a
resolution which, as indicated in the agenda, covers the
entire conflict in South-East Asia.
132. In the same resolution, or perhaps in a subsequent
one, the following measures might be adopted: first, to call
on the Secretary-General, whose good off&s have already
been used with the full support of Bolivia, to visit the area
and report back within a brief period of time, within two
weeks at the most; secondly, to establish a mediating
committee made up of one member from each of the
geographical regions in the Organization, whose task would
be to study the Secretary-General’s report and to propose to
the Council the measures that it deemed appropriate to
restore peace in the area.

146. War is not only a particularly brutal extension of
politics; it is also a frustrating extension, the last resort of
colonialism. The dependent peoples of the world have
always been victims of imperialist and colonialist conflicts
and disputes. What is particularly deplorable is that today
this has become a world-wide phenomenon. What we are
witnessing in South-East Asia is the sorriest spectacle
imaginable and a lesson to people everywhere about what
violence means when it is directed against the small and
weak peoples, against dependent peoples who are made
even poorer, more despairing and more dependent by war.
These continuing confrontations and this division in the
world are indeed disheartening.

153. Mr. ADMINA (Gabon) (interpretationfiom French):
Mr. President, I have the signal honour to congratulate you,
on behalf of the delegation of Gabon, on your accession to
the presidency of the Council for the month of February.
The delegation of Gabon attaches the greatest importance
to our excellent relations with your great and beautiful
country, Kuwait, and admires the courageous, active and
constructive role it plays on the international scene. Because
you are known by your lofty qualities as a skilful and
experienced diplomat ready to defend the causesof justice,
independence, equality and peace, it goes without saying
that we are happy to work jointly with you during our term
of office in this international body.

147. The uncommitted countries, which are in the majority in the Security Council, do not officially represent the
non-aligned, and this has been incorrectly understood. We
took a clear and constructive stand when this chain of wars
broke out and began to sow destruction and grief in that
martyred and heroic region of the world.
..
148. For my delegation, there can be no explanation or
rational justification for these acts of violence, even less so if
the idea is to teach a lesson, as might have been done in
medieval times, or to extract an eye for an eye or a tooth for
a tooth. It bodes ill if death and destruction are intended to
convey a pedagogical message. One can, of course, speak
out against peace, but that is not only tantamout to denying
reason and the progress of civil&&ion in recent times, but it

154. My delegation would like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to Ambassador Mills of Jamaica for the eloquent
and effective manner in which he presided over our work
during the month of January, at a time when his country
was taking its first steps as an active member of the Council.
15

155. Although the Sino-Vietnamese conflict is one oflong
standing, once again, as a result of that conflict, that part of
the Asian continent is experiencing tragic moments. This
situation constitutes a threat to peace and security not only
in Asia but also in the rest of the world. The principles of the
Charter are at stake. The rights and freedoms of man
defined in 1789 and enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights in 1948 are being trampled underfoot.
Likewise, the principle of settling disputes between countries by peaceful means remains a dead letter in the annals of
contemporary history. More than ever the peoples of the
third world must show that they are vigilant, so as to foil the
manceuvres of the great Powers aimed at the establishment
of their hegemony by sowing disarray throughout the
world.

tries must refrain from having recourse to force, from
intervening in the internal affairs or other countries and
from carrying out subversive activities by one means or
another.
157. It is in thii spirit and bearing in mind the number, the
credibility and the uniformity of the reports on the
evolution of the situation in Kampuchea and along the
length of the Sine-Vietnamese border that my delegation
wishes at once to assure the Security Council that it will
support any initiative or decision of the Council calling on
the parties concerned: first, to evince the utmost
moderation; secondly, immediately to withdraw their
troops; thirdly, to respect the territorial integrity of the
violated countries and to make credible their intention to
respect the territorial integrity of other States of the region
by so acting that the populations of those countries may
finally live in peace.

156. In consistency with the above-mentioned principles,
my country, Gabon, cannot but rise against all actions or
manceuvres of whatever country that jeopardize the
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
options of other countries. Indeed, we believe that coun-

The meeting rose at 8.35 p.m.

16

---

.-

..--.. -. -- -.

..-

’

..
.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

from bookstores
and distributors
or writs to: United
Nations,
Sales

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
deposits&es
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ZCAK

IIOJIYYHTb

H3nAH&fR

OPl-AHU

JAI&NM

OE-bEAHHEHHhIX

HAIXHR

IbAaHus
ODraHmauuri
OfYbexmfeHnblx
HauaR
NOXCKHO xynnrr.
a KHHXtXbIX
Yarasiniax
H are~rc~aax
no scex paBoHax
pupa. Hasonxre
cnpaaxn
06 HaxaHHIIX
aamen KHH~HOM
rdarasune
mm nrimnre
no aiipecy:
Opraxn3auna
06’bexuxeusrbrx
HaunR, Cexqas no npoflame u3nasmR. Hbr-o-FfopK
HJIU Xenesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

B

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
est.&n en venta en librertas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

L&ho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 2.50

79-70002-November

1981-2350
