A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/45
23 December 1999

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 66
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/54/553)]
54/45.

Question of Antarctica

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/56 of 10 December 1996, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
submit a report consisting of the information provided by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties on their
consultative meetings and on their activities in Antarctica, and on developments in relation to Antarctica,
Taking into account the debates on the question of Antarctica held since its thirty-eighth session,
Conscious of the particular significance of Antarctica to the international community, including for
international peace and security, the global and regional environment, its effects on global and regional
climate conditions, and scientific research,
Reaffirming that the management and use of Antarctica should be conducted in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in the interest of maintaining
international peace and security and of promoting international cooperation for the benefit of mankind as
a whole,
Recognizing that the Antarctic Treaty,1 which provides, inter alia, for the demilitarization of the
continent, the prohibition of nuclear explosions and the disposal of nuclear wastes, the freedom of
scientific research and the free exchange of scientific information, is in furtherance of the purposes and
principles of the Charter,

1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.

99-77689

/...

A/RES/54/45
Page 2

Welcoming the entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty2
on 14 January 1998, under which Antarctica has been designated as a natural reserve, devoted to peace
and science, and the provisions contained in the Protocol regarding the protection of the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, including the need for environmental impact
assessment in the planning and conduct of all relevant activities in Antarctica,
Welcoming also the continuing cooperation among countries undertaking scientific research activities
in Antarctica, which may help to minimize human impact on the Antarctic environment,
Welcoming further the increasing awareness of an interest in Antarctica shown by the international
community, and convinced of the advantages to the whole of mankind of a better knowledge of Antarctica,
Reaffirming its conviction that, in the interest of all mankind, Antarctica should continue for ever to
be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that it should not become the scene or object of
international discord,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the question of Antarctica3 and the role
accorded by the Secretary-General to the United Nations Environment Programme in preparing his report
and also of the Twenty-first, Twenty-second and Twenty-third Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings,
which were held at Christchurch, New Zealand, from 19 to 30 May 1997, at Tromso, Norway, from 25
May to 5 June 1998, and at Lima, from 24 May to 4 June 1999, respectively;
2. Recalls the statement under chapter 17 of Agenda 21,4 adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, that States carrying out research activities in Antarctica
should, as provided for in article III of the Antarctic Treaty, continue:
(a) To ensure that data and information resulting from such research are freely available to the
international community;
(b) To enhance the access of the international scientific community and the specialized agencies of
the United Nations system to such data and information, including the encouragement of periodic seminars
and symposia;
3. Welcomes the invitations to the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme to attend Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings in order to assist such meetings in their
substantive work, and urges the parties to continue to do so for future consultative meetings;
4. Welcomes also the practice whereby the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties regularly provide
the Secretary-General with information on their consultative meetings and on their activities in Antarctica,
and encourages the parties to continue to provide the Secretary-General and interested States with

2

International Legal Materials, vol. XXX, No. 6, p. 1461.

3

A/54/339.

4

See Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14
June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II, chap. 17, para. 17.105.
/...

A/RES/54/45
Page 3

information on developments in relation to Antarctica, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report which shall consist of that information to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session the item entitled
“Question of Antarctica”.
69th plenary meeting
1 December 1999
