THE QUESTION OF RACE CONFLICT IN SOUTH AFRICA RESULTING FROM THE POLICIES
OF APARTHEID OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA 40

In the course of its meetings in Africa, 41 the Security Council adopted the following resolution relating
to this question.

The Security Council,
Noting with grave concern the aggravation of the
situation in South Africa resulting from the continued
intensification and expansion of the policies of apartheid and repression by the Government of South
Africa,
Having heard the statements of those individuals
invited to address the Council on this question,
Taking note of the statement of the representative
of the Special Committee on Apartheid,42
Deploring the persistent refusal of the Government
of South Africa to implement the resolutions adopted
by the Security Council in order to promote a peaceful solution in accordance with the Charter of the
Uni~ed Nations,
Gravely concerned that the situation in South Africa
seriously disturbs international peace and security in
southern Africa,
Noting the continued military build-up and strengthening of its military capability by the Government
of South Africa,

Convinced that urgent measures must be taken by
the Security Council to secure implementation of its
resolutions and thereby promote a solution to the
grave situation in South Africa and southern Africa,
1. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
continuing its policies of apartheid in violation of its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reiterates its total opposition to the policies of
apartheid of the Government of South Africa;
3. Recognizes the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa in pursuance of their
human and political rights, as set forth in the Charter
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
4. Urgently calls upon the Government of South
Africa to release all persons imprisonned, interned or
subjected to other restrictions as a result of the policies
of apartheid;
5. Calls upon all States to observe strictly the arms
embargo against South Africa;
6. Urges Governments and individuals to contribute
generously and regularly to the United Nations funds
which are used for humanitarian and training purposes
to assist the victims of apartheid;
7. Commends the inter-governmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and individuals for
assisting in the education and training of South Africans
and urges those who do not to begin and those who
do to expand their efforts in this field;
8. Decides, as a matter of urgency, to examine
methods of resolving the present situation arising out
out of the policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa.

40 Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted
by the Council in 1963, 1964 and 1970.
41 See above, pages 2 and 3.
42 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twentyseventh Year, 1628th meeting.

Adopted at the 1639th meeting by 14 votes to none,
with 1 abstention (France).

Resolution 311 (1972)
of 4 February 1972

QUESTION CONCERNING THE SITUATION IN TERRITORIES UNDER
PORTUGUESE ADMINISTRATION 43

In the course of its meetings in Africa, 44 the Security Council adopted the following resolution relating
to this question.

Resolution 312 (1972)
of 4 February 1972

The Security Council,
Having reviewed the situation in the African territories under Portuguese administration,

43 Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted

by the Council in 1963.
44 See above, pages 2 and 3.

10

(d) To promulgate an unconditional political amnesty and the restoration of democratic political rights;
( e) To transfer power to political institutions freely
elected and representative of the peoples, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
5. Again calls upon Portugal to refrain from any
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of African States;

Having heard the statements of those individuals
invited to address the Council on this question,
Taking note of the statement of the Chairman of
the Special Committee on the situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 45
Gravely concerned that the Government of Portugal is continuing its measures of repression in its
military operations against the African peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), in order
to suppress the legitimate aspirations of the peoples
for s,elf-determination and independence,
Deploring the refusal of the Government of Portugal to implement the pertinent resolutions of the
Security Council, adopted on the question of the Territories under Portuguese administration, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Further deploring the policies and actions of those
States which continue to provide Portugal with military
and other assistance, which it uses to pursue its colonial
and repressive policies against the peoples of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau),
Seriously concerned at the repeated violations by
the armed forces of Portugal of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of independent African States,
Deeply disturbed at the reported use of chemical
substances by Portugal in its colonial wars against the
peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau),
Recognizing the legitimacy of the struggle of the
liberation movements in Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau) in their demand for the achievement
of self-determination and independence,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) to selfdetermination and independence, as recognized by the
General Assembly in its resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, and recognizes the legitimacy of
their struggle to achieve that right;
2. Condemns the persistent refusal of the Government of Portugal to implement General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) and all other relevant resolutions of the Security Council;
3. Again affirms that the situation resulting from
the policies of Portugal both in its colonies and in its
constant provocations against the neighbouring States
seriously disturbs international peace and security in
the African continent;
4. Calls upon Portugal:
(a) To recognize immediately the right of the peoples
of the Territories under its administration to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
( b) To cease immediately the colonial wars and
all acts of repression against the peoples of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau);
(c) To withdraw all its armed forces as presently
employed for the purpose of the repression of the
peoples of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau);

6. Calls upon all States to refrain forthwith from
offering the Portuguese Government any assistance
which would enable it to continue its repression of
the peoples of the Territories under its administration,
and to take all the necessary measures to prevent the
sale and supply of arms and military equipment to
the Portuguese Government for this purpose, including
the sale and shipment of equipment and materials
for the manufacture and maintenance of arms and
ammunition to be used in the Territories under Portuguese administration;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the implementation of the present resolution and report to
the Security Council from time to time.
Adopted at the 1639th meeting by 9 votes to none, with
6 abstentions ( Argentina,
Belgium,
France,
Italy,
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America).

Decisions
At its 1672nd meeting, on 15 November 1972, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Burundi,
Ethiopia, Liberia, Madagascar, Nigeria, Sierra Leone,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Tunisia and Saudi
Arabia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
the item entitled "Question concerning the situation in
the Territories under Portuguese administration: letter
dated 7 November 1972, addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, the Congo, Dahomey, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the
Sudan, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic
of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Zaire and Zambia
(S/10828)". 46

At the same meeting, the Council decided, upon the
request of the delegations of Somalia and the Sudan, 47
46 Ibid., Twenty-seventh Year, Supplement for October, No1·ember and December 1972.
4 7 !hid., document S/10830.

Official Records of the Security Council, Twentyseventh Year, 1629th meeting.
45 See

11
