General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

110

(XXX) of 15 December 1975, 31/186 of21 December 1976,
32/161 of 19 December 1977 and 35/110 of 5 December
1980 on permanent sovereignty over national resources in
the occupied Arab territories,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Arab territories, 68 requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 35/110, and noting with satisfaction the
mission undertaken in preparation of that report,
l. Condemns Israel for its refusal to allow the United
Nations consultants on national resources access to the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories,
2. Emphasizes the right of the Arab States and peoples
whose territories are under Israeli occupation to full and
effective permanent sovereignty and control over their natural and all other resources, wealth and economic activities;
3. Reaffirms that all measures undertaken by Israel to
exploit the human, natural and all other resources, wealth
and economic activities in the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories are illegal and calls upon Israel to desist
immediately from such measures;
4. Further reaffirms the right of the Arab States and
peoples subjected to Israeli aggression and occupation to
the restitution of, and full compensation for the exploitation,
depletion and loss of and damages to, their natural, human
and all other resources, wealth and economic activities, and
calls upon Israel to meet their just claims;
5. Calls upon all States to support the Arab States and
peoples in the exercise of those rights;
6. Calls upon all States, international organizations,
specialized agencies, business corporations and all other
institutions not to recognize, or co-operate with or assist in
any manner in, any measures undertaken by Israel to exploit
the national resources of the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories or to effect any changes in the demographic
composition, the character and form of use of their natural
resources or the institutional structure of those territories;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a comprehensive report on permanent sovereignty over national
resources in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem, and to make proposals for follow-up and implementation;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report
on the implications, under international law, of the United
Nations resolutions on permanent sovereignty over natural
resources, on the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories and on the obligations of Israel concerning its conduct in these territories.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /981

36/174.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/18 of 10 November 1978, by
which it accorded observer status to the Agency for Cultural
and Technical Co-operation,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council decision 190
(LXI) of 5 August 1976, by which the Council had designated the Agency for Cultural and Technical Co-operation

68

A/36/648.

to participate on an ad hoe basis in the deliberations of the
Council on questions within the scope of its activities,
Noting with satisfaction the desire expressed by the
Agency for Cultural and Technical Co-operation to establish
close co-operation with the United Nations in all fields of
common interest, in particular training, desertification control, science and technology for development, new and renewable sources of energy and technical co-operation
among developing countries,
Recognizing the importance of those sectors,
l. Welcomes the participation of the Agency for Cultural and Technical Co-operation in the work of the United
Nations in fields of common interest;
2. Recognizes the necessity of strengthening co-operation between the United Nations and the Agency for Cultural and Technical Co-operation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in collaboration with the Secretary-General of the
Agency for Cultural and Technical Co-operation, to examine proposals by the Agency aimed at reinforcing cooperation with the United Nations and to submit a report
thereon through the Economic and Social Council to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /981

36/175.

Specific action related to the particular needs
and problems of land-locked developing
countries
The General Assembly,
Reiterating the specific actions related to the particular
needs of the land-locked developing countries stated in resolutions 63 (III) of 19 May 1972, 69 98 (IV) of 31 May
197670 and 123 (V) of 3 June 197971 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and D~velopment,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 31/ 157 of 21
December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977, 33/150 of
20 December 1978, 34/198 of 19 December 1979 and 35/
58 of 5 December 1980 and other resolutions of the United
Nations relating to the particular needs and problems of
land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly, its related organs and the specialized
agencies, emphasizing special and urgent measures in favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 72
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the sea,
aggravated by remoteness and isolation from world markets,
and the prohibitive transit, transport and trans-shipment
costs impose serious constraints on the socio-economic development of land-locked developing countries,
Noting with concern that the measures taken so far in
favour of land-locked developing countries and the assistance given fall far short of their needs,

69
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.73.11.D.4), annex I.A.
10
Ibid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E. 76.11.D.10 and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
71
Ibid., Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one, sect. A.
72
Resolution 35/56, annex.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Reaffirms the right of land-locked developing countries to free access to and from the sea and their right to
freedom of transit;
2. Appeals to all States, international organizations and
financial institutions to implement, as a matter of urgency
and priority, the specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries
envisaged in resolutions 63 (III), 98 (IV) and 123 (V) of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
in the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, in the Substantial
New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the least developed countries 73 and in other relevant resolutions of the
United Nations;
3. Urges all donor countries, as well as others in a
position to do so, and the international organizations concerned, to provide land-locked developing countries with
appropriate financial and technical assistance in the form
of grants or concessional loans for the construction and
improvement of their transport and transit infrastructures
and facilities;
4. Urges also the international community and multilateral and bilateral financial institutions to intensify efforts
in raising the net flow of resources to land-locked developing
countries to help offset the adverse effects of their disadvantageous geographical situation on their economic development efforts, in keeping with the over-all development
needs of each land-locked developing country;
5. Invites the transit countries to co-operate effectively
with the land-locked developing countries in harmonizing
transport planning and promoting other joint ventures in the
field of transport at the regional, subregional and bilateral
levels;
6. Commends the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other United Nations agencies for their work
and the assistance they have provided to the land-locked
developing countries and invites them to continue to take
appropriate and effective measures to respond to the specific
needs of those countries;
7. Invites the international community to give financial
support to interested transit and land-locked developing
countries in the construction of alternative routes to the sea;
8. Recommends continued and intensified activities relating to the conducting of necessary studies and the implementation of special actions and action programmes for
the land-locked developing countries, including those in the
area of economic co-operation among developing countries,
as well as those that have been envisaged in the programme
of work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the regional commissions and other programmes and activities at the regional and subregional
levels.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/176.

Expansion of the conference facilities of the
Economic Commission for Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 /
65 of 24 July 1981,
Recalling also that the Economic Commission for Africa
was established at Addis Ababa in 1958 and that its con13
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September 1981 (United Nations publication. Sale,
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.

111

ference facilities, which were donated to the United Nations
by the Government of Ethiopia, were designed to service
the limited number of African countries that were States
Members of the United Nations in the late 1950s and early
1960s,
Noting with satisfaction the increase in the number of
independent States in Africa as a result of decolonization,
Noting further that there are at present fifty African States
Members of the United Nations and that there is the prospect
that more will be admitted to membership in the United
Nations,
Mindful of the heavy responsibilities entrusted in the present decade to the Economic Commission for Africa as the
main centre for the promotion of the economic development
of Africa, in general. and for the implementation of the
Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, in
particular. which the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity adopted at its
second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on 28 and 29
April 1980. 74
Noting that the present conference facilities at the headquarters of the Economic Commission for Africa are believed to be inadequate in relation to the needs of the large
number of African States that have become members of the
Commission since its establishment and the growing number
of international, intergovernmental and regional organizations participating in conferences there,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake, as a
matter of urgency, a study of the adequacy of the conference
facilities at the headquarters of the Economic Commission
for Africa to meet the demands thereon as a result of the
enlarged membership and increased activities of the
Commission;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to report the
findings of the study together with his suggestions, through
the Economic Commission for Africa at its seventeenth session and the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1982, to the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/177.

Transport and Communications Decade in
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ I60 of 19 December 1977,
33/ 197 of 29 January I 979 and 34/ 15 of 9 November 1979
on the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa
and. in particular, its resolution 35/108 of 5 December 1980,
by which it approved the organization of consultative technical meetings for the various African subregions,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions 1979/
61 of 3 August 1979, 1980/46 of 23 July 1980 and 1981 /
67 of 24 July 198 I on the Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa,
Recalling also resolution 341 (XIV) adopted on 27 March
1979 by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa at its fifth meeting,7 5 in which the Conference urged member States to give high priority to the
development of transport and communications,
Recalling further resolution CM/Res. 738 (XXXlll) adopted
by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
'

4

A/S-11114. annex I

·, See Official Rffords of th,· Iiconormc and Social Co1111cil, /979,
.\upplemn11 No 15 (E!l<J79i50). part two. sect I)
