186

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

10. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to consider
the observations of States under paragraph 8 above and
to submit its report with recommendations for possible
co-operation for the speedy elimination of the problem,
bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with the necessary facilities and
services, including summary records;
12. Decides to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its thirty-second session.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/103.

Drafting of an international convention
against the taking of hostages

The General Assembly,
Considering that the progressive development of international law and its codification contribute to the
implementation of the purposes and principles set forth
in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles
proclaimed in the Charter, freedom, justice and peace
in the world are inseparable from the recognition of
the inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights
of all members of the human family,
Having regard to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 23 and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, 24 which provide that everyone has
the right to life, liberty and security,
Recognizing that the taking of hostages is an act
which endangers innocent human lives and violates human dignity,
Gravely concerned at the increase of such acts,
Recalling the prohibition of the taking of hostages
in articles 3 and 34 of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949,211 the Hague Convention of 1970
for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, 26
the Montreal Convention of 1971 for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, 27
the Convention of 1973 on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents,28 as well as General
Assembly resolution 2645 (XXV) of 25 November
1970 condemning aerial hijacking or interference with
civil air travel,
Recognizing the urgent need for further effective
measures to put an end to the taking of hostages,
2s Resolution 217 A (III).
24 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
25 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
26
United States Treaties and Other International Agreements, vol. 22, part 2 (1971), p. 1644.
21 Ibid., vol. 24, part 1 (1973 ), p. 568.
2s Resolution 3166 (XXVIII), annex.

Mindful of the need to conclude, under the auspices
of the United Nations, an international convention
against the taking of hostages,
l. Decides to establish an Ad Hoe Committee on
the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Taking of Hostages, composed of thirty-five Member
States;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
after consultations with the chairmen of the regional
groups, to appoint the members of the Ad Hoe Committee on the basis of equitable geographical distribution and of representation of the principal legal systems
of the world;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to draft at the
earliest possible date an international convention against
the taking of hostages and authorizes the Committee,
in the fulfilment of its mandate, to consider suggestions
and proposals from any State, bearing in mind the views
expressed during the debate on this item at the thirtyfirst session of the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to afford the Ad
Hoe Committee any assistance and provide it with all
facilities it may require for the performance of its work,
to provide the Committee with pertinent information
on the taking of hostages and to ensure that summary
records of the meetings of the Committee will be drawn
up and submitted;
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its
report and to make every effort to submit a draft convention to the General Assembly in good time for consideration at its thirty-second session and requests the
Secretary-General to communicate the report to Member States;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Drafting of
an international convention against the taking of hostages".
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequently i11formed the Secretary-Genera/29 that he had appointed as
members of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an
International Convention against the Taking of Hostages thirtythree of the thirty-five State.t to be appointed by him ill accordance with paragraph 2 of the abol'e resolutio11.
As a result, the Ad Hoe Committee is composed of the following Member State.s: ALGERIA, BARBADOS, CANADA, CHILE, DEMO·
CRATIC YEMEN, DENMARK, EGYPT, FRANCE, GERMANY, FEDERAL
REPUBLIC OF, GUINEA, IRAN, ITALY, JAPAN, JORDAN, KENYA,
LESOTHO, LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA, MEXICO, NETHERLANDS,
NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, SOMALIA, SURINAM,
SWEDEN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, UNION OF SoVIET SoCIALIST
REPUBLIC'S, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA.
29 A/31/479.
