United Nations

A/RES/67/241

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 February 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 141

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 24 December 2012
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/669)]

67/241. Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001, its resolutions
57/307 of 15 April 2003, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005,
61/261 of 4 April 2007, 62/228 of 22 December 2007, 63/253 of 24 December 2008,
64/233 of 22 December 2009, 65/251 of 24 December 2010 and 66/237 of
24 December 2011, as well as its decisions 63/531 of 11 December 2008 and 65/513
of 6 December 2010,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations, 1 on amendments to the rules of procedure of the
United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal 2 and on
the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services, 3 the report of the Internal Justice Council on administration of justice at
the United Nations, 4 the letter dated 23 October 2012 from the President of the
General Assembly to the Chair of the Fifth Committee, 5 the letter dated 10 October
2012 from the Secretary-General to the President of the Assembly 6 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 7
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations,1 on amendments to the rules of procedure of the
United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal2 and on
the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services;3

_______________
1

A/67/265 and Corr.1.
A/67/349.
3
A/67/172.
4
A/67/98.
5
A/C.5/67/9.
6
A/67/538.
7
A/67/547.
2

12-49306

*1249306*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/241

Administration of justice at the United Nations

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,7 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
I
System of administration of justice
3.
Recalls section I, paragraph 5, of its resolution 53/221 of 7 April 1999, in
which it underlined its full respect for the prerogatives and responsibilities of the
Secretary-General under the Charter of the United Nations, and reaffirms that the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the decisions of the International Civil
Service Commission are binding on the Secretary-General and on the Organization;
Also recalls paragraph 6 of its resolution 66/237 and paragraph 9 of its
4.
resolution 65/251, and stresses that all elements of the system of administration of
justice must work in accordance with the Charter and the legal and regulatory
framework approved by the General Assembly;
Reaffirms that, in accordance with paragraph 28 of resolution 63/253, the
5.
Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal shall not have any powers beyond those
conferred under their respective statutes; 8
6.
Emphasizes that the decisions of the General Assembly related to
administrative and budgetary matters are subject to review by the Assembly alone;
7.
Reaffirms that recourse to general principles of law and the Charter by
the Tribunals is to take place within the context of and consistent with their statutes
and the relevant General Assembly resolutions, regulations, rules and administrative
issuances;
Notes that some decisions taken by the Tribunals may have contradicted
8.
the provisions of General Assembly resolutions on human resources managementrelated issues;
Reaffirms its decision, contained in paragraph 4 of resolution 61/261, to
9.
establish a new, independent, transparent, professionalized, adequately resourced
and decentralized system of administration of justice consistent with the relevant
rules of international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to
ensure respect for the rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability
of managers and staff members alike;
10. Notes with appreciation the achievements produced since the inception
of the new system of administration of justice, regarding both the disposal of the
backlog and the addressing of new cases;
11. Acknowledges the evolving nature of the new system of administration of
justice and the need to carefully monitor its implementation to ensure that it remains
within the parameters set out by the General Assembly;
12. Emphasizes the importance of the principle of judicial independence in
the system of administration of justice;
13. Recalls paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, reiterates its request to the

_______________
8

2/7

Resolution 63/253, annexes I and II.

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/67/241

Secretary-General to make every effort to institutionalize good management
practices in order to address the underlying factors that give rise to disputes in the
workplace and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session;
14. Stresses the importance of ensuring access for all staff members to the
new system of administration of justice, regardless of their duty station;
15. Invites all who are involved in the implementation and functioning of the
system of administration of justice, including managers and staff members, to
contribute to strengthening the system of administration of justice, aiming to ensure
that the system has a positive impact on staff-management relations and improves
the performance of both staff and managers;
16. Notes with concern that performance management is highlighted as the
single most important cross-cutting issue in the report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services;
17. Recognizes that sound performance management can greatly contribute
to avoiding conflict in the workplace, and requests the Secretary-General to
redouble his efforts to continue to develop and implement a credible, fair and fully
functioning performance appraisal system;
18. Recalls paragraph 14 of its resolution 66/237, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly, for consideration at the main part of its
sixty-eighth session, an updated report on issues relevant to its review of the statutes
of the Tribunals;
19. Also recalls paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly, for consideration at its sixty-eighth session, a
proposal for conducting an interim independent assessment of the formal system of
administration of justice;
20. Decides that the assessment requested in paragraph 19 above should be
conducted in a cost-efficient manner and within existing resources;
II
Informal system
21. Recognizes that the informal system of administration of justice is an
efficient and effective option for staff who seek redress of grievances and for
managers to participate in;
22. Reaffirms that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of
the system of administration of justice, emphasizes that all possible use should be
made of the informal system in order to avoid unnecessary litigation, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to recommend to the General Assembly at its
sixty-eighth session additional measures to encourage recourse to informal
resolution of disputes and to avoid unnecessary litigation;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure that management responds
to requests of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services
in a timely manner;
24. Stresses the importance of developing a culture of dialogue and amicable
resolution of disputes through the informal system, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to propose, at the main part of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, measures to encourage informal dispute resolution;
3/7

A/RES/67/241

Administration of justice at the United Nations

25. Recalls paragraph 153 of the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services,
and requests the Secretary-General to take concrete measures to address the current
organizational culture wherein there is a tendency to shift responsibility for the
resolution of conflict upwards in the organizational hierarchy;
26. Welcomes the recommendations to address systemic and cross-cutting
issues contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office
of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixtyeighth session on progress made on the implementation of those recommendations;
27. Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General, contained in
paragraph 67 (a) of resolution 62/228, paragraph 21 of resolution 63/253,
paragraphs 16 to 18 of resolution 65/251 and paragraph 19 of resolution 66/237, to
report to it on the revised terms of reference for the Office of the United Nations
Ombudsman and Mediation Services, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that the terms of reference and guidelines for the Office are promulgated as soon as
possible;
28. Recalls paragraph 18 of its resolution 66/237 regarding the establishment
of a single integrated and decentralized office of the ombudsman for the United
Nations Secretariat, funds and programmes, and acknowledges that progress has
been made in this regard;
29. Also recalls paragraph 20 of resolution 66/237, welcomes the
information provided informally by the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman
and Mediation Services on the financial and administrative implications resulting
from settlements reached through informal dispute resolution, and requests the
Office to provide to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session another
informal briefing on such implications;
30. Recognizes the positive impact of the establishment of the seven regional
offices of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, in Bangkok,
Geneva, Nairobi, Santiago, Vienna, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Regional Service Centre
in Entebbe, Uganda;
III
Formal system
31.

Recognizes the roles of the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal;

32. Recalls article 7 of the statute of the Dispute Tribunal and article 6 of the
statute of the Appeals Tribunal, and encourages the Tribunals to continue to expand,
as appropriate, their practice of consultation in the process for developing
amendments to their rules of procedure;
33. Requests that the rules of procedure of the Dispute Tribunal and the
Appeals Tribunal 9 be amended accordingly whenever a decision of the General
Assembly entails a change in the rules of procedure;
34. Recalls paragraph 35 of its resolution 66/237, and notes that
corresponding changes in the rules of procedure of the Dispute Tribunal and the
Appeals Tribunal have not yet been made;
_______________
9

4/7

Resolution 64/119, annexes I and II.

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/67/241

35. Approves the amendments to article 9 of the rules of procedure of the
Appeals Tribunal contained in annex II to the report of the Secretary-General on
amendments to the rules of procedure of the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals
Tribunal;
36. Welcomes the issuance and dissemination of guides on lessons learned
from the judgements of the Tribunals;
37.

Notes the increasing number of cases proceeding to formal adjudication;

38. Also notes that the authority of judges and the applicability of their
judgements derive from decisions of the General Assembly, including the statute of
the Dispute Tribunal and the statute of the Appeals Tribunal;
39. Recalls its decisions in paragraphs 30 and 31 of its resolution 63/253 that
the conditions of service of the judges of the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals
Tribunal shall be treated separately from the conditions of service of other judicial
appointments in the United Nations system;
40. Emphasizes the importance of recruiting the candidates best able to shape
the Appeals Tribunal as a pillar of judicial excellence, and invites the Internal
Justice Council, with reference to the recommendation in paragraph 35 of its
report,4 to specify its recommendations on the stipulated qualifications for the
Appeals Tribunal judges;
41. Recalls paragraph 52 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and approves the mechanism for
addressing possible misconduct of judges proposed by the Secretary-General in
section B of annex VII to his report on administration of justice at the United
Nations;
42. Recognizes the importance of effective measures against the filing of
frivolous applications, encourages the judges to make full use of those measures
currently available to them, and invites the Internal Justice Council to provide its
views on appropriate options in this regard;
43. Takes note of paragraph 18 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and decides to consider the request for an
additional Legal Officer position at the P-3 level in the Management Evaluation
Unit in the context of the proposed budget for the support account for peacekeeping
operations at the second part of its resumed sixty-seventh session;
44. Stresses the need to ensure that all individuals acting as legal
representatives, whether staff members or external counsel, are subject to the same
standards of professional conduct applicable in the United Nations system, and
requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Internal Justice Council and
other relevant bodies, to prepare a code of conduct for legal representatives who are
external individuals and not staff members, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at the main part of its sixty-eighth session;
45. Decides to consider the continued need for the P-3 Legal Officer position
in the Office of Staff Legal Assistance in Nairobi in the context of the proposed
budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations at the second part of its
resumed sixty-seventh session;
46. Welcomes the positive contributions of the Office of Staff Legal
Assistance to the system of administration of justice, and decides to revert, at its
sixty-eighth session, to the issue of the mandate and functioning of the Office;

5/7

A/RES/67/241

Administration of justice at the United Nations

47. Decides that the overall level of resources for the Office of Staff Legal
Assistance shall be maintained at its current level until the General Assembly takes
a decision regarding a staff-funded scheme;
48. Notes that the report of the Secretary-General on administration of justice
at the United Nations contains a number of joint financing options for the Office of
Staff Legal Assistance by the Organization and the staff, and in this regard, requests
the Secretary-General, when submitting a single preferred proposal for
consideration and approval by the General Assembly, at the main part of its sixtyeighth session, to do so in consultation with all relevant stakeholders, including the
Internal Justice Council and staff representatives;
49. Recalls paragraph 34 of its resolution 66/237, paragraph 46 of the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, article 10.7
of the statute of the Dispute Tribunal and article 9.3 of the statute of the Appeals
Tribunal, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to solicit
responses to facilitate the submission of further information to the General
Assembly, for consideration at the main part of its sixty-eighth session, on the
practice of tribunals in other international organizations and in Member States
regarding awards for moral damages, emotional distress, procedural irregularities
and violations of due process;
50. Notes the importance of ensuring that all categories of personnel have
access to recourse mechanisms to resolve disputes;
51. Takes note of the proposed expedited arbitration procedures for
consultants and individual contractors developed by the Secretary-General
contained in annex IV to his report on administration of justice at the United
Nations, and decides to remain seized of the matter;
52. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to include information on
disputes involving non-staff personnel in the context of both management
evaluation and informal mediation in his respective reports and to provide
information also on existing measures to institutionalize good management practice
that aim to avoid or mitigate disputes involving the different categories of non-staff
personnel;
IV
Financial implications and cost-sharing arrangements
53. Expresses concern that the agreements on cost-sharing arrangements for
the totality of the internal justice system has not yet been finalized and that the full
amount of reimbursement has not yet been received by the participating entities;
54. Recalls paragraph 43 of its resolution 66/237, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to make every effort to expedite the finalization of agreements on costsharing arrangements for the totality of the internal justice system, including on the
expected reimbursement of approximately 4.5 million United States dollars from the
participating United Nations entities, and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at the main part of its sixty-eighth session;
V
Other issues
55. Recalls paragraph 8 of its resolution 61/261 and paragraph 37 of the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and
6/7

Administration of justice at the United Nations

A/RES/67/241

requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the main part
of its sixty-eighth session proposals with reference to accountability of individuals
where violations of the rules and procedures of the Organization have led to
financial loss;
56. Notes with concern the delays in selecting new members of the Internal
Justice Council, notes that the lack of a functioning Council jeopardizes the control
mechanisms of the formal part of the system of administration of justice, requests
the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly apprised of progress in
appointing members to fill the remaining vacancies on the Council, and requests the
Council to provide recommendations and to report on lessons learned drawn from
this situation;
57. Recalls paragraph 45 of its resolution 66/237, stresses that the Internal
Justice Council can help to ensure independence, professionalism and accountability
in the system of administration of justice, and requests the Secretary-General to
entrust the Council with including the views of both the Dispute Tribunal and the
Appeals Tribunal in its annual reports;
58. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the reports requested in
paragraphs 13, 18, 19, 44, 48, 49, 54 and 55 of the present resolution in a single
comprehensive report on administration of justice to be submitted to the General
Assembly at the main part of its sixty-eighth session;
59. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the
comprehensive report to be submitted by the Secretary-General, without prejudice
to the role of the Fifth Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with
responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters;
60. Reaffirms the need for fully equipped courtrooms and other
administrative requirements for the Tribunals, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure the provision of functional courtrooms with adequate facilities as a matter of
urgency.
62nd plenary meeting
24 December 2012

7/7
