13

Resolutions adopted on the reporu of the Second Committee

Invites the Governments of Member States to give
full recognition to the needs of land-locked Member
states in the matter of transit trade and, therefore, to
accord them adequate facilities in terms of international
law and practice in this regard, bearing in mind the
future requirements resulting from the economic development of the land-locked countries.
656th plenary meeting,
20 February 19S7.
1029 (XI). International commodity problell18
The General Assembly,
Noting that the World Economic Survey 19S5 8 again
stressed the importance, both for world economic stability and for the economic development of underdeveloped countries, of the problems arising in international commodity trade,
Considering the need to promote adequate consideration of these problems through research and international consultation,
1. Draws the attention of the Governments of Member States to the opportunity that exists, under paragraph 3 of Economic and Social Council resolution
557 F (XVIII) of 5 August 1954, for them to bring
commodity problems to the attention of the Commission on International Commodity Trade;
2. Notes Economic and Social Council resolution
620 (XXII) of 9 August 1956;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on International Commodity
Trade to give special consideration, within its present
programme of work-bearing in mind the relevant
parts of the introductory statement of the SecretaryGeneral9 at the twenty-second session of the Council
and the debates in the Second Committee at the eleventh
session of the General Assembly-to the importance
o_f present international commodity problems in relation to world economic stability ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
give his full assistance, within the limit of available
resources, to the work of the Commission on International Commodity Trade, and in particular to the
preparation of studies suggested by it.
656th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.
1030 (XI). Question of the establishment of a
Special United Nations Fund for Economic
Development
The General Assembly,
Convinced that an expanded flow of capital to underdeveloped countries, by contributing towards the improvement of their economies, would, especially in the
light of existing disparities in the rates of growth as
between the developed and the under-developed countrie~, serve the cause of peace, and help towards the
attainment of greater prosperity in all countries,
Mindful of the growing desire for increased action
by the United Nations in the field of financing economic
development, especially for the financing of non-selfliquidating projects,
• United Nations publication, Sales No.: 1956.II.C.1.
'Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Twenty-second Session, 934th meeting.

Recalling that the establishment of a Special United
Nations Fund for Economic Development has been
under close study by the General Assembly for a number of years, starting with its resolution 520 (VI)
of 12 January 1952, and that various special committees and experts have submitted their views on the
question,
Having examined the interim report 10 submitted to
the Economic and Social Council at its twenty-second
session by the Ad H oc Committee set up by the General Assembly in pursuance of its resolution 923 (X)
of 9 December 1955,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 619 A (XXII) of 9 August 1956 which expressed
the hope that the General Assembly, at its eleventh
session, would consider what further steps might help
to promote the early establishment of a special fund
for economic development,
1. Commends the Ad H oc Committee on the Question of the Establishment of a Special United Nations
Fund for Economic Development for the work it has
accomplished in preparing the interim report;

2. Requests the Ad H oc Committee, on the basis
of the views expressed by Governments in their replies
to the questionnaire annexed to General Assembly
resolution 923 (X) of 9 December 1955, the previous
resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Economic and Sodal Council relating to the establishment
of a special fund, the reports of previous special committees and groups of experts, and the suggestions
made during the twenty-second session of the Economic
and Social Council and the eleventh session of the
General Assembly :
(a) To set forth the different forms of legal framework on which a Special United Nations Fund for
Economic Development may be established and statutes
drafted;
( b) To indicate the types of projects which might
be provided for in programmes of operations of a
United Nations economic development fund;
(c) To submit to the Economic and Social Council,
at its twenty-fourth session, together with the final
report requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 923 ( X), a supplementary report prepared in
accordance with the instructions in sub-paragraph (a)
and (b) above;
3. Authorizes the Ad Hoe Committee to append to
its final report any related suggestions or proposals
for the provision of economic assistance to underdeveloped countries under the auspices of the United
Nations which Governments may wish to put forward;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
forward to the General Assembly, at its twelfth session,
the final and supplementary reports of the Ad H oc
Committee, together with any recommendations on
further steps which could help promote the early establishment of an international economic development
fund within the framework of the United Nations ;
5. Invites the Governments of Member States and
the Secretary-General to provide the Ad H oc Committee with all necessary assistance.

661st plenary meettnu,
26 February 1957.
"'A/3134 and Corr. l and 2.
