United Nations

A/RES/60/252

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 April 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 49

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 27 March 2006
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/60/L.50 and Add.1)]

60/252. World Summit on the Information Society
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/183 of 21 December 2001, 57/238 of 20 December
2002, 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 and 59/220 of 22 December 2004,
Recalling also the Declaration of Principles and the Plan of Action adopted by
the World Summit on the Information Society at its first phase, held in Geneva from
10 to 12 December 2003, 1 as endorsed by the General Assembly, 2
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 3
Recognizing that the implementation and follow-up of the World Summit
should be an integral part of the integrated follow-up of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields and should
contribute to the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, and should not require the creation
of any new operational bodies,
Acknowledging the urgent need to bridge the digital divide and to assist
developing countries, including least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States, and countries with economies in
transition to benefit fully from the potential of information and communication
technologies,
Reaffirming the potential of information and communication technologies as
powerful tools to foster socio-economic development and contribute to the
realization of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals,
Stressing the importance of the contribution of the Summit to the building of a
people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented information society so as to
enhance digital opportunities for all people in order to help to bridge the digital
divide,
_______________
1

See A/C.2/59/3, annex.
See resolution 59/220.
3
See resolution 60/1.
2

05-50272

A/RES/60/252

Acknowledging with appreciation the role played by the International
Telecommunication Union in the organization of the two phases of the Summit,
1.
Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Tunisia for having hosted
the second phase of the World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis from
16 to 18 November 2005;
Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
2.
the Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union on the second
phase of the Summit; 4
3.
Endorses the Tunis Commitment and the Tunis Agenda for the
Information Society adopted by the Summit at its second phase;4
4.
Welcomes the contribution of Member States, relevant United Nations
bodies and other intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations,
civil society and the private sector to the success of the Tunis phase of the Summit;
Also welcomes the strong development orientation of the outcomes of
5.
both the Geneva and the Tunis phases of the Summit, and urges their full
implementation;
Further welcomes progress achieved by the Summit towards a multi6.
stakeholder approach in building a people-centred, inclusive and developmentoriented information society, and acknowledges that Governments could play an
important role in that process;
Welcomes the Digital Solidarity Fund, established in Geneva as an
7.
innovative financial mechanism of a voluntary nature, open to interested
stakeholders, with the objective of transforming the digital divide into digital
opportunities for the developing world by focusing mainly on specific and urgent
needs at the local level and seeking new voluntary sources of “solidarity” financing;
Reiterates that the process towards enhanced cooperation to be started by
8.
the Secretary-General will involve all relevant organizations and all stakeholders in
their respective roles, as mentioned in paragraph 71 of the Tunis Agenda;
Invites the Secretary-General, in an open and inclusive process, to
9.
convene a new forum for multi-stakeholder policy dialogue called the Internet
Governance Forum, in accordance with the decisions made at the Tunis phase of the
Summit;
10. Welcomes the importance attached by the Summit, as reflected in the
Tunis Agenda, to multi-stakeholder implementation at the international level, which
should be organized taking into account the themes and action lines in the Geneva
Plan of Action1 and moderated or facilitated by United Nations agencies, where
appropriate;
11. Urges Member States, relevant United Nations bodies and other
intergovernmental organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations, civil
society and the private sector, to contribute actively, inter alia by initiating actions,
where appropriate, to the implementation and follow-up of the outcomes of the
Geneva and Tunis phases of the Summit;

_______________
4

2

See A/60/687.

A/RES/60/252

12. Requests the Economic and Social Council to oversee the system-wide
follow-up of the Geneva and Tunis outcomes of the Summit, and to that end
requests the Council, at its substantive session of 2006, to review the mandate,
agenda and composition of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development, including considering strengthening the Commission, taking into
account the multi-stakeholder approach;
13. Decides to proclaim 17 May annual World Information Society Day to
help to raise awareness of the possibilities that the use of the Internet and other
information and communication technologies can bring to societies and economies,
as well as of ways to bridge the digital divide;
14. Also decides to conduct an overall review of the implementation of the
Summit outcomes in 2015;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
through the Economic and Social Council, by June 2006, a report on the modalities
of the inter-agency coordination of the implementation of the Summit outcomes,
including recommendations on the follow-up process, for consideration at the
substantive session of the Council.
74th plenary meeting
27 March 2006

3
