UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/32
30 May 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3785th meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 May 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is concerned that, despite recent positive
developments, there is continuing instability in Burundi. It recalls its
resolution 1072 (1996) of 30 August 1996, in which, inter alia, it demanded
that all sides in Burundi declare a unilateral cessation of hostilities and
initiate unconditional negotiations with a view to reaching a comprehensive
political settlement.
"The Security Council reiterates its support for the efforts of the
regional leaders and takes note of the Joint Communiqué (S/1997/319) of
16 April 1997 issued following the Fourth Arusha Regional Summit on the
Burundi Conflict held in Arusha, Tanzania. In particular, the Council
welcomes the decision of the regional leaders to ease sanctions in order to
alleviate the suffering of the people of Burundi.
"The Security Council welcomes the fact that talks are being held in
Rome which are complementary to the Arusha process. It also welcomes the
commitment of the Government of Burundi to the comprehensive political
dialogue among all the parties within the framework of the Arusha process.
It urges all the parties in Burundi to continue to pursue a negotiated
settlement and to refrain from actions which are detrimental to such
dialogue.
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the involuntary
resettlement of rural populations and calls upon the Government of Burundi
to allow the people to return to their homes without any hindrance.
"The Security Council expresses its support and appreciation to former
President Nyerere as well as to the Special Representative of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity in their efforts to find a
peaceful solution to the crisis in Burundi.

97-14366 (E)

300597

/...

S/PRST/1997/32
English
Page 2

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep the Council informed on the situation in Burundi, especially with
regard to the progress of a negotiated and peaceful settlement in the
country.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
