A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/104
30 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 88 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/728/Add.3)]
49/104.

Commodities

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 45/200 of 21 December 1990, 47/185 of 22
December 1992 and 48/214 of 23 December 1993, and stressing the urgent need of
their full implementation,
Welcoming the importance attached in Agenda 21, 1/ adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, to issues related to
commodities in the context of sustainable development,
Recalling the commitments on market access made in the Final Act of the
Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations 2/ and the importance
attached therein to increased export opportunities for developing countries,
Recognizing that in many developing countries, in particular African
countries and least developed countries, the commodity sector remains the
principal source of export revenues, employment, income and savings, an

1/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992, (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by
the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
2/
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of
Multilateral Trade Negotiations, done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT
secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7), vol. 1.
95-76267

/...

A/RES/49/104
Page 2

important field for investment and a significant contributor to the
reactivation of growth and development,
Noting the recent increase of some commodity prices, recognizing that
this may not constitute a long-term trend and recognizing also the need for a
better functioning of commodity markets and the necessity of stable and more
predictable commodity prices, including avoiding excessive price fluctuations
and searching for long-term solutions to commodity problems,
Concerned about the difficulties experienced by the developing countries
in financing and implementing viable diversification programmes,
Mindful of the need for developing countries, especially African
countries and least developed countries, to diversify their economies and in
particular the commodity sector, with a view to modernizing their production,
distribution and marketing systems, enhancing productivity and stabilizing and
increasing their export earnings in the context of the general decline of
primary commodity prices,
1.
Takes note with interest of the report of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on the commodity
situation, developmental linkages between the commodity sector and other
sectors and actions required to develop such linkages in the context of
diversification; 3/
2.
Emphasizes the need for developing countries that are heavily
dependent on primary commodities to continue to promote a domestic policy and
an institutional environment that encourage diversification and enhance
competitiveness;
3.
Expresses the urgent need for supportive international policies to
improve the functioning of commodity markets through efficient and transparent
price formation mechanisms, including commodity exchanges, and through the use
of commodity price risk management instruments;
4.
Notes the need expressed by developing countries, in particular
the commodity-dependent developing countries, for stable and more predictable
commodity prices;
5.
Stresses the importance of commodity diversification as a means to
increase export revenues of developing countries and to improve their
competitiveness in the face of the persistent instability in the prices of
some primary commodities and the general deterioration in the terms of trade;
6.
Urges developed countries to continue to support the commodity
diversification efforts of developing countries, especially African countries,
inter alia, by providing technical and financial assistance for the
preparatory phase of their commodity diversification programmes;
7.
Reiterates the importance of maximizing the contribution of the
commodity sector to economic growth and sustainable development in commoditydependent developing countries, and in this respect stresses, inter alia,
that:

3/

A/49/226.
/...

A/RES/49/104
Page 3

(a)
An appropriate domestic environment and favourable international
environment are critical for successful diversification and the creation of
developmental linkages between the commodity sector and other sectors of the
economy, as well as for the availability of market outlets;
(b)
Trade-distorting policies and practices, including tariff and
non-tariff barriers, tariff escalation and obstacles to competition, have a
negative effect on the ability of developing countries to diversify their
exports and to undertake the requisite restructuring of their commodity
sector;
(c)
Expansion of South-South trade in commodities offers opportunities
for intersectoral linkages within and among exporting countries;
(d)
There is a need to promote research and development, to provide
infrastructure and support services and to encourage investment, including
joint ventures in developing countries engaged in the commodity and commodityprocessing sectors;
8.
Emphasizes the importance for developing countries to process a
significant part of their commodities, and in this regard stresses the need
for new market opportunities for their processed and semi-processed
commodities;
9.
Expresses the need for the full implementation of the Uruguay
Round agreement, taking into account the special and differential treatment
agreed for developing countries, including the provisions envisaged for
African countries and the least developed countries;
10.
Welcomes the work being done by the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development on the impact of the results of the Uruguay Round on
individual commodities of particular interest to developing countries and
invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to intensify this exercise in close collaboration with the
executive secretaries of the regional commissions and other concerned
organizations;
11.
Notes with appreciation the work under way by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in assessing the impact of the
Uruguay Round on agricultural commodity markets, and encourages the
Organization to pursue its work and to inform the General Assembly of its
findings;
12.
Urges producers and consumers of individual commodities to
intensify their efforts aimed at reinforcing mutual cooperation and
assistance;
13.
Welcomes the assignment to the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development of the United Nations global mandate for mineral resources,
and urges that efforts be made to mobilize financial resources to allow the
Conference, in close collaboration with the regional commissions, to expand
its technical assistance to developing countries in that area;
14.
Also welcomes the decision of the Standing Committee on
Commodities of the Trade and Development Board, urging the secretariat of the

/...

A/RES/49/104
Page 4

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to continue its work on
commodity risk management, particularly in relation to developing countries;
15.
Stresses the importance of improving the competitiveness of
natural products with environmental advantages and the impact that this could
have on promoting sustainable consumption and production patterns, and calls
for financial and technical assistance to the developing countries for
research and development of such products;
16.
Notes the increased number of requests for assistance that the
Second Account of the Common Fund for Commodities is receiving, expresses the
need for efficient allocation of the existing resources, and also notes the
expectations expressed by member countries of the Fund that further voluntary
contributions will be forthcoming;
17.
Decides to include the question of commodities in the provisional
agenda of its fifty-first session.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
