S/2012/926

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 December 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 13 December 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my report on the situation in Mali of
29 November 2012 (S/2012/894) and Security Council resolution 2071 (2012), in
which I was requested to provide financial costs for the possible deployment of a
logistical support package for an international military force. I also have the honour
to refer to the request by Council members that the Secretariat provide different
options and cost estimates for logistical support that could be provided by the
United Nations.
I should like to recall paragraphs 92 and 93 of my report, in which I shared
some of my concerns associated with the possible provision of a United Nations
logistical support package for an African-led international support mission for Mali.
The United Nations has developed a comprehensive capability to deploy and
support peacekeeping operations where the international military presence enjoys
the strategic consent of the major actors. The United Nations does not have, nor has
it sought to develop, significant expertise or capability to provide logistical support
to international military forces deployed to conduct offensive combat operations
against hostile armed forces. When the hostile forces to be defeated are a highly
capable and violent terrorist organization or organizations, the expertise required to
conduct combat and support such operations is more specialized than that for
standard combat, making the lack of expertise of the United Nations in this area of
particular relevance.
The United Nations has worked hard to provide logistical support to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), including while it has been engaged
in combat operations. I wish to draw the attention of Council members to the fact
that the initial deployment of AMISOM to Mogadishu was mandated through
resolution 1744 (2007) of 20 February 2007 and that it was not until 16 January
2009, through resolution 1863 (2009), that the Council authorized the United
Nations to deploy a logistical support package to AMISOM. Following Council
authorization, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
granted an initial commitment authority for United Nations operations on 10 March
2009. The Secretariat began to provide logistical support directly to AMISOM
through the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA) in October
2009. During the period from the initial deployment in February 2007 to October
2009, AMISOM was provided with logistical support through bilateral channels.
From October 2009 to June 2012, United Nations logistical support was confined to
the capital city, Mogadishu, with very limited supply lines. While UNSOA gradually
12-64925 (E) 181212

*1264925*

S/2012/926

built up capacity to support the two contingents of AMISOM in Mogadishu, once
AMISOM began combat operations outside Mogadishu, UNSOA experienced
significant challenges in providing the level of logistical support required for
sustained AMISOM combat operations.
Drawing on the lessons of Somalia, and as indicated in my report, one option
that the Council may wish to consider would be a phased approach, whereby
combat-related military operations would receive logistical support through
voluntary or bilateral sources. Once the objectives of the military operations had
been achieved, the Council could authorize the United Nations to provide a support
package to assist an international force during stabilization operations. Were the
Council to endorse this approach, details of such a support package could be
developed over time when the operational environment of the post-combat phase
would be clearer.
A second option would be for the United Nations to provide logistical support
to an African-led international support mission for Mali deployed in southern Mali
for the purpose of helping the Malian defence and security forces to build their
capacity to conduct the operations called for in the harmonized joint concept of
operations endorsed by the African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), referred to as the “strategic operational framework” in
my report. Under this option, the United Nations would provide a comprehensive
logistical support package, as detailed below, to international troops in southern
Mali, but would not provide such support to international troops in territory not
controlled by the Government of Mali or in areas of active combat.
A third option for a support package would be to combine the first two options.
Under this scenario, following authorization by the Council of an African-led
international support mission for Mali, the United Nations would immediately
initiate efforts to provide logistical support to the international force in areas of Mali
to which it deploys that are controlled by the Government. After the Malian defence
and security forces and the international force achieve their strategic military
objectives in northern Mali, and combat operations have broadly ended, the United
Nations could then provide logistical support to the international force wherever it is
deployed in the territory of Mali, including in northern Mali, as part of a second,
stabilization phase of military operations. For planning purposes, the information on
the types of logistical support that the United Nations would provide under the first
phase of this scenario would be the same in the initial phase as option II and can
also be found below. Details of the support that would be provided under the second
phase of this scenario could be developed at a later time, as in the case of option I.
As has been broadly acknowledged, the strategic operational framework makes
a number of planning assumptions that would need to be fulfilled, and leaves
unanswered a number of important questions that would need to be answered, for
the concept to be successful. The support package options presented herein offer the
possibility of the United Nations providing significant logistical capability to an
international military force, but are not designed to provide the critical military
enablers necessary for the success of the envisaged operation. Significant bilateral,
financial and material support from Member States and other partners would be
required to cover, among other things, the equipping, predeployment training and
preparation of international forces, in addition to reimbursements of salary and
allowances and acquisition of contingent-owned equipment.

2

12-64925

S/2012/926

Logistical support provided by the United Nations to an international military
force in Mali under the above options would be funded primarily or exclusively
from United Nations assessed contributions and comprise the equipment and
mission support services normally provided for a United Nations peacekeeping
operation of the same size. This would be used to meet the life-support needs of the
deployed international forces, including the provision of rations, fuel, engineering
works, communications and medical support. Assessed funding would also provide
for the strategic deployment of new forces, the rotation of existing forces, the
movement of equipment and supplies and additional staff to manage the delivery of
the support package.
A limited set of the requirements of an international force that would not be
covered by United Nations assessed funding could possibly be met by financial
support from Member States and other partners provided through a trust fund
administered by the United Nations. The trust fund could cover additional
requirements such as the procurement of Organization-owned equipment to bridge
gaps in contingent capability not provided for in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The use of funds administered by the United Nations would need to
strictly adhere to United Nations financial and procurement rules.
In developing the concept for a support package under the above options,
assumptions were made, including that it would be for an international force of up
to 3,300 personnel, comprising 2,990 troops, 30 individual police officers and two
formed police units of, in total, 280 personnel, as provided for in the strategic
operational framework. The composition of the troops would include a force
headquarters, infantry battalions and enabling companies, including aviation,
logistics, transport, engineering, medical, signal and military police.
Logistical support by the United Nations to the international force could be
provided in the functional areas of supply (rations, water and fuel); engineering,
including construction, power generation, water supply and sanitation; medical
support; strategic movement; strategic communications; and limited information
technology support. The troop-contributing countries would be reimbursed for their
organic contingent-owned major equipment, in accordance with United Nations
rates, from assessed contributions. The United Nations could provide logistical
support, under options II and III above, in the following areas, on the basis of the
initial planning estimates and the strategic operational framework endorsed by
ECOWAS and the African Union:
(a) Supply. After an initial period of self-sufficiency, the required rations,
water and fuel would be provided to the international military force up to United
Nations standards through commercial contract arrangements. Delivered
commodities might be provided by the contractor to predefined sector locations
from where the troops would be responsible for collection. Sufficient levels of
reserve stocks would be established to improve the robustness and survivability of
the force. Pending the completion of the requisite procurement processes, the
interim logistical support capability would depend on strong bilateral assistance
from Member States;
(b) Engineering. Engineering support for international troop deployment
would be provided by the United Nations, leveraging a range of enabling
capabilities (military, United Nations and Member States) in addition to construction
services provided by commercial companies. The overall conditions in theatre are

12-64925

3

S/2012/926

harsh and significant efforts would be required to bring facilities and other positions
for the force up to United Nations standards, in particular in the areas of
accommodation, power supply, refrigeration, sanitation and the quality and quantity
of potable water. There would be an urgent need to establish key facilities, including
the force headquarters. The limited engineering concept will recognize the tactical
and interim nature of the international force, with 80 per cent of the force housed in
camps with soft-walled accommodation (tentage). The remaining 20 per cent could
eventually be provided with modularized prefabricated facilities in semi-permanent
hubs. Essential defence stores required by the force would be provided by the
United Nations. The troops would be expected to deploy with self-sustainment
capacity according to United Nations standards. This would include troopcontributing-country-provided tentage, limited sanitation, power and water
production. Bilateral assistance would be essential to bridging any gaps in the
capacity of troop-contributing countries. Particular attention would need to be paid
to minimizing the negative impact of the deployment on host communities, their
resources and the environment;
(c) Medical support. Troop-contributing countries would be expected to
deploy one level II medical facility up to United Nations standards. The United
Nations would support the establishment of additional medical facilities with
equipment, pharmaceuticals, consumables and laboratory supplies, including
ambulances. The United Nations would establish, through commercial or bilateral
arrangements, medical evacuation/casualty evacuation services in Governmentcontrolled territory and to locations outside Mali. Medical evacuation/casualty
evacuation capability from locations in northern Mali would need to be provided by
troop-contributing countries or partners. Pending the completion of the requisite
procurement processes, interim medical evacuation/casualty evacuation capability to
meet all needs would depend on the aviation resources of troop-contributing
countries, with possible support from bilateral partners. Appropriately qualified
medical personnel to staff the facilities must be provided by the participating
contingents;
(d) Movement support. The United Nations would provide the international
force with support in the surface and air transportation of cargo and the deployment
and rotation of contingent personnel. Capability and capacity enhancements to the
existing transport infrastructure might be required to enable airfield, terminal and
port operations. To the extent possible, the strategic movement support will rely on
existing regional United Nations capacities and supply lines;
(e) Aviation. It is not anticipated that, under the current strategic operational
framework, there would be a requirement for United Nations-provided aviation
support operating only in Government-controlled territory. Consequently, it is not
anticipated that the United Nations would provide tactical aviation support within
the theatre of operations. If this requirement were to change, the United Nations
would re-examine this recommendation. The international force would require
aviation support for combat operations in northern Mali, which would need to be
provided by a troop-contributing country or partner. The nature of the tactical
military aviation requirements would need to be identified by the force. The Council
may wish to consider whether the costs of such aviation operations should be
covered by assessed contributions. As mentioned above, the United Nations could
implement some airfield upgrades for the benefit of the force, if required. The
determination of equipment and infrastructure development requirements at local

4

12-64925

S/2012/926

airfields would require the conduct of a specialized assessment mission to examine
and assess the suitability of the existing capabilities in operational safety, including
night operation capability, available aviation fuel supply systems, firefighting and
emergency crash and rescue services. Search and rescue operations would need to be
conducted by the force;
(f) Communications and information technology. The United Nations
would provide the required strategic communications and information technology
capability and equipment for force locations in Government-controlled territory. The
United Nations would rely on local contracts or bilateral arrangements for
installation, training of contingents and technical support in theatre. Contingents
from each troop-contributing country would be expected to deploy with the
appropriate tactical communications capability. The United Nations could provide
the equipment and training for the force’s strategic communications and information
technology requirements in areas not controlled by the Government, but the force
would need to install and operate the equipment. The United Nations could maintain
and repair equipment if it were transported to the designated United Nations facility.
The United Nations logistical support would be defined and provided through
a range of contractual instruments. Host Government agreements would need to be
established to allow the United Nations and its contractors to operate in Mali and in
countries in the region. Memorandums of understanding between the United
Nations, troop-contributing countries and the organization fielding the international
force would be required to provide for fully accountable use of the Organization’s
resources in conformity with its rules and regulations and to define the roles,
responsibilities and obligations of each party. As the United Nations and
international partners’ analysis of contingent and future United Nations support
conditions develop, it is anticipated that other required services would be identified.
In parallel, scopes of work for longer-term requirements to bring support services to
United Nations standards would be developed and bid on commercially.
United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces would be
provided in compliance with the Organization’s human rights due diligence policy.
Under the policy, the United Nations would be obliged to carry out a risk assessment
of any forces that might receive United Nations assistance under such a support
arrangement. Should it be determined that there are substantial grounds to believe
that there is a real risk that an intended recipient may commit grave violations of
international humanitarian, human rights or refugee law, the United Nations would
work with the relevant authorities with a view to putting in place effective measures
to eliminate or minimize that risk. Should the United Nations receive reliable
information that provides substantial grounds to believe that a recipient of United
Nations support is committing grave violations of international humanitarian,
human rights or refugee law, the United Nations would intercede with the relevant
authorities with a view to bringing those violations to an end. If, despite such
intercession, the situation were to persist, the United Nations would be obliged to
suspend or withdraw support from the elements committing those violations.
The troop-contributing countries would be reimbursed from assessed
contributions for their organic contingent-owned major equipment, in accordance
with United Nations rates. However, the United Nations logistical support package
would not provide reimbursement for contingent-owned major equipment that was
gifted or donated to troop-contributing countries, ECOWAS, the African Union or

12-64925

5

S/2012/926

where the ownership remains with the donor; personnel reimbursement (troop
costs); reimbursement for self-sustainment; the acquisition of contingent-owned
major or minor equipment; compensation for loss and damage of contingent-owned
equipment owing to hostile action and forced abandonment; and compensation for
death and disability.
Costs for the logistical support package remain dependent on the further
development of a concept of operations for the international force, in addition to
continuing work to identify suppliers and deliver support solutions. Logistical
support for the deployment and sustainment of the international force would be a
substantial undertaking. A preliminary assessment of the financial implications for
assessed contributions, should the Secretariat be requested by the Council to
implement the logistical support package outlined in option II or phase I of
option III, indicates that support for a fully deployed force, in a sustainment phase,
would cost approximately $133 million over a full year. One-off establishment costs
of $64 million could also be expected. If the Council were to authorize a
multidimensional mission, including components to provide political and rule of law
support as described in my report, additional costs each year of approximately
$25 million, in addition to up to $10 million in start-up costs, could be expected.
The above costs are based on comparable elements of United Nations
operations. Should the Council decide to authorize a logistical support package, the
Secretariat would conduct detailed planning, in consultation with relevant partners.
Such planning may result in an adjustment to the above-estimated costs. Following
the planning, the Secretariat would present a financing proposal to the General
Assembly for its consideration. Such a proposal would be prepared with regard to
the appropriate funding period and a phased deployment timeline for personnel and
equipment.
With the information currently available to the Secretariat, it is difficult to
estimate the costs involved in providing logistical support to combat operations in
northern Mali. Nevertheless, the recent expansion of AMISOM, and its support from
UNSOA, beyond Mogadishu into south and central Somalia provide an indication of
the difficulties and added costs that could be incurred in supporting combat
operations by an international force in a remote environment. Such a force would
need to rely extensively on its own organic logistical capabilities, as AMISOM does,
including light engineering and distribution of supplies, in the absence of available
vendors and given an expected inability to sufficiently secure United Nations
activities. Even so, on the basis of experience in Somalia, the lengthened supply
lines and more hazardous conditions associated with the provision of support to
combat operations in the north of Mali would probably add significantly to support
costs as compared to the costs presented above for options II and III. On the basis of
the provision of supplies and services through a combination of bilateral and
commercial channels, it is estimated that the costs of a basic support package to a
fully deployed mission of 3,300 personnel undertaking combat operations in
northern Mali would amount to $161 million over a full year. In addition, initial
start-up costs could reach $82 million.
I further observed in my report that the effective implementation of any
intervention in northern Mali would require significant and timely external support
for training, equipment, logistics and funding for both the international force and the
Malian defence and security forces above and beyond what the United Nations

6

12-64925

S/2012/926

could provide. There are various options for the provision and funding of such
support. The full range of support required by the Malian defence and security
forces, including training and equipping requirements, will need to be provided
through direct bilateral and multilateral arrangements, in addition to support in
coordination with the African Union, ECOWAS and other key stakeholders. The
options presented above do not anticipate a role for the United Nations in providing
support to the Malian national forces.
In addition to the logistical support package and financial contributions
delivered through a trust fund administered by the United Nations, the force would
also have a number of military capabilities required to achieve the objectives
outlined in the strategic operational framework. ECOWAS has identified special
forces, air support assets (combat and utility aircraft and logistic air transport),
additional fire support capabilities, intelligence and counter-improvised explosive
device equipment and training as areas that require additional support. These would
also need to be addressed through bilateral and multilateral arrangements.
Subject to the adoption of a resolution by the Council and budgetary approval
by the Assembly, the United Nations would be able to begin to deliver initial
elements of logistical support through commercial arrangements six to nine months
following such authorization and approval. It will be important to be realistic about
the time that will be required to bring contingents up to United Nations standards
and to deliver the full logistical support package. In the interim, capability would
need to depend on strong bilateral assistance from Member States.
Furthermore, as conveyed in my report, I intend to establish a full-time United
Nations political presence, including expertise in human rights, in Mali. This
presence could evolve into a multidimensional United Nations mission with the
mandate to provide the Malian authorities with long-term stabilization and
peacebuilding assistance. It would include rule of law and security institutions, mine
action, promotion of national dialogue, regional cooperation, security sector reform,
human rights and the initial demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of
former combatants, as necessary. Should the Council decide to authorize these
additional mandated responsibilities, I would initiate an integrated assessment and
planning process and revert with specific proposals for further consideration. As
more information becomes available, the proposals provided above would be further
refined, including with regard to the structure, composition and mandate of the
multidimensional United Nations presence in Mali.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-64925

7
