S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6950th meeting
Wednesday, 24 April 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nduhungirehe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Rutilo
Mr. White
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Zhu Yanwei
Ms. Legendre
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Flies
Mr. Erroja
Mr. Munir
Mr. Lee Kyung Chul
Mr. Listov
Mr. Akpoto Komlagan
Mr. Day
Mr. Cenzer

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-31190 (E)

*1331190*

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Cuba, Ecuador and Indonesia to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to request all speakers to limit their
statements to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. I would also like to thank
Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for the briefing he gave us this morning.
I would like to make the following three
comments. First, the Lebanese Government affirms
today, as it always does, its respect for its obligations
under international resolutions, including resolution
1701 (2006). On numerous occasions, the Lebanese
Government has called for the implementation of all the
provisions of that resolution. By the same token, it has
often called upon the international community to urge
Israel to fulfil its obligations and to end its violations
of Lebanese sovereignty by land, sea and air, also in
accordance with resolution 1701 (2006).
It is undeniable that the current calm in southern
Lebanon reflects my country’s commitment to those
obligations and the cooperation between the Lebanese
Army and the forces of United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL). In that regard, we pay tribute
to UNIFIL’s contribution through its command and
its troops. Nonetheless, efforts must be strengthened
to move from a cessation of hostilities to a permanent
ceasefire.
It should also be underscored that the Israeli air
force violates Lebanese airspace on a daily basis, as
underscored by the Secretary-General in his periodic
report (see S/2013/120). That is a threat to the safety
of civilians and is also likely to undermine UNIFIL’s
mission. In that connection, must I recall that Israel
continues to occupy the northern part of Al-Ghajar
village and neighbouring regions? That is a gross
violation of its obligations under resolution 1701 (2006)
and disregards the plan put forward by UNIFIL to bring

2

an end to the occupation. Today we reiterate our call for
an end to Israeli occupation of the northern part of the
Al-Ghajar village, the Shab’a farms and the Kfar Shuba
hills.
Secondly, since our meeting on 18 April on the
humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.6949), the
situation in that country has worsened further, as has
its impact on neighbouring countries, in particular
on my country, Lebanon, at all social, economic and
security levels. I would therefore like to state that
Lebanon is committed, now more than ever, to a policy
of dissociation from the crisis in Syria. It is committed
to the tenets of the Baabda Declaration, adopted by the
National Dialogue Committee in June 2012.
This morning His Excellency, Mr. Michel Sleiman,
President of the Republic, reiterated his position that
Lebanon will not allow weapons or combatants to be
sent to Syria or training camps to be set up in Lebanon.
In that regard, he underscored that this position is not
only in accordance with the implementation of the
Baabda Declaration and the policy of non-interference
in Syrian affairs, but also helps to consolidate Syrian
national unity and avoids destabilizing the situation.
However, the military impact of the fighting in Syria
continues to spread to the border areas with Lebanon
and constitutes a gross violation of my country’s
security. In that connection, we again condemn those
who order such violations, whatever their justification
may be.
Furthermore, the ongoing influx of Syrian refugees
into Lebanon is constantly increasing. The number
of refugees has increased by 20,000 during the past
week, while resources are noticeably decreasing. We
are no longer able to meet the basic needs of refugees
for housing, food and medicine. Nonetheless, we
reiterate that the borders of Lebanon will remain open
to Syrian refugees and that Lebanon has no intention
to deport anyone. At the same time, we reaffirm our
support for the two requests made by the the President
of the Republic of Lebanon for the convening of an
international conference on Syrian refugees in order
to consider ways to share the burden, based on the
principal of a shared responsibility, and to establish
camps within Syria far from the confrontation zones
and close to neighbouring States, under the protection
of the United Nations.
Thirdly, returning the to the main topic of today’s
debate, all reports underscore the fact that Israel is

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

pursuing its settlement activities in the occupied
territories with impunity and in violation of United
Nations resolutions, and continues to build the separation
wall in contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Similarly, it continues
to confiscate lands and take control of water sources in
contravention of the provisions of conventions signed
in Geneva and The Hague.
However, a new factor that is actually both new and
old is the worsening of the difficulties experienced by
prisoners in Israeli detention. As the Council is aware,
since it began its occupation in 1967, Israel has detained
over 726,000 Palestinians and left many to rot in prison
without trial. Since the beginning of this year, Israel has
arrested more than 1,070 Palestinians. Of those, 234 are
children, some of whom are only eight years old. Samer
Issawi and his companions have continued their hunger
strike and their heroic resistance month after month in
order to ensure that the cause of Palestinian prisoners
is publicized in the international media. Indeed, their
cause has been taken up by numerous humanitarian
human rights organizations. The conditions that led to
the deaths of the two prisoners, including Maysara Abu
Hamdiyeh, has shaken international public opinion.
However, the Security Council has remained silent in
the face of that unacceptable humanitarian tragedy.
In the same context, I should now like to focus on
the issue of children in the Israeli military detention
system, in particular following the publication of a
report on that subject by UNICEF on 6 March. The
report documents the most abject, arbitrary, institutional
types of maltreatment — including torture, blows and
humiliation — inflicted upon Palestinian children
when they are stopped or transferred to be interrogated.
Those practices include, inter alia, raids into houses
and arrests in the middle of the night. They are detained
alone, threatened with rape and are not allowed to have
their family members present with them. In the report
on the subject, UNICEF calls for all measures to be
taken to ensure appropriate treatment of Palestinian
children who are arrested by the Israeli authorities, in
accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and other national instruments.
We are not living on another planet. We are fully
aware of the political reasons for this situation, even
if we do not approve of the political reasons that have
prevented the Council from assuming its responsibilities
and bringing an end to Israel’s occupation of the
Palestinian State and the realization of its independence.

13-31190

But what is stopping the Council from at least adopting
a statement to reflect UNICEF’s recommendations,
based on the most basic humanitarian standards? How
can the Council remain silent?
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We have
carefully listened to today’s briefing by Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
My delegation supports the comprehensive statements to
be delivered this afternoon by the representatives of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and of Djibouti on behalf of the States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Allow me to add the following observations.
Egypt underscores that Palestine’s accession
to non-member observer State status in the United
Nations pursuant to the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012 is a first step
towards full membership of the State of Palestine at the
United Nations on the basis of the borders of 4 June 1967.
We call on the Security Council to respond as soon as
possible to the request from the State of Palestine dated
23 September 2011 for full membership at the United
Nations (S/2011/592, annex I).
Egypt condemns the continuing illegal Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular around East Jerusalem. We call
on the international community to take a firm stand
against those illegal practices.
Egypt condemns the ongoing Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people on occupied land,
including its siege of the Gaza Strip and pressure on
the Palestinian Authority, as well as Israeli settlers
continuing to resort to violence against unarmed
Palestinians. We call on the international community
to work towards an immediate release of the thousands
of Palestinian prisoners and detainees held in Israeli
detention centres. We condemn the flagrant violations
against them, including the deaths of the two prisoners
Arafat Jaradat and Maysara Abu Hamdiyeh. We also
pay tribute to the struggle of the prisoner Samer Issawi.
We hold Israel fully responsible for protecting his life
and call for his return to the West Bank.
The Quartet mechanism must be reviewed. The
group has made no progress in the past few years, to
the point that it cannot even agree on whether to meet.

3

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

Egypt supports the recent efforts of the United
States of America to resume working for peace
following the visit of President Obama to the region.
We hope that those efforts will lead to genuine progress
this year that moves the Palestinian question forward
towards the establishment of an independent and
sovereign State of Palestine on the basis of the 4 June
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. We
welcome the easing of the fiscal restrictions imposed
on financial support to the Palestinian side and look
forward to Israel lifting all financial sanctions.
Egypt is working for stability in the Gaza Strip. We
continue our efforts towards national reconciliation,
which certainly merits the clear support of the
international community and the parties concerned,
not the imposition of obstacles. We express our concern
about Israel’s continuing defiance of all attempts to
calm the situation, including its ongoing aggression
against Palestinians and the strengthening of the
economic embargo on the Gaza Strip, as well as the
restrictions on areas to Palestinian fishermen.
We believe that Egypt’s efforts to preserve
maintain stability on the Sinai peninsula, including
through security cooperation with all parties, have led
to the investigation of undocumented media reports of
two missiles recently being launched against Israel. To
date, we have no specific evidence of the truth of such
allegations.
Israel continues to call for an immediate end to
acts of violence and bloodshed in Syria by providing
urgent assistance to the Syrian refugees and support
to the host countries of those refugees. We underscore
the need to maintain the unit and territorial integrity
of Syrian land and the cohesion of Syrian society. The
events taking place in Syria today in no way justify the
continuing occupation of the Syrian Golan. We call for
the immediate implementation of relevant resolutions
regarding the legitimacy of the occupation of the Golan.
We call for no settlements in the Golan and Israel’s
withdrawal from the territory.
In the light of what I have just said, Egypt again calls
on the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities
in order to deal with the Palestinian question with the
seriousness that it requires. We further urge the Council
to take the necessary measures to put an immediate
end to the illegal Israeli settlement activities towards
an ultimate solution, in particular since the question of
Palestine has been and continues to be the fundamental

4

reason for instability in the Middle East, thereby
threatening international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would
like to express my gratitude to the Security Council for
giving me the floor on behalf of the League of Arab
States at the first meeting and briefing on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
since the summit meeting of the League of Arab States
held at the end of March. The importance of today’s
meeting lies in the fact that it represents a further link
in the communication and contact between the Security
Council and the League of Arab States following the
Council meeting attended by the Secretary General
of the League of Arab States on 26 September 2012
(see S/PV.6841). That meeting led to the adoption of
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/20) reaffirming
the cooperation between the League of Arab States and
the United Nations in the area of international peace
and security.
I will therefore focus my statement on the contents
of the decisions of the recent Arab summit and the
statement of the Secretary General of the League
of Arab States on the question of Palestine and the
developing situation in Syria.
The summit meeting of the League of Arab States
adopted resolution 7595, which reaffirms that a just
and comprehensive peace is our strategic option. The
resolution underscores the fact that the peace process
is a comprehensive and indivisible course of action and
that a just and comprehensive peace in the region can
be achieved only through a complete Israeli withdrawal
from the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, to the lines
of 24 June 1967, and the territories still occupied in
southern Lebanon.
The resolution reaffirms the need to achieve a
just solution to the problem of Palestinian refugees
on the basis of the Arab Peace Initiative, General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), the establishment of
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and the condemnation
of all forms of settlement, in line with the Arab Peace
Initiative adopted by the 2002 Beirut summit and the
subsequent summit meetings of the League of Arab
States, as well as international law and the relevant
terms of reference. The resolution reaffirms that

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

Palestine is a full partner in the peace process. It calls
for continued support for Palestine in its just demand
that Israel cease all settlement activities. It further calls
for negotiations to be based on the terms of reference
of the peace process, namely, the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the principle of land for peace, and within a specific
time frame. It urges that the borders be discussed on
the basis of an end to the occupation since 1967 and that
the final status issues of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in
particular the settlement of the questions of Jerusalem,
refugees, borders, land, water rights and Israel’s full
withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories, start to
be addressed.
The resolution underscores the fact that the Gaza
Strip and the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, are a single and indivisible geographic
entity, on which, together with all territories occupied
since 1967, the independent State of Palestine is to be
established, with East Jerusalem as its capital. It also
condemns all Israeli efforts to divide the unity of the
Palestinian territories, as well as all unilateral measures
by Israel.
Since the historic adoption by the General
Assembly of resolution 67/19 granting observer
status at the United Nations to the State of Palestine,
the peace process has been in a stalemate as a result
of Israeli settlement activities. The stalemate has led
regional and international partners to express concern
about the threat it poses to the peace process. Israel’s
intransigent and continued expansion of settlements in
the face of the clear international consensus on their
illegality and illegitimacy, their violation of the norms
and rules of international law and humanitarian law,
and the grave harm they do to the peace process and the
achievement of the two-State solution also led the Arab
summit to hold Israel wholly responsible for the delays
in negotiations.
In that context, the Arab summit called upon the
international community to launch serious discussions
whose terms of reference should be the implementation
of United Nations resolutions, in particular relevant
Security Council resolutions — primarily resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) — calling for an end to
the occupation and an Israeli withdrawal to the 1967
borders, an end to the occupation of the territories
of the State of Palestine, and the release of Arab and
Palestinian prisoners. The summit also called upon the

13-31190

Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities and
adopt the necessary mechanisms to achieve those ends.
In that context, I note the conclusions adopted by
the Foreign Affairs Council of the European Union on
10 December 2012, which emphasized the urgency of
renewed, structured and substantial peace efforts in
2013, as well as the report of the Secretary-General of
8 March 2013, which states that “[t]he year 2013 will
be decisive in the peace process” (A/67/738, para. 25).
The Secretary-General’s report also reiterates the five
priorities he set forth in that regard in his address to
the General Assembly on 22 January 2013, primary
among which was the importance of renewing a
collective international engagement, which was further
emphasized in the Caracas Declaration in Solidarity
with the Palestinian People and the State of Palestine
of 18 April 2013.
Of course, the commitment of the Security Council,
as the United Nations body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, should be in the
forefront of that collective international engagement.
Further, on 23 January, the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations
stated that the United States is still fully committed to
direct negotiations, which lends further significance
to the forthcoming visit to Washington , D.C., next
week by the Arab ministerial delegation following this
week’s consultations with the Secretary General of
the League of Arab States and visits to a number of
European States that have taken place since the Arab
summit in March.
Moving on to the situation in Syria, the most
important development in the context of the Arab
League was the adoption of resolution 580 by the
Arab summit on 26 March. I will describe some of
the resolution’s content without getting into too much
detail.
First, the resolution welcomes the fact that the
National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and
Opposition Forces would now be occupying the seat
formerly held by the Syrian Arab Republic in the League
of Arab States, its bodies, councils and organizations,
until the holding of elections leading to the formation
of a Government that can assume authority in Syria.
Secondly, the resolution emphasizes the importance
of efforts to reach a political solution in the Syrian
crisis as a priority, and the right of States to their own
self-defence.

5

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, the resolution commends the efforts of
neighbouring States and other Arab States in providing
for the urgent needs of refugees and calls for support to
help those States shoulder the burden of hosting refugees
in terms of housing and other assistance, particularly in
Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq, in accordance with the relief
plans put forth by their respective Governments.
Fourthly, the resolution calls for an international
conference at the United Nations for the reconstruction
of Syria and the rehabilitation of infrastructure in
all affected sectors as a result of the widespread
destruction. In that regard, I also note the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Syria. The Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States held a meeting a Geneva
last week with the High Commissioner for Refugees
to address all aspects of the crisis, including renewed
cooperation between the League of Arab States and
Office of the High Commissioner.
In order to reaffirm the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States to achieve stability, security and good governance
in Syria under a democratic system, the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States held a number
of meetings at the Headquarters of the United Nations
in New York on 22 April, the first of which was with
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Also in attendance
was Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, who
chairs the committee formed by the Ministerial Council
of the League of Arab States on the crisis in Syria,
where a consensus was reached on expressing greater
concern about the deteriorating situation in Syria than
it has at any other time in the past, taking note of the
effects of the crisis on the region, and stating that there
is no viable solution to the crisis other than a political
solution.
The tripartite talks between the Secretary General
of the League of Arab States, the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi were
held the same day, 22 April, in the course of which
they considered ways and means to assist the various
Syrian parties in launching a transitional political
process aimed at creating a new Syria where the entire
population and all factions would enjoy protection. In
that meeting, Mr. Ban called upon the Security Council
to come together and exert all its efforts to achieve a
political solution. He also expressed his support for the
efforts of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for that purpose, a call
which was seconded by the Secretary General of the

6

League of Arab States. We make the same appeal to
the Security Council today. Undoubtedly, in the end,
all those efforts will lead to the implementation of the
Geneva Communiqué which can be modified to take
into account developments that have taken place since
its adoption.
In conclusion, I would like to express my deep
gratitude for the contacts between the Security Council
and the League of Arab States in conformity with the
agreement reached last September.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I speak on behalf of
the member States of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).
At the outset, Mr. President, I hasten to congratulate
your country most sincerely, as well as you and your
team, upon Rwanda’s rejoining the Security Council
almost 20 years after the genocide. It is a remarkable
achievement, and we salute the people of Rwanda
and wish them continued full enjoyment of peace and
stability.
The current status quo of political stalemate
remains the most pressing concern and long-standing
challenge to the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the international community. Despite the promising
reality following the granting of observer State status
to Palestine by an overwhelming majority of States
members of the General Assembly on 29 November 2012
(see A/67/PV.44), the OIC believes that the implications
arising from the significant missed opportunities we
have seen are definitely unfavourable, especially in the
light of the highly unstable and volatile situation in the
Middle East.
Despite the support granted by the majority of
States Members of the United Nations to resolution
67/19 elevating Palestine to the status of observer State,
Israel, the occupying Power, persists in carrying out
illegal policies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, by expanding settlements,
building an apartheid wall, detaining thousands of
Palestinians and illegally besieging the Gaza Strip.
All these activities now threaten to undermine the
prospects for the two-State solution and to destabilize
the region. In that regard, the OIC calls upon the
international community to ensure Israel’s halt of its
settlement policies and enable the Palestinian people

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

to exercise their inalienable rights, in line with United
Nations resolutions and international law.
The detention of Palestinians is very alarming.
That miserable and hopeless scenario is repeating itself,
against the backdrop of pervasive Israeli repressive and
inhumane measures, and shows no sign of ending. The
resort by Palestinians to refusing food can be seen as a
rejection of the widespread harsh and injurious Israeli
instrument known as administrative detention, which
is administered by military courts, so as to detain
Palestinians indefinitely, subject to half-yearly reviews.
At this critical time, the OIC underlines that prompt
action aimed at upholding the principles of right, justice
and freedom; the enforcement of international law;
and the implementation of resolutions of international
legality constitutes an obligation and a responsibility of
the Security Council. Such action is necessary in order
to maintain the prospects for peace and to accelerate its
realization through fulfilling the Palestinian people’s
national rights to self-determination and independence;
finding an equitable settlement for Palestinian refugees
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III);
resolving the Israel-Palestine conflict; and, ultimately,
achieving a durable peace in the region that will lead to
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine
on pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The OIC remains very concerned over the human
rights violations committed against Palestinians in
Israeli prisons. The death of the Palestinian prisoner
Maysara Abu Hamdieh last month in an Israeli jail not
only exposes the inhumane policies and systematic
violations perpetrated by the Israeli occupation
against Palestinian prisoners, but also requires the
international community to take urgent and effective
action in order to defend Palestinian prisoners’ human
rights, save their lives and pressure Israel to respect its
obligations towards Palestinian prisoners in accordance
with international humanitarian law and the Geneva
Conventions, and to release them immediately.
The OIC underlines that the blockade imposed
by Israel on the Gaza Strip constitutes a collective
punishment of the civilian population; has a serious
social, economic and humanitarian impact on the
living conditions of the Palestinian population; and
represents a serious threat to regional peace and
stability. In that regard, the OIC reiterates its firm and
unwavering demand for an immediate end to the illegal
and inhumane Israeli blockade and the opening of all

13-31190

crossing points controlled by Israel, to allow for the
free movement of persons and goods into and from the
Gaza Strip.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation is
very concerned over the deteriorating situation and
the ongoing bloodshed, violence and destruction of
property in Syria, and it stresses the need to preserve
Syria’s unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. The OIC therefore calls for the immediate
cessation of the violence, killing and destruction, for
the respect of Islamic values and human rights, and for
saving Syria from the danger of an all-out civil war. It
is sad, indeed painful, to acknowledge that the minaret
of Syria’s famous twelfth-century Ummayad mosque in
Aleppo has today been destroyed.
The OIC urges the Syrian regime to immediately
stop the killing of its citizens and engage in a serious
dialogue between the National Coalition of Syrian
Revolution and Opposition Forces and representatives
of the Syrian Government, in order to pave the way for
a transition process that would enable the Syrian people
to achieve their legitimate aspirations for democratic
reform and change.
However, the OIC, while reiterating its commitment
to a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria, calls upon
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, to assume its responsibilities and act promptly
to stop the killing, destruction and displacement
perpetrated against the Syrian people, and to find a
peaceful and lasting solution to the Syrian crisis.
In closing, I wish to reaffirm the full support
and solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people
in their endeavour to regain their legitimate and
inalienable national rights, including their right of
return and self-determination and the establishment
of their independent Palestinian State on their national
soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset I should like to extend to
you my sincere congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
should like also to thank you for having convened this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. Let me
also express my country’s support for the statements
either made or to be made later by the speakers on

7

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

behalf of the League of Arab States, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement.
I should like to begin by offering our condolences
to the United States of America in connection with the
victims of the criminal terrorist acts that took place in
Boston last week. I wish also to reaffirm the sympathy
and solidarity of the Saudi people with the American
people. We feel deeply the grief suffered by the families
of the victims, and we wish a speedy and full recovery
to the injured, who include Saudi nationals.
Regrettably, the achievement of peace and the
reaching of a just and equitable solution to the question
of Palestine seems to remain a disappointing mirage.
Israel continues to show its defiance and its disdain for
the international community’s will by proceeding with
the expansion of settlements and by reaffirming its
determination to persevere in that policy. In addition,
it mistreats and devalues the lives of the Palestinian
prisoners held in its jails by subjecting them to
oppression and starvation, which led this month to the
death of the martyr Maysara Abu Hamdieh.
Moreover, settlers continue to launch brutal attacks
and assaults on Palestinians, the latest of which was
the deliberate running over on 9 March of a 9-year-old
Palestinian child by the name of Malik Adel Al-Shaer.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls on the Council
to act to protect prisoners. We call on the Human Rights
Council, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and humanitarian organizations, as well as human
rights organizations, to closely monitor the situation
of Palestinian prisoners and detainees, and to expose
violations of their political, human and physical rights,
as well as the severe criminal negligence that is inflicted
upon them. We call on the international community to
compel Israel to respect the rights of children, just as
we draw the international community’s attention to
the report issued by UNICEF in February 2013 that
explicitly depicts the brutal and inhuman punishments
meted out by Israel and its occupation forces on the
Palestinian children held in their prisons.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, indeed, all Arab
countries continue to unequivocally choose peace as the
strategic option; their good intentions were reflected
in the launching of the Arab Peace Initiative in 2002.
However, the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people and its continued contempt for and threats
against Haram Al-Sharif are undermining any chance
to achieve a just peace. Such a peace must be based on a

8

globally agreed two-State solution, according to which
the independent State of Palestine would be established
with holy Jerusalem as its capital on land occupied by
Israel within the borders of 4 June 1967.
The time has come to end the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territories, the Syrian Arab Golan and
occupied Lebanese territories. The time has come
for the Middle East to enjoy a just, comprehensive
and equitable peace. The time has indeed come for
Palestinian refugees to return from the diaspora and
have their aspirations realized pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 194 (III). The time has come for
all citizens of our region to enjoy the fruits of peace
and to live in security and stability. It is time for our
societies to achieve the development and prosperity
they deserve. We have had enough aggression, enough
settlements, and enough occupation.
The situation in sister Syria is deteriorating by the
day. So far, more than 70,000 people have been killed,
as noted in the joint statement issued this month by
United Nations humanitarian agencies. Similarly, in the
past week the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has provided alarming figures about Syrian
refugees, whose numbers are expected to reach more
than 3 million. This problem has become an untenable
economic burden on neighbouring countries. In fact, it
has become a serious threat to security and stability in
the region.
Through resolutions and decisions of the General
Assembly, the world has condemned the Syrian regime,
which continues to struggle to maintain power over the
bodies of Syrian children, women, the young and the
elderly. Moreover, the League of Arab States, which
represents the conscience of the Arab community,
has stressed the need to reach an equitable solution by
enabling the Syrian people to defend themselves, to
preserve their rights and dignity, and to achieve their
aspirations to freedom.
We have lately witnessed the bold steps taken by
the Syrian opposition to unite and form the National
Syrian Coalition, which has been recognized by more
than 100 countries in the world as the representative
of the Syrian people. Moreover, the Coalition has been
invited to assume the Syrian seat in the League of Arab
States. The time has come for the Syrian people to
regain their due position in international organizations
and bodies.

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

The Syrian people have spoken loudly and declared
their will by demanding the departure of the Al-Assad
regime, which lost its legitimacy as soon as it committed
aggression and atrocities against its own people. The
search for an equitable solution in Syria must begin by
allowing the Syrian people to open a new chapter in
their lives — a chapter upon which the sun of freedom
will shine and which will allow them to exercise their
genuine right to choose their own leadership and
their representatives away from the authority of this
tyrannical regime.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing
and the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine for their
interventions.
As we enter the second quarter of 2013, the situation
in the Middle East remains a source of grave concern
for the world. The peace process between Israelis and
Palestinians remains perilously stalled. The situation in
Syria is deteriorating still further and the spillover effect
on its neighbours, with a full-fledged humanitarian
crisis, is ever more serious.
Despite the international community’s best hopes
that appropriate conditions for the resumption of
negotiations on the two-State solution will eventually
prevail, the continued occupation of Palestine
indefinitely prolongs the uncertainty, instability and
insecurity so detrimental to both Palestinians and
Israelis. This state of affairs is untenable, and we must
see progress towards two States living side by side
in peace and security. That will be beneficial for the
Israelis, the Palestinians and the world as a whole, as the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict constitutes one of the most
serious challenges to international peace and security.
The illegal construction and expansion of Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, continue to pose the most
significant and immediate threat to the two-State
solution. Brazil reiterates yet again its call on Israel
to cease all settlement construction immediately and
unconditionally, to reconsider its decision to build in
the so-called E-1 area, and to dismantle all settlement
construction. Settlements are illegal under international
law, constitute a major obstacle to peace, and contribute

13-31190

to the indefinite protraction of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We must recall that Israel, as the strongest
party and the occupying Power, bears the greater
responsibility to take steps in order for peace to thrive.
Brazil followed with keen interest and expectation
the recent visit of United States President, Barack
Obama, to Israel and Palestine, and the subsequent talks
between Secretary of State John Kerry and leaders of
the region. We do hope that the resumption of effective
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations will once again figure
as a top priority for all involved. We urge Israelis
and Palestinians to take advantage of the momentum
that Brazil hopes will soon be generated and to show
the political resolve needed to reach the goal of an
independent, democratic, contiguous and economically
viable Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, living
side by side with Israel.
Although economic measures alone cannot
substitute for progress in the political arena, we
are convinced that fostering inclusive economic
development in Palestine is essential to consolidate the
State and build a solid basis for lasting peace.
In the same vein, the active engagement of Israeli
and Palestinian civil societies with their Governments
and with each other can contribute significantly to
peace efforts. Indeed, many civil society organizations
from both sides are a source of hope in the search for
peace. It is important to give adequate voice to those
civil organizations devoted to reconciliation, solidarity
and sustainable peace. They should receive greater
attention from multilateral organizations, including
UNESCO and the Human Rights Council.
In addition to the efforts of individual actors to
bring about the resumption of peace negotiations, the
Security Council must actively carry out its Charterbased responsibility to promote peace in the Middle
East, as it currently does in so many other parts of the
world.
Turning to Syria, let me express our dismay at the
continuation of the unabated violence against civilians
and at the destruction of a brotherly country in a
conflict that has simply lasted far too long and taken too
high a toll. It must come to an end. Brazil reiterates its
strong and unequivocal condemnation of all violations
of human rights and humanitarian law perpetrated
by all sides. As we have consistently pointed out, the
primary responsibility to protect civilians lies with the
Government of Syria. At the same time, we recall that

9

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

all parties must fulfil their obligation to halt violence
and fully abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Brazil views with serious concern allegations that
chemical weapons may have been used in Syria. We
believe that it is essential that this issue be dealt with
in accordance with established legal procedures, in an
impartial and transparent manner. We recall Syria’s
obligation under the 1925 Geneva Protocol and reiterate
our view of the importance of Syria’s accession to the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
If the violence is to end, all stakeholders, especially
those who have significant influence on the parties,
must actively seek to convince all sides that there is
no military solution to the conflict and that they must
engage in a Syrian-led negotiation process. For this
purpose, it is critical to stop the flow of weapons into
Syria, which further feeds the erroneous perception that
military victory is a realistic possibility. Meanwhile,
civilians continue to bear the brunt of doubtful political
calculations.
We commend the work of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. Brazil
regrets that political differences have prevented this
body from engaging in the implementation of the final
communiqué of the Action Group for Syria of June 2012.
The elements contained therein provide the guidelines
for a viable negotiation process that will open the way
to putting an end to the crisis and meeting the legitimate
claims of the Syrian people for democracy, economic
opportunity and social justice, while preserving the
independence and territorial integrity of Syria. We
continue to firmly believe that a Syrian-led transition
can be attained only through comprehensive national
dialogue. In this sense, we should listen carefully to
the proposal of Guatemala for a second meeting of the
Geneva Action Group for Syria.
In view of the grave deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, Brazil continues to urge all parties
to facilitate safe, unfettered and immediate access for
humanitarian organizations to all those in need. We
praise the humanitarian assistance provided to Syrian
refugees by neighbouring countries. Brazil has been
contributing financially through the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to mitigate the
plight of the refugees and internally displaced persons.
Consideration must also be given to the lifting of all

10

unilateral sanctions that affect the lives of the civilian
population, in line with recommendations contained in
reports of the independent international commission
of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic of the Human
Rights Council.
Finally, let me briefly refer to Lebanon. Brazil
commends President Sleiman and the Lebanese
Government for continuing to adhere to the dissociation
policy. We call upon parties in Syria and actors in
Lebanon to effectively cooperate with the Lebanese
Government in its efforts to preserve such a key policy.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I should like to
express my warmest congratulations to you, Sir, on the
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
by your country this month. There is no doubt that on
the day when the results are assessed, the international
community will remember the positive momentum that
you gave to this body.
I appreciate this opportunity to share with the
Council the conclusions of recent deliberations held
by the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People on the issue that is
central to its mandate. Meeting on 17 and 18 April in
Caracas, Venezuela, at the invitation of the Venezuelan
Government, our Committee called on the international
community to re-engage with Israel and the State of
Palestine and to remove the obstacles to negotiation.
We called for a revitalized Quartet, which should
coordinate with key regional players and report to the
Council on its efforts and progress made.
In Caracas, we strongly condemned settlements
and demanded their removal. We also asked the
Council and the high contracting parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention to uphold their responsibilities to
ensure a end to settlement construction in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The meeting in Caracas deplored
the abuse of Palestinian prisoners, who are often
detained without trial, leading to hunger strikes and
deaths. Participating delegations also demanded the
immediate release of all prisoners, including children,
women, elected officials, pre-Oslo detainees, and those
held without trial.
We expressed optimism that the passage of General
Assembly resolution 67/19 would accelerate the

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

momentum in the Council towards full United Nations
membership for the State of Palestine. We considered
the vote on 29 November 2012 was a kind of vote of
confidence, as Palestine meets the Charter criteria
for statehood and is ready and willing to assume
the responsibilities that come with United Nations
membership. That is why we called on States that
recognize Palestine at the United Nations to establish
diplomatic relations with it.
We confirmed that the State of Palestine may avail
itself of the dispute-settlement mechanisms provided
by the International Court of Justice, and supported any
action by Palestine to participate fully, effectively and
constructively in the work of the United Nations and its
conferences, including, for example, by signing treaties
and conventions, including the Rome Statute. We also
called on the international community unequivocally to
support Palestinian unity.
Finally, at the Caracas meeting it was decided to
ask the General Assembly to proclaim an international
year of solidarity with the Palestinian people in 2014
and to launch a global campaign to bring an end to the
Israeli occupation of the occupied territories, realize
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, and
promote a just, lasting, and comprehensive negotiated
peace. Those, Sir, are the decisions that we took in
Caracas and that the Committee, through me, wishes
to convey to you.
The President: I now give the floor to the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The acceding country
Croatia; the candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; and the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania, align themselves with
this statement.
Let me start with the Middle East peace process.
Ending the conflict is a fundamental interest of the
European Union, as well as of the parties themselves
and the wider region. For this reason, the European
Union reiterates the urgency of renewed, structural and
substantial peace efforts in 2013.
The European Union commends and supports
the diplomatic efforts currently being deployed by
the United States to facilitate this process, including

13-31190

the personal commitment of President Obama and
Secretary of State Kerry, and urges the parties to engage
in good faith and with the necessary political will. The
European Union also recalls the particular importance
of the Arab Peace Initiative, which provides regional
support for a comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian peace
settlement.
The European Union is aware of the obstacles
that stand in the way of a comprehensive peace
between Israelis and Palestinians, but it also believes
that a decisive breakthrough is possible and that it
must take place very soon. Waiting for supposedly
better circumstances is not an option, as the time for
implementing a two-State solution is running out.
The European Union reiterates that Israeli
settlement activities, which are illegal under
international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and
undermine the viability of the two-State solution. The
European Union recalls its long-standing concern about
the extensive use by Israel of administrative detention
without formal charge.
The new opportunity for peace must be seized and
must be about more than simply getting the parties back
to the negotiating table. Greater mutual confidence
between the parties needs to be created. An appropriate
framework, including parameters, is needed if
negotiations are to have a chance of succeeding in a
reasonable time frame.
The European Union stands ready to give active and
concrete support to these efforts with all the instruments
at its disposal. The emphasis that the European Union
has placed in recent months on economic development
in the occupied Palestinian territory — in particular in
Area C of the West Bank — is fully in line with the
options and initiatives currently under discussion. The
European Union is ready and willing to take its support
to the next level in order to help to ensure that resumed
direct substantial negotiations between the parties are
successful. In the same spirit, the European Union
remains fully supportive of ongoing efforts aimed
at Palestinian reconciliation under the leadership of
President Abbas, in line with the principles set out in
his speech of 4 May 2011.
The European Union condemns in the strongest
terms the latest rocket fire from Gaza and rocket
attacks against the Israeli city of Eilat, and reiterates
its fundamental commitment to the security of
Israel. It is vital that all parts of the agreement on the

11

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

cessation of hostilities be implemented. On the same
line, the European Union also urges once again the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) in all
its parts. The European Union will also continue to
work to reduce actions on the ground that threaten the
success of a renewed talks process.
The European Union understands that Salam
Fayyad has decided to resign as Palestinian Prime
Minister but that he will, for the time being, remain
at the head of a caretaker Government. The European
Union commends him for the remarkable results he has
achieved in institution-building and in strengthening the
rule of law over almost six years in a very challenging
role.
The European Union recalls that, as the largest
donor to the Palestinian Authority, it has played a
major role in bringing about these achievements, which
led international financial institutions to declare that
the Palestinian Authority is above the threshold for a
functioning State. The European Union stresses in this
regard the importance of the Palestinian Authority’s
fiscal sustainability and economic viability. It
underlines the necessity for the transfer of Palestinian
tax and custom revenues to be made in full and on a
regular basis.
If an agreement to finally end this conflict, which
has lasted for decades, were to be reached, the door
would open to a deepened and enhanced cooperation
between the European Union and all the countries
of the region, bringing benefits to all involved and
contributing to the prospect of a new era of peace and
prosperity throughout the Middle East.
Allow me now, Sir, to turn to Syria. The
humanitarian briefings last week in this Council (see
S/PV.6949) painted a horrific image, underscoring
once again how civilians, and among them women
and children, are paying the price for the fighting. The
European Union recalls that the Syrian regime bears
the primary responsibility for the ongoing violence, and
condemns the widespread and systematic violations and
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian
law. We continue to witness indiscriminate shelling with
heavy weaponry and air and Scud missiles attacks by
the Syrian regime; just recently we have heard reports
about another onslaught of the regime forces close to
Damascus, killing at least 109 people — many of them
civilians — in the single suburb Jdeidet Al-Fadel.

12

The European Union recalls the latest report of
the independent international commission of inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, which states that crimes
against humanity and war crimes have been committed
in Syria. In this regard, let me stress that all parties to
the conflict should commit to their obligation to abide
by international humanitarian law — including the
protection of medical facilities, staff and patients — and
hold to account those in their ranks who do not. The
European Union recalls that there should be no impunity
for any such violations and abuses.
Syria has not responded to the repeated calls of
the international community to ensure accountability
through a national procedure. The European Union
therefore wishes to recall that the Security Council can
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court, as requested in the Swiss letter to the Security
Council of 14 January 2013, at any time. The European
Union calls on the Security Council urgently to address
the situation in Syria in all its aspects, including this
issue.
We are maintaining our efforts towards reaching a
credible political solution through a Syrian-led political
transition principally based on the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012, and leading to a democratic, peaceful
and inclusive Syria. In this regard, the European Union
welcomes the establishment of the Syrian National
Coalition, which the European Union accepts as a
legitimate representative of the Syrian people, as a
crucial step forward. We fully support Joint Special
Representative Brahimi’s efforts and the proposals he
made on 29 January. In his briefing just a few days
ago, he emphasized that the initiative of dialogue that
was proposed in February by Sheikh Moaz Al-Khateeb
should be further developed, not discarded.
The European Union is therefore encouraged by the
acceptance by the Coalition of the principle of a political
process under credible conditions. It is of the utmost
importance that all Syrian opposition forces act in a
united way towards achieving a democratic transition
in Syria in the inclusive framework of the Syrian
National Coalition. The European Union looks forward
to working with the interim Chairman, Mr. George
Sabra, to that end. In that regard, we also welcome the
opening of the office of the Syrian National Coalition
in New York.
Alongside its diplomatic action to promote a
political settlement, the European Union is the leading

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

humanitarian donor in the context of the Syrian
conflict, as part of a wider international response.
The total European Union response to the crisis,
including pledged support, has reached a level of close
to €800 million committed by the European Union and
its member States. However, that is still an insufficient
amount to cope with the growing number of persons in
need. We are particularly grateful to the Governments
and peoples of Syria’s neighbouring countries for the
generosity they have shown, and we call on Member
States to honour the pledges they have made, including
those made most recently at the Kuwait Conference.
However, money is only one aspect of the problem.
Given the quickly deteriorating situation and the high
risk to the overall stability of the region, an effective
delivery of aid to all those in need is urgently required.
As was requested by Under-Secretary-General Amos
in her statement before the Council last week (see
S/PV.6949), the European Union will take steps in line
with humanitarian principles to provide humanitarian
assistance to all areas in the country, including those
currently not reached by humanitarian aid.
The complex situation on the ground and the
difficulty in gaining access require that the European
Union work with the Syrian National Coalition where
necessary to calibrate its response to the real needs of
the population inside Syria. The European Union also
urges the regime in Damascus to allow delivery of
humanitarian assistance by whatever routes are most
effective, in order to reach all the population in need,
including across borders, and to allow a broader scope of
humanitarian actors to work in Syria. We welcome the
fact that the Security Council was finally able to agree
on joint messages in that regard after the humanitarian
briefing, but more is required from the Council.
The Syrian conflict has already spilled over beyond
Syrian borders. The crisis is escalating in a dramatic and
unpredictable way, with a huge potential to destabilize
the entire region. We urge the Security Council to
actively follow the situation in Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq
and Turkey and other spillover threats. The European
Union recalls the obligation of the Syrian authorities to
respect the sovereignty and integrity of neighbouring
States and condemns its violations of those principles.
Lastly, the European Union is extremely concerned
by allegations that chemical weapons might have been
used in Syria. We emphasize that any use of chemical
weapons, whether by a State or a non-State actor, is

13-31190

abhorrent and must be unreservedly condemned. The
European Union and its member States have addressed
a letter to the Secretary-General welcoming his
decision to start an investigation into that matter. We
remain convinced that the seriousness of the allegations
that have been made warrants a full, independent and
impartial investigation and that such an investigation
should commence quickly and cover all serious
allegations about the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
All parties in Syria, particularly the Syrian regime,
must cooperate fully with the investigation, including
by providing unimpeded access for investigators. They
must also ensure the safety and security of chemical
weapons stockpiles, pending independently verified
destruction under supervision by the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
The President: Before giving the floor to the next
speaker, I would like to recall that all speakers shall
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana, Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, for his leadership in
convening this open debate. I would also like to express
appreciation to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
Japan has long understood the Palestinians’
aspiration to build an independent State and has
supported the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. Japan thus endorses a two-State solution,
under which Israel and a future independent Palestinian
State would coexist, side by side, in peace and security.
In the light of that position, Japan voted in favour of
General Assembly resolution 67/19 regarding the status
of Palestine at the United Nations in November 2012.
Japan once again calls upon Palestine to
immediately resume direct negotiations with Israel
and not to use its non-member Observer State status,
granted in accordance with the General Assembly
resolution, to act in a way that might negatively affect
or hinder direct negotiations with Israel. We ask for
prudence with respect to its conduct, such as applying
for membership in international organizations, an
action that might negatively affect prospects for the
resumption of negotiations.

13

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

Israel, for its part, should freeze its settlement
activities in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. The
transfer of tax revenues, which Israel collects on behalf
of the Palestinian Authority, is a necessary task that
Israel should conduct for the fiscal stability of the
Palestinian Authority. In that regard, Japan appreciates
Israel’s resumption of the transfers in March.
With respect to the issue of Palestinian prisoners,
Japan worries that that issue could worsen Palestinian
sentiment and thus negatively affect the peace process.
We hope to see the new Israeli Administration create
conditions for a resumption of meaningful negotiations.
As for the situation in Gaza, Japan is concerned
by the sporadic rocket fire into Israel that occurred
recently, despite the ceasefire brokered by Egypt
in November 2012. We urge all parties concerned to
respect the ceasefire with a view to realizing a durable
calm in Gaza.
The entire international community should mobilize
the political and economic means at its disposal to help
Israel and Palestine overcome their differences and
realize substantial progress this year. Japan welcomes
the renewed commitment by the United States to the
peace process following President Obama’s visit to
the region in March 2013. At this critical juncture, we
need to engage with key stakeholders in Arab and other
regions in a more effective manner. In that context,
Japan renews its commitment to making an active
contribution — in cooperation with the United States,
Arab countries, the Quartet and other partners — to
that end.
Japan has been committed to assisting Palestinian
State-building efforts since the Oslo accords. During
the past fiscal year, Japan provided assistance in the
amount of approximately $85 million, including budget
support for the Palestinian Authority and contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We have also been
addressing the needs of socially vulnerable communities
in East Jerusalem, Area C, and Gaza by implementing
various projects in fields such as job creation and the
social participation of youth, child education, health
services and hygiene.
Japan has been promoting regional cooperation. Our
initiative “Corridor for peace and prosperity” has been
making steady progress since 2006. In addition, Japan
launched a new cooperation framework among East
Asian countries to assist Palestinian development by

14

co-hosting, together with Palestine, the first Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development in February 2013 in Tokyo.
As a follow-up, a meeting among participant countries’
aid agencies and a business leaders’ meeting are each
scheduled to take place during the course of this year.
We believe that synergetic effects can be generated with
the new United States initiative that Secretary of State
John Kerry recently announced on business expansion
in the West Bank.
Allow me now to touch upon the question of
Syria. Japan is deeply concerned by the serious and
deteriorating situation in Syria and profoundly deplores
the death of many thousands of people as a result of
the continued violence. The briefing to the Council
by United Nations humanitarian organizations last
week (S/PV.6949) was yet another occasion to listen to
appalling accounts of the tragic incidents taking place
on the ground there every day.
As an active member of the Group of Friends of the
Syrian People, Japan reiterates its call on all parties in
Syria to immediately halt the violence and abuses of
human rights, and condemns the Syrian authorities for
not keeping their own commitments and responsibilities
to protect their own citizens.
It is hardly realistic to expect a smooth political
transition with President Al-Assad remaining in power.
At the same time, we need to deal with threats posed
by extremists. From that standpoint, Japan supports
the diplomatic efforts of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States for Syria, and hopes that
the Syrian National Coalition, widely acknowledged
by the international community as the legitimate
representative of the Syrian people, will consolidate its
base to play a major role in advancing the process of a
Syrian-led political transition.
We regret to see that the Security Council has failed
so far to take necessary action to bring about a political
transition in Syria, despite its primary responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. In
such circumstances, Japan will favourably consider
Qatar’s initiative to seek the avenue of the General
Assembly to underscore the urgent necessity to stop
violence and explore a political solution based on the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

With regard to chemical weapons, Japan urges
the Syrian authorities to refrain from using them
or transferring them to non-State actors in any
circumstances. Supporting the Secretary-General’s
investigation into all alleged use of the weapons, Japan
also demands that full and unfettered access be granted
to his investigation team by the Syrian authorities.
Lastly, there is an urgent need to address the rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria. Japan
urges all parties in Syria to ensure rapid and unimpeded
access for aid organizations to those in need, and to
cooperate fully with the United Nations and relevant
organizations to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The funding situation also needs to be
improved. I would like to announce that Japan has
already disbursed a total of about $65 million that it
pledged at the high-level international humanitarian
donor conference for Syria, held in Kuwait City in
January. As a result, Japan’s assistance has now totalled
$80.5 million. We remain committed to significantly
contributing to international efforts and encourage
other donor countries to do so as well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of April.
The question of Palestine remains the foremost issue
in the Middle East, and the heart of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. Undoubtedly, the Arab-Israeli conflict, which
has lasted for over six decades, will not be resolved until
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories comes
to an end; the legitimate rights of the Palestinians, as
acknowledged by legitimate international declarations,
are realized; and a sovereign, independent and
contiguous Palestinian State is established.
Palestine achieved a great breakthrough last
November when it ascended to the status of a
non-member observer State in the United Nations, with
the support of the majority of the Member States. We
hope that the achievement will be further built upon
by greater international recognition of the State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders, with holy Jerusalem
as its capital.
The continued expansion by the Israeli occupation
authorities of settlement activities in the heart of the

13-31190

West Bank, Jerusalem and its surroundings, especially
after the ascension of Palestine as a non-member
Observer State; the continued expulsion of Arab
inhabitants from their homes; and the expropriation of
their properties are blatant evidence of the insincerity
of Israel’s claims about its desire for peace, and further
undermine efforts to create a Palestinian State and its
national authority. The gross legal and human rights
violations carried out by Israel, the occupying Power,
against the Palestinian people and its lack of respect for
its international obligations are further evidence of that
insincerity.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates its
condemnation of all Israeli practices that have seriously
hindered international efforts for peace and exacerbated
the tense and unstable situation in the entire region.
We renew our call on the international community,
especially the Security Council, to shoulder its full
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
to pressure Israel to halt its illegitimate activities and
for the expeditious resumption of peace talks towards
a fair and comprehensive resolution of the Palestinian
question on the basis of the two-State solution, as
indicated in the Arab Peace Initiative.
We are deeply concerned about the grave
humanitarian and economic situation of the Palestinian
people, especially in the Gaza Strip, as a result of
the continued blockade and closure of the entry
points, leading to grave violations of international
law, including the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. We call
on Israel to end the blockade, pursuant to resolution
1860 (2009); to remove all its military checkpoints from
other Palestinian cities and villages; and immediately
and unconditionally to release Palestinian prisoners
held in inhumane conditions in Israeli jails.
The United Arab Emirates is following with great
concern the deteriorating humanitarian conditions
of the Syrian people and Syrian refugees and the
escalating violence and displacement in the Syrian
Arab Republic. We call on the international community
to shoulder its humanitarian and political responsibility
to halt the great tragedy being endured by the Syrian
people. We emphasize the sovereignty and integrity of
Syria and the need for a political process that would end
the bloodshed and preserve the unity of Syria through
an orderly transition of authority. The United Arab
Emirates has shouldered its responsibilities towards the
Syrian people by providing relief and aid to the refugees

15

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

in neighbouring Arab States and by supporting Arab
international initiatives in that regard.
We renew our support for the efforts of the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to resolve
the crisis peacefully, in accordance with the terms of
reference of his mandate.
We renew our commitment to the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and were deeply disappointed by the
postponement of the conference on the establishment of
a zone free of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass
destructionin the Middle East, which was to be held
in March 2015. We call for that conference to be held
without delay, for all relevant parties to participate, and
for Israel to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and subject all its facilities to the
comprehensive guarantee system.
We call upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to
cooperate fully with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, to fulfil its international obligations, and
remove all doubts and concerns about its nuclear
programme. We hope for a peaceful solution to that
crisis that would remove the shadow of danger from
our region, alleviate doubts concerning the nuclear
programme in Iran and reaffirm its peaceful nature.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Israel occupies Arab land in Lebanon and
Palestine, yet no one at the international level has acted
to put an end to those occupations. The overwhelming
enthusiasm that some are expressing for the Security
Council to adopt resolutions under Chapter VII
dissipates when it comes to Israel, although the
occupation has been going on now for over half a
century. Israel is committing documented, systematic
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. But, paradoxically, no official in Israel has
ever been punished for that.
Today we have heard suggestions that certain
dossiers should be referred to the International Criminal
Court, but that desire disappears when it comes to Israel,
whose violations have clearly reached the level of war
crimes or crimes against humanity. Israel is implacably
pursuin its settlement activity, to which many have
referred today and which has been widely condemned.
The surface area of the settlements has risen by 182 per

16

cent. The number of settlements has gone up 189 per
cent. Paradoxically, there has been no international
response to deter Israel. Israel has been spared the sort
of military and economic sanctions that are imposed on
others, even though everyone is agreed that settlement
building is illegal and an obstacle to peace.
Israel is behaving in flagrant violation of
international law. The paradox is that Israel is
considered by some to be a racist, thuggish State when
it comes to international law. Israel has not respected
any of the resolutions adopted against it. It has enacted
more than 60 racist resolutions against the Palestinian
people since 1968.
Paradoxically, no genuine calls have been made
for the freeing of the Palestinian prisoners. Very few
have called for the Israeli detention camps to be opened
up to international observers or non-governmental
organizations, even though a great number of detainees
have lost their lives due to torture, medical negligence
or hunger strike, or have been killed in a premeditated
way.
Israel introduced nuclear weapons into the Middle
East, and in so doing precluded the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in our region. But the paradox
is that none of the threats and sanctions imposed or
pressure exerted on certain States, particularly those
that have peaceful nuclear programmes in conformity
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, have been applied to Israel, despite the danger
that Israel’s weapons represent for the region and for
the world. These are the realities and the paradoxes that
some States with influence within the Organization
try to sweep under the rug and turn our attention from
because these realities are crystal clear.
How should we answer someone who might quite
rightly ask why we in the United Nations are failing on
the political, humanitarian and ethical fronts to meet
our responsibilities to deal with the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territory and to put an end to these
flagrant violations by Israel? Is it possible or admissible
for certain States to impose their own biased agendas
on our Organization? Everyone has the right to know
openly whether this failure of our Organization is
desired by those influential States, or whether it is just
the result of a lack of power, collusion and weakness
on the part of States? Or should we consider the Israeli
occupation as something that transcends international
law and accountability because Israel enjoys the favour

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

of a specific country? If that is the case, then let us call
things by their name; our Organization should not be
called the United Nations, but the organization of the
countries of major influence.
The United Nations and its Members must act. Since
it began 65 years ago, the Palestinian nightmare has not
sufficed to provoke the conscience of the international
community into adopting earnest measures that would
lead to a fair solution for the Palestinians and restore
their legitimate rights, rather than simply making
pointless and vain speeches before the Security Council
and other international forums. What can the United
Nations and its Member States say to the Syrian people
who remain under Israeli occupation after more than
45 years? What can the United Nations say to them when
they call into question the credibility and effectiveness
of the United Nations? It is the United Nations that has
been incapable of taking real measures against Israel to
force it to implement relevant resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981).
What can we say about the absence of necessary
international efforts to put an end to Israeli settlementbuilding in the Golan? What can we say about the
inability of international human rights mechanisms to
put an end to Israeli humanitarian and human rights
violations? How can we respond when we see that there
is no international reaction?
The indiscriminant and racist policies and practices
of the Israeli regime continue. They continue to remove
people from the separation area. Israel is building a
separation wall in the occupied Golan. What can we
say about the shots fired towards Syrian territory? And
what of the licence that Israel and the United States
have granted themselves to explore for oil in the Golan?
These are all questions that I would put to members
and ask for responses, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. Israel is assisting terrorist groups
in the separation wall area and ensuring that wounded
terrorists get to Israeli hospitals so that they can be
treated in Israel before they are brought back to Syrian
territory along the same line of separation. We must be
aware of the fact that the aid provided to these terrorist
groups in the area of separation is not simply a blatant
violation of international law but also endangers the
lives of United Nations personnel in the area.
On 6 March, terrorist groups kidnapped
21 peacekeepers who were working in the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. The terrorists

13-31190

were allowed to take the hostages to Jordan so that their
photos could be taken with the terrorists. Israel then
authorized the return of the terrorists to Syria.
As I have in other statements that I have made with
regard to the situation in the Middle East, I would like
to underscore the fact that it is dangerous to introduce
other subjects under this agenda item because that could
undermine the historic importance of this agenda item
and divert our debates from their primary objective of
considering ways to put an end to the Israeli occupation.
Therefore, I am not going to respond to the vindictive
allegations made against my country, Syria, by certain
delegations because I do not want to fall into the trap of
burying the real point of this agenda item.
However, we have a great deal to say to refute the
vindictive allegations made by States that support and
arm terrorists, sow fanaticism and destruction in Syria,
and work to ensure that all peaceful solutions to the crisis
will fail. I am referring to Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey,
Israel and certain countries of the European Union,
some of which are members of the Council. All of them
are engaged in provoking an inter-Islamic conflict as a
substitute for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in order
to bury the Palestinian cause and distance themselves
from the mess of the two-State solution. In their clever
statements today, the representatives of that alliance of
States have confirmed our conviction that they seek by
every possible means to steer attention from the point
at hand — the situation in the Middle East — in order
to put the situation in my country, Syria, under the
spotlight.
The situation that has developed is a humanitarian
situation and they want to turn it into a political crisis
with a humanitarian angle. In that connection, I call on
the representatives of Saudi Arabia and Qatar to direct
the content and provocative nature of their statements
to the miserable living conditions endured by the
populations of their two countries. Those populations
are deprived of a constitution, a parliament, civil and
political liberties and any form of national opposition,
not even a formal one. Saudi and Qatari politicians
have spread Salafi, Wahhabi, Takfiri terrorism and
perverted the precepts of Islam, which is based on
tolerance. Those same politicians are today responsible
for shamefully sacrificing the lives of tens of thousands
of Muslim youth throughout the world under the pretext
of Jihad for the sake of petrodollars.

17

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
honour to address the Security Council at this meeting
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I wish
to convey the Movement’s appreciation for Rwanda’s
presidency of the Security Council for having convened
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
regrettably continues to deteriorate owing to the
oppressive, violent practices that Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to inflict on the Palestinian people in
violation of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law. Regrettably, since the last
open debate (see S/PV.6906), despite regional and
international peace efforts, Israel, the occupying Power,
has continued its colonization of Palestinian land, its
blockade of the Gaza Strip, its military raids and arrest
campaign, and all forms of collective punishment of the
Palestinian civilian population under its occupation.
As stressed in the recent meeting of a delegation
led by the NAM Chair with Secretary-General Mr. Ban
Ki-moon and the March President of the Security
Council, the deteriorating situation of the thousands of
Palestinian prisoners and detainees, which are being
unlawfully held by Israel, the occupying Power, is a
matter of grave concern to the Movement. Furthermore,
Israel’s violent suppression of non-violent civilian
protests against the occupation, particularly against the
abuse of thousands of Palestinians in Israeli prisons,
including the recent torture and killing of a Palestinian
detainee and in solidarity with prisoners on hunger
strike, as well as against Israel’s settlement, wall and
colonization of Palestinian land, has caused extensive
casualties and further destabilized the situation and is a
matter that preoccupies the Movement.
We, the Non-Aligned Movement, condemn the
continued unlawful detention and imprisonment of
thousands of Palestinians, including children, women
and numerous elected officials, who continue to be
held under harsh, inhumane conditions and subject to
physical and mental ill-treatment. In that regard, the
Movement condemns, inter alia, Israel’s use of torture
and all other forms of physical and psychological
mistreatment and deprivation of Palestinian prisoners.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for the release of all
Palestinian political prisoners.

18

The Movement condemns ongoing Israeli
settlement activities, which constitute grave breaches
of international law and violate numerous United
Nations resolutions, including resolutions of the
Security Council, as well as other illegal practices in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to defy international law and the will
and demands of the international community with that
destructive, provocative and illegal practice, which
is threatening the realization of a just and peaceful
solution.
Thousands of Palestinians have been displaced
from their lands in the Jordan Valley, where thousands
more are at risk of displacement due to Israel’s illegal
colonization, as well as in and around occupied East
Jerusalem, where the occupying Power continues
to pursue measures aimed at the quiet transfer or
depopulation of the indigenous Palestinian inhabitants
and at ensuring a Jewish majority in the city. Violence
and terror also continue to be waged by extremist Israeli
settlers against the Palestinian civilian population and
at Muslim and Christian holy places, including in
Jerusalem.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for a complete
end to all Israeli settlement activities, the construction
of the wall, home demolitions, residency revocations,
excavations, including near Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
the closure of Palestinian institutions in the city, a
cessation of the transfer of Israeli settlers to Palestinian
land and an end to their lawlessness. The Non-Aligned
Movement also calls for the complete lifting of the
blockade of Gaza and for international attention to the
severe humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip.
The Non-Aligned Movement stresses the urgent
need for action by the international community to
redress the unjust and critical situation endured by
the Palestinian people under Israel’s almost half a
century of military occupation. The relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law must be
implemented. The responsibilities of the Security
Council, which is mandated to maintain international
peace and security, are clear. It is high time that those
responsibilities were upheld. The Security Council
cannot remain on the sidelines. It must act to advance
efforts to resolve the prolonged and tragic conflict as
a result of which the Palestinian people have too long
been denied their inalienable human rights, including
to self-determination and to return, and the freedom of

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
Turning to Lebanon, the Movement condemns
Israel’s ongoing violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty.
It calls on all parties concerned to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the current
fragility and to avoid a resurgence of hostilities.
Such actions also constitute a threat to international
peace and security and are a continuation of Israel’s
aggression against Lebanon.
Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement is concerned about the recent violation
of the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement between
Israeli and Syrian Forces, which brings the risk of
tension, escalation and confrontation in the area. The
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as
Israeli measures to impose its own jurisdiction and
administration in that area, are null and void and have
no legal effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands
that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders
of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
The States members of the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterate their continuous calls on the Security Council
to act urgently in order to send a clear message to Israel,
the occupying Power, that all those illegal actions must
be fully halted forthwith and that it must comply with
international law.
Let me now speak in my national capacity. I
would like to refer to the present political and security
situations in the Middle East region, which is becoming
increasingly fragile and precarious. That is particularly
true with regard to the situation in Syria.
The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that any
foreign military involvement against Syria would only
exacerbate the crisis and extend the insecurity to other
countries in the region. Therefore, Iran is of the view
that the way out of the present crisis in Syria lies in
strengthening a comprehensive and peaceful political
process aimed at establishing, first and foremost,
a cessation of violence between the parties and the
holding of a national dialogue between the opposition
and the Syrian Government for a peaceful political
process. The regional countries should cooperate with

13-31190

one another to facilitate such dialogue and national
reconciliation. To that end, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has actively participated in talks with regional
countries, in particular Egypt and Turkey. It seems that
there is no alternative if we want to restore peace and
stability to Syria and to the region.
Turning now to what was said against my country by
the representative of the Israeli regime in the Chamber,
it is not my delegation’s intention to comment in detail.
I would like to point out only that the Islamic Republic
of Iran has officially declared its commitment to the
fundamental principles of the Charter to refrain from
the threat or use of force against any member of the
United Nations. The Israeli regime, with a dark history
of terrorist activities, possessing hundreds of nuclear
warheads and known as an illegal force in the world,
would do better to keep quiet and to stop threatening
other countries. At the very least, the Council should
demand that the Israeli regime abandon its policy of
flouting international law and the Charter of the United
Nations and immediately desist from resorting to the
threat or use of force.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): First of all, I would like to
convey our appreciation for Rwanda’s presidency of the
Security Council this month and for having convened
this open debate at such a crucial point in time. At the
same time, let me also thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing.
Ukraine is deeply concerned about the deterioration
of the situation in the Middle East and in the Palestinian
territories, in particular. It is our strong conviction
that the solution to the question of Palestine should be
based on the full implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), as well as the Madrid Peace
Conference formula and the Oslo Accords. The lack of
progress achieved in the peace process, including on
the settlement issue, lies at the heart of the Palestinian
people’s frustration. In that regard, I should emphasize
that there is no alternative to the quest for peace and to
the political solution of the crisis.
Ukraine rejects any acts of terrorism, by
whomsoever, as a means of reaching any political
goal. In our view, any violent or provocative actions by
radical elements should be halted resolutely since they
lead only to a further escalation of violence.

19

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

It is our belief that the momentum exists and that,
under the current circumstances, there is no alternative
for the parties but to overcome their differences and,
for the sake of peace, to come back to the negotiating
table. We strongly appeal to all sides to refrain from
any unilateral actions that could further aggravate the
situation or pre-empt the outcome of the final status
talks.
I would like to reiterate Ukraine’s determination
to contribute further to the search for a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. In our view, such a peace
will come about only on the basis of an agreement that
ensures the Palestinian people’s legitimate right to selfdetermination and statehood, while, at the same time,
respecting Israel’s right to peace and security.
Ukraine reaffirms its strong commitment to
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria. We believe that the United Nations
should retain its leading role in solving the Syrian
crisis. We strongly support the efforts of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi as the Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria.
We are convinced that the parties to the conflict
should do their utmost to bring about a sustained
cessation of armed violence in all its forms, paving the
way for a Syrian-led political transition. It is our belief
that a national dialogue that includes all strata of the
Syrian society, together with the introduction of social
and political reforms, is the only effective mechanism
to resolve the existing internal problems.
Ukraine, which fully supports the universal
principles and norms of international law, joins the calls
of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
to avoid the further militarization of the conflict and to
alleviate the suffering of the innocent population. In
that regard, as stipulated by a decree of the President of
Ukraine, my country has, through the United Nations,
provided humanitarian assistance to the Syrian civilian
population, including Syrian refugees in neighbouring
countries.
As to the way forward, we strongly believe that
the Geneva communiqué creates all the necessary
conditions for the parties to reach a peaceful political
solution and to stop the violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

20

Mr. Mukerji (India): Mr. President, let me begin by
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. I would
also like to express our appreciation for the convening
of today’s quarterly open debate, which will allow the
Council to take stock of recent developments in the
Middle East, including the State of Palestine. I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his comprehensive briefing.
The Middle East peace process is passing through
its most difficult phase in recent times. For more than
two years, the parties have not held a single official
meeting. The efforts of the international community,
including those of the Quartet, have failed to make
any impact on the ground. In the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, the intensification of settlement activities
is quickly eroding the very foundation of a twoState solution. The plight of ordinary Palestinians is
worsening every day due to roadblocks and related
occupation infrastructure that put restrictions on the
free movement of persons and goods.
The blockade of Gaza has also continued to cause
a great deal of hardship for the Palestinians. The
plight of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails requires
immediate attention. Meanwhile, the Palestinian
Authority is facing one of its worst financial crises,
which threatens to erode the progress made in building
Palestinian State institutions. If the present situation
persists, the international community will risk seeing
a serious destabilization of the region. It is therefore
imperative that efforts aimed at breaking the deadlock
and resuming the peace process be reinvigorated.
Any political process, to be meaningful, must
put an end to Israeli settlement activities. Continuing
settlement activities are a violation of international law
and harmful to the peace process. We join others in
urging Israel to stop settlement activities in order for
the Palestinian side to come to the negotiating table.
We have noted that Israel has recently taken
measures to allow the flow of basic goods into Gaza.
Still, the continuing blockade remains in force and
is adversely affecting essential services, economic
activities and infrastructure development. We continue
to call for the complete lifting of the blockade. The
parties should also fully implement the provisions of
the ceasefire agreement reached in November 2012.
The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, at its recent
meeting in Brussels last month, underscored the urgent

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

need to close the Palestinian Government’s financing
gap, estimated at $1.2 billion for the current year. In
that context, it is important that the international
community continue to respond to the financial needs
of the Palestinian authority.

Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba
endorses the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In my national capacity, I wish to highlight
some aspects relevant to the matter at hand.

Since the time of Mahatma Gandhi, India’s
support for the Palestinian cause has been strong and
unwavering. India was the first non-Arab country to
recognize the State of Palestine. Since then, India’s
bonds of friendship with the Palestinian people have
been strengthened and reinvigorated by regular
interactions. As a member of the Security Council in
2011 and 2012, India supported Palestine’s bid for full
and equal membership of the United Nations. Continuing
that support, India co-sponsored the General Assembly
resolution 67/19 in November 2012, which upgraded
the status of Palestine to non-member observer State.
India has consistently supported a negotiated solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian issue with a view to achieving
a sovereign, independent, viable and united State of
Palestine, living within secure and recognized borders
with East Jerusalem as its capital, side by side and
at peace with Israel, as endorsed in various Security
Council resolutions and the Quartet road map.

This is the second open debate this year on the
Middle East region held at the Security Council
without achieving any progress. It is unfortunate that
the situation in the region, especially in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, has seen no
progress. The region is still marked by instability and
insecurity.

India has also partnered with Palestine in
socioeconomic development and has extended material
assistance to the Palestinian Authority. As in previous
years, India pledged an amount of $10 million in 2012
as budgetary support to Palestine. India also annually
contributes $1 million to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. India is in the process of implementing projects,
bilaterally and through the India, Brazil and South
Africa Fund, including in the fields of information and
communication technology, vocational training and
school construction.
In conclusion, let me express our deep concern at the
deterioration of the situation in Syria. We believe that
the joint communiqué of the Action Group (S/2012/523,
annex), adopted in June 2012, provides a good basis for
resolution of the Syrian crisis. A Syrian-led political
process that meets the legitimate aspirations of all
sectors of Syrian society is the only way to resolve
the crisis and must be seriously pursued by all parties
concerned.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.

13-31190

The main political problem in the Middle East is
the systematic aggression by Israel against Palestine.
The Security Council must play its role in defence
of international peace and security and immediately
adopt concrete practical measures to compel Israel to
end its abuses and illegal policies and practices against
the Palestinian people. Israel’s behaviour deliberately
contravenes United Nations resolutions and international
law, poses a threat to regional and international peace
and security, and violates the human rights of an entire
people by means of flagrant, systematic and inhumane
abuses that should be condemned by this organ. Israel’s
illegal occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories remains the major obstacle to achieving a
just, lasting and comprehensive solution in the Middle
East region. There will be no peace in the Middle East
as long as those aggressions persist and the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people are not taken into
account.
The General Assembly adopted the historic
resolution 67/19 when a majority of its members
granted Palestine non-member observer status in the
United Nations. Cuba supported that resolution, in
accordance with its long-standing position in support
of the cause of the Palestinian people and the defence of
its rights. However, such action constitutes an interim
step towards the eventual accession of Palestine to the
United Nations as a fully fledged Member State. The
Security Council must consider and approve, without
further delay, the request made by Palestine in 2011 to
be recognized as a United Nations Member State.
Today, the situation in the region is tense and
explosive, due to the increasing number of illegal
Israeli settlements, the harsh and distressing reality
of Palestinian prisoners and the blockade to entry of
goods, humanitarian aid and fuel in the Gaza Strip.

21

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

Palestinian prisoners lack rights to essential
goods and services, namely, water, food, medical care,
education, visits and legal defence. In addition, they
are subjected to continous physical and psychological
abuse. The recent death of a 64-year-old prisoner due
to medical negligence by the occupying Power has led
to violent clashes in East Jerusalem, Hebron and other
localities of the occupied territory, where Israel’s use of
excessive force has injured dozens of people and killed
two Palestinian adolescents.
Only an end to the settlement policy, the release
of Palestinian prisoners and the lifting of the blockade
imposed on the Gaza Strip will make it possible to
launch a significant political process that will bring
peace to the region.
Cuba will continue to support the Palestinian
people in their legitimate and just struggle for selfdetermination and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Cuba calls upon Israel to comply with international
law and to put an end to its occupation of all Arab
territories, and reiterates once again its support for a
just and lasting peace for all the peoples of the Middle
East region.
Cuba is closely following the situation in Syria
and its international impact, aware of the fact that
the information available is frequently manipulated.
The calls made by those who promote regime change
in Syria and rely on the use of force and violence are
alarming. They should instead contribute to dialogue
and negotiation between the parties.
The Security Council was not conceived as an
instrument to be used by certain Powers to provoke
regime change in selected countries. There is reason
to be concerned about intentions to promote Security
Council actions and declarations aimed at increasing
violence, undermining a sovereign Government,
generating insecurity and leading a nation to a social and
humanitarian crisis with unforeseeable consequences.
The obligation of the Security Council is to
promote peace, not violence; to prevent destabilization,
not to finance, arm and train those involved in
destabilization; and to protect the innocent, not to use
and manipulate them for geopolitical purposes. That is
also the responsibility of the Organization as a whole.
Cuba objects to NATO’s maneuvering to have the
Security Council approve the aggression in Syria. It

22

also rejects the complicity of the mass media, which
are accustomed to distorting reality and to not being
answerable for their actions.
Cuba shares the concern about the loss of innocent
lives in Syria and elsewhere in the world. It also
condemns the acts of violence being committed against
defenceless civilians by all those involved in that or any
other conflict.
A civil war in Syria or a foreign-force intervention
would have serious consequences for international
peace and security, especially for the Middle East
region. We reject attempts to turn the alleged protection
of human lives into an excuse for foreign intervention,
either directly or through support for irregular armed
groups, including the use of mercenaries, who only sow
destruction and multiply the number of deaths.
Cuba reaffirms the right of the Syrian people to the
full exercise of their self-determination and sovereignty,
without foreign interference or intervention of any kind.
The role of the international community, in this time of
difficulty for a State Member of the United Nations, is
to offer its assistance in order to safeguard peace and
stability in that country.
Finally, Cuba reiterates its rejection of the double
standard prevailing in the Security Council. On the
one hand, it can be very flexible and tries to ensure,
through all kinds of pressure, that certain situations
are considered in the Council. On the other hand,
when the situation does not suit the interests of certain
countries, it is slow to act, or simply fails to act, as
in the case of Palestine. After dozens of resolutions
by this organ, there has been no progress in achieving
the establishment of a Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It has shown its inability to
grant Palestine its well-deserved status of full United
Nations Member and does nothing to stop the ongoing
violations committed by Israel, the occupying Power,
against the Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending you, Mr. President, for having convened
this important debate. The Sri Lanka delegation
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

The world must not forget the dire humanitarian
situation of the Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, especially in Gaza, where conditions are
unsustainable. We stress the urgent need for the
leadership to end the marginalization and oppression
of Palestinians in their own land. International
humanitarian law requires the protection of the civilian
population in the occupied territories. It is regrettable
that unethical practices continue that could erode the
likelihood of a two-State solution.
The settlement activities run counter to article 49 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention (1949) and are therefore
a factor in the recurrence of violence in the region.
The international community has repeatedly called for
a freeze on settlement activity. The Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the International
Court of Justice all have condemned the settlement
activities as illegal. Ending those practices, which
contribute to much human suffering and continuing
friction in the occupied territories, are essential steps
that need to be taken to improve the situation on the
ground as well as for confidence-building.
The blockade imposed on Gaza has resulted in
approximately 80 per cent of families in that location
being dependent on humanitarian aid from the United
Nations for their survival. Restrictions on imports and
exports are stifling economic growth. Those restrictions
need to be lifted within the framework of resolution
1860 (2009), as that would contribute significantly to
the economic advancement of Gaza and the well-being
of the people.
Sri Lanka also supports the work of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
keep the majority of the people in Gaza supplied with
the bare necessities.
Both parties to the conflict must create the
environment necessary to facilitate peace. There is an
urgent need for mutual confidence-building measures
in support of efforts to resume dialogue and substantive
negotiations. Israel must protect the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied territories and desist from
actions that are contrary to the established rules of
international law and practice. We are also mindful of
the security needs of Israel. The indiscriminate attacks

13-31190

against Israeli civilians, including the firing of rockets
from Gaza into Israel, will widen the gap between
the parties. We encourage both parties to exercise the
utmost restraint for the sake of the safety of civilians
and for the greater goal of peace.
It is important to remain engaged in the process of
finding a just and durable solution to the situation in the
Middle East. Sri Lanka supports the implementation
of the General Assembly resolutions regarding the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to statehood
and the attainment of a two-State solution on the
basis of the 1967 borders. The viability of the twoState solution will depend on the political unity and
economic advancement of the Palestinian people, and
we are confident that Palestinian internal reconciliation
efforts will continue. The progress made by the
Palestinian Authority despite the severe political and
economic constraints is commendable.
Sri Lanka supports Palestine’s application for
admission to full membership in the United Nations,
and it is our hope that the Security Council will give it
favourable consideration.
In conclusion, Sri Lanka welcomes the declaration
made in solidarity with the Palestinian people and State
of Palestine adopted at the recent special meeting of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, held in Caracas.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to convey my sincere congratulations to
you, Sir, on your presidency of the Council this month,
and I thank you for holding this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing today.
Today we meet in our quarterly open debate at a
time when the peace efforts are at a very difficult stage.
The stalemate in the peace process has lasted for years
now and there seems to be no hope for an end to the
deadlock or a resumption of negotiations to achieve a
durable, just and comprehensive peace that would put
an end to the occupation and confirm the recognition of
the Palestinian State as an independent and sovereign
State, within the borders of 4 June 1967 and with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

23

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

We believe that full responsibilty for the stalemate
lies with Israel’s continued practices, as the occupying
Power, its procrastination, its grave violations of
international law and the basic terms of reference of
the peace process, and its continued enforcement
of a policy of fait accompli, enacted through further
annexation of Palestinian territories, the Judaization
of Jerusalem and its separation from its surroundings
in the West Bank, which we denounce. Israel has also
carried out forced expulsions and cancelled Palestinian
identity cards, while increasing and intensifying its
settlement activities and campaigns of escalating
violence by settlers against Palestinians and against
Islamic and Christian places of worship, including the
Al-Aqsa mosque. The current violations and abuses
against Palestinian prisoners in full view of the entire
world are grave violations of the principles of human
rights and international humanitarian law.
Firm and urgent action is required on the part of the
international community to end the bloodshed, which
cannot be prolonged or tolerated and which carries the
risk of an escalation of the situation at any moment,
especially in the light of Israel’s continued policy of
arbitrary arrests of Palestinians, including women
and children. The practices of Israel as the occupying
Power over the past decades can be considered a
form of collective punishment, and the international
community can no longer justify this policy to current
and future generations.
We believe that the resumption of negotiations
on a fair and honest basis requires putting an end to
those practices in the occupied territories, including
East Jerusalem; addressing the question of Palestinian
prisoners in Israeli prisons; and immediately lifting the
unfair and oppressive blockade of Gaza. Those measures
are based on the principles of international legitimacy
and are basic requirements for the resumption of the
peace process.
Tunisia reaffirms that achieving a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East is a comprehensive effort that
can be realized only through an Israeli withdrawal
from all Palestinian and Arab occupied territories,
including the Arab Syrian Golan, a withdrawal to
the pre-1967 borders and from the territories still
occupied in southern Lebanon, and a recognition of the
independence and sovereignty of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as the basis for a twoState solution in which Israel and Palestine live side by
side in peace.

24

We also express our deep concern regarding the
situation in the brotherly country of Syria, where
the ongoing killing and destruction have had grave
consequences for Syria and the entire region, in
particular at the humanitarian level. We reiterate
our support for the aspirations of the Syrian people
to liberty, dignity and democracy, and we recall the
resolutions adopted by the most recent Arab summit in
Doha, which were mentioned by the representative of
the League of Arab States in his statement. We also
emphasize the need for an expedited political solution
that would put an end to the crisis, which can no longer
be tolerated or prolonged, while emphasizing the unity
of Syrians and the territorial integrity of Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): In order for members
to be able to go home before midnight, I have decided
to circulate my speech but not read the whole thing.
Members will thus have to promise to read it.
The civil war in Syria is a catastrophe with no end in
sight. The situation of the millions of civilians in Syria
and in neighbouring countries continues to deteriorate
and has reached unbelievable dimensions. The country
is being reduced to rubble, and the Syrian State is
gradually collapsing. Cities and neighbourhoods are
being destroyed under constant fire from missiles and
heavy artillery on an appalling scale. There seems to be
no end to the suffering of the civilian population. We
are witnessing brutal suppression and indiscriminate
killings. The conflict is spilling across borders and
threatening regional stability.
The paralysis of the Security Council makes the
situation worse. As a result, the dynamic of the conflict
is becoming entrenched in a logic of violence. Norway
urges the Council to take a clear and unanimous
stand against the continuing and gross violations of
international humanitarian law. The international
community must, at an absolute minimum, stand up
for the basic principles of international humanitarian
law, even if it is divided over how to achieve a political
solution.
We urge all countries to stop the flow of weapons
into Syria. A political solution to the conflict is the only
way to save the Syrian people from further suffering,
for which the regime bears primary responsibility.
Therefore, our message to Al-Assad is that he must start
transferring executive power with a view to enabling a

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

meaningful political transition towards a pluralistic and
representative Syria. Our message to the opposition
groups is that they must contribute to a meaningful
political dialogue and negotiate within the framework
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex). Our
message to the Security Council members is that they
must find a way to promote a political transition based
on the Geneva communiqué. We must give our full
support to the work of Joint Special Representative
Brahimi.
Norway is committed to a democratic, pluralistic
and unified post-Al-Assad Syria. We support the
efforts of the opposition groups to organize themselves
on a more inclusive and representative basis. In the
current situation, Norway regards the Syrian National
Coalition as the legitimate representative of the Syrian
people. We are assisting the Coalition in building up
capacities to provide practical help on the ground and
to train people for a future pluralistic and democratic
Syria. The litmus test is whether we succeed in making
the situation better for all Syrian people, ensuring that
the rights of all minority groups are protected. Thus,
whether they are men or women, Alawite, Druze,
Kurd, Sunni, Shia or Christian, all Syrians should be
guaranteed a role in shaping the future of Syria.
We are facing a humanitarian crisis of colossal
proportions. The Syrian Government has shown a
flagrant disregard for the humanitarian consequences
of its indiscriminate warfare. The opposition groups
are also guilty of serious disrespect for fundamental
humanitarian principles regarding the protection of
humanitarian personnel and installations. We therefore
call on the Syrian Government and the opposition
groups to respect international humanitarian law
and fundamental human rights and desist from the
despicable practice of gender-based violence. Those
responsible for crimes against humanity and war crimes
must be held accountable.
Since March 2011, Norway has provided $75 million
in humanitarian assistance to Syrian refugees and to
those who are suffering inside Syria.
Let me now turn to the Middle East peace process.
On 19 March, Norway chaired the spring meeting of
the donor support groups for Palestine — the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee (AHLC) — held in Brussels. Twenty
years have passed since the AHLC was set up to build
the foundations for a Palestinian State and to develop
its institutions. To fully succeed, the State-building

13-31190

exercise may need to be accompanied by meaningful
steps towards the two-State solution. If that vision is
lost, the willingness of donors to contribute will indeed
diminish.
The financial situation is serious. Palestinian
revenues are insufficient for a balanced budget, while
donor contributions have declined in recent years.
Last year, the Palestinian Authority’s deficit reached
$1.4 billion, with donor contributions covering only
$826 million. At the meeting in Brussels, the donors
promised that they would continue to provide funds,
and contributions may reach $1 billion for 2013. That
could cover most of the Palestinian budget deficit this
year, but it will not resolve the long-term challenges.
More and more donors are questioning the
sustainability of the current approach. They are asking
whether we are not in fact financing a permanent
occupation, given that there are no substantial
improvements in those areas or signs of a rapid
resumption of negotiations. The recent resignation
of Prime Minister Fayyad reflects the increasing
frustration of the Palestinians. I salute my good friend
Mr. Fayyad for his steadfast work over many years on
building up a sustainable Palestinian economy and
laying a solid foundation for the establishment of a
Palestinian State.
The parties need to recommit themselves to
achieving a two-State solution. The Israeli occupation
and Israeli settlement activities remain the main
problem and must stop. Rocket attacks against
Israel from Gaza must also stop. Donors need to see
meaningful progress before the next AHLC meeting in
September, which should be convened at the political
level. We need to address the tough questions regarding
the continued relevance of our efforts and strategies as
donors. I appeal to the donors to continue to provide
funding for the Palestinian Authority during this
difficult transition.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
endorses the statement delivered by Mr. Mohammad
Khazaee, Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

25

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

Helping to build a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East is one of the main challenges
of the United Nations. The lack of respect for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and self-determination
of the countries of the South have been recurrent
practices of colonialists and imperialists in times past.
Even today, those practices are still used to retain their
already questionable hegemony.
Now they are turning to new notions to disguise
their purposes while relying on the most advanced
technologies of the military, killing innocent civilians,
including women, children and the elderly. They
sponsor the fragmentation of national States, fueling
ethnic, religious and cultural differences while
seeking to impose political models that are alien to
the realities of countries that have their own historical
traditions. They foster mercenary activities and spread
terrorism in order to change the political and legal
structures of countries and steal their wealth. The
mass media organizations present these terrorists as
redeemers seeking independence and democracy. That
interventionist logic disrupts peace and stability in the
Middle East.

Following the adoption in the General Assembly
of resolution 67/19, granting the status of non-member
observer State at the United Nations, the occupying
Power withheld legitimate Palestinian tax revenues and
defiantly asserted that it would continue to build its
illegal settlements in order to make a State of Palestine
unviable. The occupying Power is attempting to change
the cultural and historical identity of the Palestinian
people, thereby compromising its territorial integrity
and self-determination.
The Venezuelan people admire the endurance
of the Palestinian people and support the right of
Palestine to be a full Member of the United Nations, in
accordance with the provisions of its founding Charter.
We demand that Israel withdraw to its pre-1967 borders
in accordance with resolution 242 (1967). We endorse
the right of the Palestinians to have East Jerusalem as
their capital. We insist that the Palestinian refugees
enjoy their right to return to their homeland. We
demand the release of Palestinian prisoners, and an end
to the occupation of the Syrian Golan. Those who have
committed crimes covered by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court must pay for their crimes.

Venezuela is concerned about the warmongering
actions of Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people, which systematically violates the
human rights of that heroic people. The State of Israel
keeps some 5,000 political prisoners in deplorable
conditions. Arbitrary arrests, harassment and
intimidation are the order of the day. The construction
of illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the criminal blockade against the
people of Gaza continue. UNICEF estimates that each
year, about 700 Palestinian children aged 12 to 17 are
arrested, interrogated and detained by Israel’s army,
police and security agents.

Our delegation stresses the importance of the
special meeting of the United Nations Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, held on 17 and 18 April in Caracas. At that
meeting, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State
of Palestine, Mr. Riad Malki, denounced the apartheid
being practiced in the occupied Palestinian territories
through an inhumane and infamous separation with
zones, facilities, roads, transport and permits only
for Israelis. It is scandalous that Palestinians require
special permits to enter and move within their own
territory. Venezuela endorses these demands of the
Palestinian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Over the past decade, about 7,000 cases of cruel,
inhumane and degrading treatment in the Israeli prison
system have been corroborated. Since 1947, the State of
Israel has failed systematically to implement the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations advocating a twoState solution, shirking its obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations. The principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international humanitarian law,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, are
ignored by Israel. It is undeniable that those who, by act
or omission, support such policies bear their share of
responsibility for the situation.

The Bolivarian Government believes that Syria
must be respected. The only way to settle the conflict in
that country is through political dialogue between the
Syrian authorities and the opposition — an agreement
among the Syrians themselves. We support the efforts of
the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States to Syria, Ambassador
Lakhdar Brahimi, and we express our concern over
the effort to diminish or manipulate the importance of
mediation and dialogue as the ways par excellence to
achieve peace, while irresponsibly promoting war in
order to dismember a sovereign State.

26

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

Venezuela deplores the fact that arms are being
supplied from outside to groups involved in terrorist
activities that refuse to take part in any political dialogue.
Such interference by foreign Powers constitutes a clear
violation of the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence, as they apply to
Syria. The countenancing of diplomatic recognition
by the United Nations of irregular groups acting
independently of the Syrian State and using violence and
terrorism to achieve their political aims is a undesirable
precedent for international law. A negotiated solution
among Syrians themselves is indispensable, urgent and
essential. We encourage peace and will support the
efforts of all those who genuinely seek it.
In Venezuela we cherish the ultimate goods — life
and peace — and we will defend the principles of
national sovereignty and self-determination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): I wish to thank you and
your country, Rwanda, Mr. President, for convening
today’s important open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. My
delegation would also like to express its appreciation to
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing. Malaysia associates
itself with the statements delivered, respectively, by the
representatives of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and by Djibouti, on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Let me begin by addressing the most pressing
priority for my delegation, which is the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. Despite
last month’s visit to the Middle East by the President of
the United States, we have yet to see any meaningful
progress on a two-State solution. Malaysia is deeply
disturbed about the condition of the thousands of
Palestinian prisoners and detainees who have been
unlawfully detained by the occupying Power. It is a
mockery of the rule of law that Israel, which time and
again declares itself to be the only democracy in the
Middle East, unlawfully detains elected Palestinian
officials, as well as women and children. We are
extremely concerned about the fact that a number of
detainees have died in prison, which many Palestinians
fear has been the result of torture by their Israeli captors.
My delegation also condemns Israel’s disproportionate
use of violence against peaceful protesters opposing

13-31190

the maltreatment of Palestinian prisoners, which
resulted, unfortunately, in casualties, including several
teenagers.
Malaysia continues to strongly condemn Israel’s
ongoing settlement activities, which the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the International Court of
Justice, as well as the Security Council itself, have all
declared to be illegal. If those bodies indeed sincerely
believe that those settlements should be outlawed,
they should join Malaysia in condemning the even
more heinous practice of preventing Palestinians from
building on and farming their own lands. We should
not fool ourselves by thinking that Israeli settlers
are innocently exploring unoccupied plots of land
and untapped resources, seeking a brighter and more
virtuous future. The harsh reality is that those illegal
settlers have consistently committed acts of violence and
harassment against Palestinians, and have deliberately
invaded, stolen from or damaged Palestinian-owned
olive groves during harvest time. Even the water from
aquifers in the region is being diverted by settlers
into Israeli pipes, to be used, among other purposes,
for irrigating crops originally tended by Palestinians.
One does not need to guess who will also benefit from
selling overpriced water back to its rightful Palestinian
owners, who are themselves denied the right to drill for
water in their lands.
Sadly, while at the village level Israeli settlers
coordinate to build houses on Palestinian soil, there
is a similar degree of coordination in the macro-level
planning and development of the E-1 area in order
to undermine the future and viability of a State of
Palestine. The international community may have
awoken a little too late to prevent the illegal settlement
activities, but now we should not hesitate to condemn
and take action on the incidents of settler violence and
other illegal acts, before the consequences become even
greater.
The illegal blockade in Gaza remains in place,
despite the urgent need to resolve the serious
humanitarian situation there, especially with regard to
the food security of its residents. Israel also continues
to restrict entry for building materials, including
those that could be utilized for building much-needed
educational and health facilities. The occupying Power
is literally taking away the building blocks for the peace
process, and at the same time is starving the population
to death. Malaysia therefore demands a complete and

27

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

immediate end to the illegal blockade. What is left for
the Palestinians when their homes, land, food, water,
groves, mosques, schools and hospitals have been taken
away? There are many wrongs that must be addressed
concerning the question of Palestine. In that regard,
Malaysia reiterates its support for an independent State
of Palestine in all of the Palestinian territory occupied
by Israel in 1967, including East Jerusalem as its capital.
Malaysia would also like to underline its concerns
about the situation in Syria. We have always believed
that a political solution to the crisis there is achievable,
but it should be based on resolutions 2042 (2012) and
2043 (2012), as well as the joint communiqué of the
Action Group for Syria issued in Geneva on 30 June
2012 (S/2012/523, annex). My delegation underlines
the need for a Syrian-led inclusive political process
that is acceptable to the Syrian people and meets their
collective aspirations and legitimate rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): During the reopening
of the Security Council Chamber last week, it was
noted that the Chamber is possibly the most important
room in the world. That is because of the Council’s
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. In the case of Syria and the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, however, it is clear that the Council
has not been able to live up to its responsibility. In those
two cases the Council has been sidelined, owing to
its own inaction. That not only reflects negatively on
the United Nations and the members of the Council,
it is also bad for world peace. In that regard, Iceland
wholeheartedly supports the sentiments expressed by
the leaders of various United Nations agencies in an
article published in the New York Times on 15 April,
which ended with the words “Enough! Summon and use
your influence, now, to save the Syrian people and save
the region from disaster.” The Council does not have
the luxury of waiting while Syria is destroyed in front
of our eyes. A political solution has to be found.
That brings me to the unresolved question of
Palestinian refugees, since they are being uprooted
once again as a result of the civil war in Syria. Of the
half-million Palestinian refugees in Syria, 400,000
are currently in need of humanitarian assistance.
Approximately 200,000 are internally displaced in
Syria, and 42,000 have fled to Lebanon, where the

28

situation in the Palestinian camps is, to say the least,
very difficult to begin with. That turn of events should
be a wake-up call for the international community to
realize how urgent it is that we find a just and lasting
solution to the plight of Palestinian refugees, as is called
for in General Assembly resolution 194 (III). They have
been waiting for 65 years. The civil war has also drawn
attention to the unresolved question of the occupied
Syrian Golan, which also needs a plan of action from
the Security Council in the light of the developments
on the ground.
As there has been no progress in the peace process
since the last open debate (see S/PV.6906), I will
focus on the role of the Security Council and some of
the activities taking place in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which clearly demonstrate the dire realities
of the occupation and that the situation on the ground is
far from being stagnant, unlike the peace process.
In this regard, we call attention to the deteriorating
security situation for the Palestinians, with notable
increases in fatalities and injuries caused by Israeli
forces, as well as continued settler’s violence;
continued demolitions of Palestinian property, with a
total of 192 structures having been demolished since
the beginning of this year, resulting in the displacement
of 355 people, according to information provided by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs;
continued and accelerated settlement activities, which
are illegal under international humanitarian law and
should be stopped altogether; the high number of
Palestinian children between the ages of 12 and 17
who are arrested, interrogated and detained each year
by the Israelis, amounting altogether to approximately
700 children every year, according to UNICEF; and the
fact that there appears to be a pattern of ill treatment of
child detainees.
Finally, Iceland would like to take this opportunity
to urge the Palestinians to reinforce their efforts
towards reconciliation, which is largely in their own
power to achieve.
Iceland would once again like to reiterate its calls
on Security Council to take on a more active role in
solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, considering the
extreme asymmetry between the two parties and the
need for impartial intervention, including by visiting
the State of Palestine, reaffirming the illegality of the
settlements, and accepting the application of the State
of Palestine for United Nations membership in light of

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

the overwhelming support of the membership for the
Palestinians’ inalienable right to self-determination.
Finally, as regards Syria, Iceland would like to
reiterate its calls on the Council to refer the situation
since March 2011 to the International Criminal Court,
and to come to a common position on how to address the
civil war in Syria and its humanitarian consequences.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset to
thank the Rwandan presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate. We are also grateful
to the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing.
Before I go further, the delegation of Indonesia
would like to associate itself with the statements made
by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
the Permanent Representative of Djibouti on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Like other members of the international community,
Indonesia remains concerned over the absence of
progress in the peace process between Israel and
Palestine. Attempts to resume dialogue and substantive
negotiations between the two parties have been made to
no avail. Nonetheless, we are encouraged by the recent
efforts of the concerned parties to revive the path of
peace, and create an atmosphere conducive to progress.
In this regard, Indonesia remains fervently supportive
of the two-State solution of Israel and a viable and
independent Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side in peace and security, on the
basis of the principle of land for peace and a just and
comprehensive peace consistent with relevant Security
Council resolutions, the road map of the Quartet, and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
Yet, Israeli policy in the occupied Palestinian
territory, especially its continued illegal settlement
activities, continues to prove to be an intractable
obstacle towards that objective. Continued Israeli
settlement activity not only compounds the problem of
the fragmentation of the West Bank, but also signals
a complete absence of commitment to engaging the
Palestinians in fair and realistic negotiations.
In Gaza, the humanitarian situation remains
debilitating as Israel’s severe blockade hinders the
movement of people and goods, thereby leading to

13-31190

increasing unemployment and the shrinking of private
businesses and economic activities. Accordingly,
Indonesia again urges Israel to stop ignoring and defying
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
law, which it has done without repercussion or
consequence thus far.
It is discouraging to note that within the past year,
there has been only one positive development in the
Palestinian cause. That was last November’s historic
admission to the United Nations of Palestine as a
non-member observer State. Regretably, that action of
the General Assembly was met with extreme retaliatory
measures by Israel. We are extremely concerned over
Israel’s continued inhumane and unlawful detention and
imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians, including
children and women, who continue to be subjected to
mental and physical mistreatment without recourse to
just and impartial legal proceedings.
Many members of the international community,
including Indonesia, have persistently condemned
Israeli actions. Yet Israel continues to demonstrate
its disregard for international law. We call on the
international community to work harder to consolidate
our efforts against Israel’s violations of international
law, and to ensure justice and freedom for the people
of Palestine.
On the situation in Syria, a humanitarian catastrophe
has regrettably continued to evolve, without proper
response from the international community, including
the Council. The situation on the ground has become
so dire that it now threatens the stability of the region.
Against this unfolding crisis, earnest efforts to stop
the violence must commence immediately. Members of
the Council must put their differences aside and find
the best way to convince all parties to the conflict to
halt the violence. The grave humanitarian situation on
the ground, particularly with reference to refugees and
displaced persons, must be addressed as a matter of
urgency. Finally, we must start without delay a political
process that will lead to a permanent solution to the
conflict, in accordance with the aspirations of the
Syrian people.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of South Africa.
Mr. Govender (South Africa): South Africa
thanks Mr. Feltman for his briefing to the Council. We

29

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

congratulate Rwanda on assuming the presidency of the
Council this month.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Today’s debate is a welcome opportunity to
underscore once again the importance of finding a
lasting solution to the situation in the Middle East in
general, and the question of Palestine in particular.
As we have said in the past, these meetings have
degenerated into talk shops about the situation, with
countries restating their already known positions but
without producing any meaningful outcome. The sad
part about this is that, while we continue participating
in these routine meetings, the people of Palestine suffer
every day under the yoke of an illegal occupation,
with the occupying Power relentlessly underming
international law, including the resolutions of the
Council, with impunity.
South Africa remains deeply concerned at the
impasse in the Middle East peace process. Despite the
recent efforts of the United States leadership to revive
the peace process, the status quo remains. We hope
that the new coalition Government of Prime Minister
Netanyahu will remove all obstacles to the resumption
of peace talks, including the construction of illegal
settlements, and return to the negotiating table as soon
as possible and in good faith.
Needless to say, the settlements are not only
illegal under international law, but also remain a major
stumbling block to the resumption of direct negotiations
and the achievement of sustainable peace. The Israeli
settlement activities are confiscating Palestinian
territory essential for a future State and seek to isolate
East Jerusalem from other main Palestinian cities,
thereby seriously threatening the very achievability of
the two-State solution in line with the overwhelming
call for the creation of a sovereign, independent, viable
and contiguous Palestinian State, coexisting peacefully
alongside the State of Israel on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Israel
should immediately stop its settlement activities as an
obligation under various Security Council resolutions
and international law.
With regard to the continuing violence, South
Africa reiterates its condemnation of all acts of violence,
regardless of where they come from, as they undermine
the viability of the two-State solution. We are especially

30

concerned by the continued abuses perpetrated by
Israeli settlers against Palestinians and their property,
including the uprooting of olive trees, assaulting and
firing on Palestinians, and the demolition of Palestinian
homes, mosques, churches and cemeteries. We hope
that the Israeli authorities will take action against the
perpetrators of such acts of aggression.
Israel’s announcement last month of its intention
to restart the monthly transfer of $100 million to
Palestine was long overdue, and we remind Israel
that the transfer of that money, which should never
have been held back, is a requirement under the 1993
Oslo Agreements. We also welcome the decision of
the United States Government to unblock of about
$500 million, which was blocked after Palestine was
admitted as a non-member observer State last year. We
reiterate our view that the withholding of the funds is
an illegal and immoral retributive act that constitutes
collective punishment of the Palestinian population and
negatively affects the effectiveness of the Palestinian
authority.
South Africa is concerned about the critical fi nancial
challenges that the Palestinian Authority faces. These
challenges have the potential to reverse the gains made
by Palestine in its institution-building project and to
render the country unstable as service delivery declines.
In that connection, we call on Israel to urgently lift all
restrictions to allow for the development of the private
sector, trade and other economic activities that could
stimulate economic growth and address the Palestinian
Authority’s fiscal sustainability in the short-to-medium
term. Sustained economic development is also critical
to addressing the deep needs of ordinary Palestinians
and to lift them out of abject poverty.
We have also taken note of the resignation of Prime
Minister Salam Fayyad and hope that his successor
will provide the necessary leadership to ensure the
socioeconomic and political stability of Palestine.
South Africa is deeply concerned about the plight
of the Palestinians who are illegally held in Israeli jails.
We deplore the death of Maysara Abu Hamdiyeh in
March this year, whose death could have been avoided
had it not been for medical neglect by the Israeli
authorities. Israel should equally address and improve
the living conditions of prisoners in order to end the
ensuing hunger strike. Palestinian prisoners have long
lived under appalling conditions in Israeli jails and the
international community has not done much about their

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

plight. In that regard, we call on Israel to respect the
human rights of all Palestinian prisoners and abide by
relevant international human rights and humanitarian
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. Israel
should ensure their safety, allow access to them by
family members and respect their basic human rights.
We reiterate our deep concern about the abuse
of the human rights of Palestinian children and their
detention. We are all very aware of the long-lasting
adverse psychological effects that this will have on this
vulnerable group. We have taken note of the February
2013 UNICEF report which, among other things,
concluded that:
“Each year approximately 700 Palestinian
children aged 12 to 17, the great majority of them
boys, are arrested, interrogated and detained by
Israeli army, police and security agents. In the
past 10 years, an estimated 7,000 children have
been detained, interrogated, prosecuted and/
or imprisoned within the Israeli military justice
system — an average of two children each day”.
Regarding the situation in Gaza, South Africa
remains deeply concerned about Israel’s continued
blockade. We call for an end to that man-made and
protracted humanitarian situation through the lifting of
the blockade on Gaza. The blockade and restrictions
imposed are in violation of international humanitarian
law and contrary to the will of the international
community as expressed in a number of Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and 1860 (2009).
The efforts of the international community towards
alleviating the humanitarian situation in Gaza are
commended. For its part, South Africa has contributed
an amount of 2 million rand to the humanitarian
programmes run by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near
East.
South Africa has always maintained that the future
of Palestine is significantly dependent on the unity of
its people. In that connection, we therefore encourage
the Palestinians to strive for unity. In particular,
we implore Hamas and Fatah to work together and
collectively consolidate the gains of the Palestinian
people. Learning from our own experience, we believe
that intra-Palestinian unity is essential for long-term
reconciliation and sustainable peace in Palestine.

13-31190

In conclusion, the deteriorating situation in the
broader region should not detract from our focus on
achieving a permanent negotiated settlement between
the two sides. It is therefore incumbent on the Security
Council and the Quartet to continue to carry out
their responsibilities without fear or favour and with
increased focus. We further call on the Council and
other stakeholders to accelerate efforts towards the
holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis, including
the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.
The President: I call on the representative of
Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to express
my delegation’s deep appreciation to you, Sir, for
having convened this open debate, which provides us
an opportunity to share views on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Not so long ago, my delegation delivered a
statement in this Chamber in which we highlighted
the significance of the transformative events ushered
in by the wave of revolution in the Middle East
inspired by a yearning for freedom and change. The
international community has not been oblivious to the
changing dynamics in the Middle East. While we as
the community of nations respect the aspirations and
the will of the people of that region to live in peace and
dignity, we have a role to play in helping them achieve
lasting peace and a sustainable livelihood.
As the people of the Middle East continue to strive
for a better future, we need to play our part in helping
them reconstruct, develop and build strong, inclusive
and sustainable institutions of governance. Because we
wish for the citizens of the Middle East what we wish
for ourselves, we stand ready and willing to contribute
in whatever way we can in shaping the Middle East
landscape in order to improve the quality of life of the
people.
It is for this reason that, under volunteer platforms
such as CAPMATCH, my country pledges to support
the people of the Middle East through tried and studied
lessons of electoral conduct, democratic governance,
public administration and the strengthening of
enforcement agencies.
There is no doubt that the Middle East of yesteryear
is completely different from the Middle East we know

31

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

now. It is a Middle East that is undergoing rapid
socioeconomic and cultural transitions as part of
globalization. Every day a new story unfolds, a new
chapter in history is written and a new beginning dawns
on the horizon.
Turning to the situation in Syria, my delegation
continues to be concerned about the continued
perpetration of violence and the increasingly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in that country,
which now has the potential to turn into a humanitarian
catastrophe. The people of Syria continue to endure
incalculable hardship and violent repression at the
hands of the Al-Assad regime. Millions remain
internally displaced, while others have sought refuge in
neighbouring countries.
In that regard, my delegation will continue to
condemn such attacks perpetrated against innocent
civilians, in particular women and children. We call
on the international community to continue its efforts
to exert pressure in order to bring the perpetrators of
those heinous crimes to justice.
We specifically call on the Security Council, as the
custodian of international peace and security, to live
up to its obligations, enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. How long will we remain bystanders
while fellow human beings continue to be subjected to
indignity and to be massacred by the very people who
purport to have their interests at heart?
On the question of Palestine, Botswana has stated
and continues to consistently express its position in
various forums, including this body, that there is merit
in the two-State solution. We believe in the coexistence
of Israel and Palestine living side by side as two
sovereign States that share not only a border but also
a common desire for peace, security and prosperity.
It is also imperative that all relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions be respected by both
parties.

good for the peace and security of the region, which has
enormous potential. It will also provide an environment
conducive to a prosperous and peaceful Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Allow me first of all to express
our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on the Middle East.
The Middle East has been going through a
significant period of transition and change. At the heart
of the challenges that we face in the Middle East lies
the Palestinian question. That issue continues to poison
the prospects for regional cooperation, welfare and
peace. Turkey continues to support a two-State solution
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security with Israel and sitting side by side
with us on an equal footing under this roof.
The revival of the Middle East process, which
has been at a deadlock for some time, including the
resumption of comprehensive peace negotiations
between the parties for a just and lasting solution,
has become increasingly crucial. That is especially
important in the face of every passing hour, which
makes a two-State solution less probable. In that
regard, we appreciate the renewed engagement of the
United States Administration in facilitating the peace
process. Turkey, as always, is ready to contribute
to all international efforts towards a just and lasting
settlement.

In that regard, we encourage all parties involved
in the peace process to sit at the negotiating table and
to embrace dialogue. We specifically urge the State of
Israel to cease the construction of settlements in the
Gaza Strip and to enable the negotiation process to
proceed, free of intimidation and pressure.

Israel’s illegal settlement activities present serious
obstacles to the resumption of negotiations. It is time
to seriously commit to and to respect the established
parameters of the peace process. As such, the decision
of the Human Rights Council in March to establish
an independent international fact-finding mission to
investigate the implications of Israeli settlements on
the human rights of Palestinian people throughout
the o occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, is noteworthy. The worrying situation of
Palestinian prisoners under Israeli custody continues
to be a great source of concern, which, as also
demonstrated in the past month, has the potential to
derail any desired advancement in the peace talks.

In conclusion, Botswana reiterates the point that a
stable and peaceful Middle East that is free of violence,
with nations living side by side in harmony, is not only

On that note, I would like to reiterate our
position of denouncing violence regardless of the
motives behind it. The illegal blockade on Gaza is

32

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

not sustainable. We expect the Israeli Government to
lift the blockade, in accordance with its bilateral and
multilateral commitments. The arbitrary closures of
border crossings and other punitive measures against
the civilian population in Gaza are counterproductive
to what we are trying to achieve.
In the meantime, we shall continue to give our
full support to Palestinian reconciliation, which, we
believe, constitutes one of the pillars for peace in the
Middle East. That important requirement should not be
put on the back burner, behind the peace negotiations.
It is also important that the Palestinian parties
understand that reconciliation will deliver recognition
of their role towards peace. Trusting the leadership of
His Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas, we will
continue to urge the parties for an expedited outcome
to their efforts. The international community should
also be ready to lend its support to a Palestinian unity
Government, followed by the holding of elections.
Turkey will continue to support the peace process,
as well as the rightful aspirations of the Palestinian
people, for an internationally recognized statehood, in
accordance with United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Allow me to touch upon the humanitarian
disaster just across our border with Syria. With more
than 70,000 dead, 1.3 million refugees, 4.5 million
internally displaced and 6 million people in need of
urgent humanitarian assistance, the Syrian crisis is the
fastest growing humanitarian crisis in the world. As we
stated last week in the Chamber (see S/PV.6949), the
international community has the moral responsibility to
support the Syrian people in their struggle. That must be
done urgently, collectively and decisively. The average
number of daily crossings by Syrians into neighbouring
countries has reached 8,000. It is not realistic to expect
those countries to continue to absorb the influx of
Syrian refugees at its current intensity. We believe
that, pending a political solution, the international
community should start to discuss unexplored ways
and means to address the problems and needs of the
internally displaced persons within Syria and to find
alternative destinations for those who choose to leave
their country because they feel insecure.
The foreign ministers of 11 countries of the Group
of Friends of Syria, at its meeting in Istanbul last
Saturday, agreed that immediate action must be taken to
bring the Syrian conflict to an end. On the sidelines of

13-31190

the meeting, the Syrian National Coalition reiterated its
very important vision of the new Syria – a democratic
and pluralistic State based on the rule of law, where
all Syrians, man and woman, will be equal, regardless
of their ethnic, religious and sectarian backgrounds.
Those statements are encouraging only as long as the
international community unites and works hand in
hand for all universal values in which we believe.
Let me conclude by sharing the view that 2013 is
vital for peace in the Middle East. Now is the time for
sincere and concrete action. There is an ever-growing
need for concerted action towards a two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Two decades
have passed since the launch of the peace process in
its current form. However, it continues to be a failure
because it focuses on managing the issue instead of
on dealing with the root causes, namely, the continued
Israeli occupation. Despite that failure, we believe that
the window of opportunity remains open in the form of
the Arab Peace Initiative, which has been on the table
for over a decade. Arab countries continue to affirm
their commitment to that peace plan. However, it is also
clear that the window will not remain open indefinitely.
It is therefore important to intensify efforts and work
very seriously and quickly in order to take advantage of
the opportunity before it is too late.
Based on the foregoing, the recent Arab League
summit meeting, which was held last month in Doha,
decided to form a ministerial committee headed by
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, the Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar. The
committee has been given the task of liaising with the
Security Council and the capitals of certain influential
countries in order to promote the Arab Initiative. We
hope that that effort will receive a positive response.
It is important to pressure Israel to put an instant end
to the settlement projects in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, and to hold it to its
commitments, including releasing prisoners that have
been held since before the Oslo Accords, terminating
the unfair and aggressive siege of the Gaza strip and
ceasing to tighten the noose around the Palestinian
economy.
The international community cannot turn a blind
eye to efforts to Judaize the city of Jerusalem. It is an
Arab city that will continue to be proudly Arab with

33

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

its different religions and ethnicities. We would like
to affirm that there is no Palestinian State without
Jerusalem and there is no Jerusalem without the
Al-Aqsa Mosque.
It is also important to achieve Palestinian
national reconciliation as a prerequisite for a just and
comprehensive peace. All parties must work together
in order to support and encourage all efforts that aim
to achieve that reconciliation, instead of undermining
them.
The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic continues
to deteriorate. Despite the ongoing military escalation,
we note that the Syrian regime continues to lose control
on the ground. Therefore, its insistence on remaining
in power has forced it to go to extremes and attempt
to impose a military solution using various methods
against the steadfast Syrian people. Although the regime
is legally and morally responsible for the protection of
its people, it unfortunately continues to use excessive
force, perpetrate massacres and target residential
areas and sanctuaries, such as refugee centres,
schools, hospitals, bakeries and houses of worship,
even historical buildings and archeological sites. That
confirms what is already clear to everyone — the
regime has lost its legitimacy.
A few days ago, the forces of the Syrian regime and
the militias supporting it committed another massacre,
this time in Jdeidet al-Fadel, where they shelled and
destroyed the only bakery in town. The massacre of
Jdeidet al-Fadel and other massacres in Darayya, Houla,
Karm al-Zeitoun and Al-Qubair and other placess are
all crimes against humanity, that is, crimes against us
all that are a source of shame for the regime in the eyes
of humankind as a whole.
One of the most dangerous forms of escalation
in Syria seen recently is the reported use of chemical
weapons. In that regard, the fact-finding mission
formed by the Secretary-General to bring out the
relevant facts and investigate the various repercussions
of those allegations, is of crucial importance.
The briefings by United Nations humanitarian
affairs officials to the Council last Thursday
(S/PV.6949) showed that it has been impossible
to find a humanitarian solution to the Syrian
crisis — the most dangerous humanitarian crisis in
the world. We commend the efforts of the United
Nations and the pledges of humanitarian aid to the
Syrian people. However, we are concerned that the

34

humanitarian crisis is deteriorating so quickly and in
a manner that is beyond the international community’s
ability to respond in terms of aid and assistance. The
danger is not limited to Syria alone; rather, the crisis
has started to spread to neighbouring countries and
threaten the entire region.
We would like to remind the Council that the longer
the Syrian crisis remains unresolved as a result of the
reluctance of the international community to resolve it
and support the Syrian people, the harder it becomes to
achieve a political solution, thus giving more space to
the cycle of violence and the growth of extremism. In
that regard, I would like to refute the lie that the Syrian
regime has been peddling, namely, that its remaining in
power is the only guarantee of safety for the minorities,
In fact, the truth is completely the opposite — the
oppression by the regime and its belittling of the Syrian
people and homeland threaten every part of Syrian
society.
Facing the urgency of the crisis, the Arab League
has, from the very beginning, exerted efforts to create
an atmosphere that would encourage the emergence of
a peaceful solution. In that regard, we supported an
important step, namely, the unification of the Syrian
opposition in its political and military wings under
the umbrella of the National Coalition for Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces. That step was in
response to an important demand by the United Nations
and the international community. We believe that the
United Nations must now, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of its Charter, support the efforts of the League of
Arab States in its capacity as the regional organization
for the region where the Syrian crisis is unfolding.
The State of Qatar, in cooperation with most Arab
States and a large number of other States, is submitting
a draft resolution to the General Assembly aimed at
supporting international, regional and United Nations
efforts to achieve a political solution to the Syrian crisis.
In that regard, we would like to note that we believe that
it is of utmost importance for the Security Council to
take unified action to put an end to the humanitarian
catastrophe. The failure of the Security Council to take
a position, stop the crisis and protect the Syrian people,
as well as the Council’s failure to deal effectively
with the Palestinian cause, will have very dangerous
repercussions for the Middle East region as a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, I would like to
begin by thanking you for convening today’s meeting
and for the manner in which you have been leading the
work of the Security Council this month. My delegation
endorses the statement delivered by the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who spoke on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
Yet again, we are meeting in the Security Council
to discuss the subject of the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. Yet again, we state our deep
solidarity with that brotherly people. Year after year, for
over 60 years, at various times, we have denounced the
illegal occupation by Israel and its expansionist policies,
which continue to undermine all efforts to achieve
peace and reject the establishment of a Palestinian
State that is sovereign and independent. Now more than
ever and subsequent to the adoption by the majority
of the international community of General Assembly
resolution 67/19, we are inescapably committed to
rectifying the historic injustice committed against
Palestinian people. We consider that the vote in favour
of the resolution by the majority of Member States
constitutes a statement by the international community
that Palestine complies with all the criteria laid down in
the Charter to be a full Member State ready to assume
its responsibilities as a nation that loves peace.
Our delegation voted in favour of the resolution
out of solidarity and based on our position of principle
in support of the Palestinian cause, which Nicaraguan
president Daniel Ortega Saavedra has always supported.
Since the 1980s, Nicaragua has fully recognized the
existence of the Palestinian State. Unfortunately, such
full recognition has not yet been achieved owing to the
lack of political will on the part of certain countries that
are members of the Security Council, which, through
the use of their veto power, stand in the way of that
legitimate aspiration of the Palestinian people. As the
veto remains the main obstacle to the achievement of
peace and security, it is time for the Security Council
to give thought, in a positive and unconditional manner,
to the Palestinian State’s request for full membership.
We must continue to support all Palestinian efforts so
that, sooner or later, Palestine can sit beside us as the
194th State Member of the United Nations.
Israel, following the decisive recognition by the
General Assembly of Palestine’s status as a non-member
observer State, has, as a reprisal, stepped up its policy
of occupation and its criminal blockade, continuing the

13-31190

construction of settlements and refusing to dismantle
existing ones. Ignoring the will of the international
community and causing the peace process to stagnate,
in an attempt to impose conditions on negotiations,
it continues to alter the demographic and religious
makeup of the Palestinian territory, which represents a
serious violation of international law.
Peace in the Middle East does not mean that we
need only resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict; a
solution must also include the situation in the Israelioccupied territories in Lebanon and Syria. Moreover, it
should include peace in all countries of the region.
Nicaragua reiterates its appeal for respect for the
right of Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland,
consistent with General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
and calls on Israel to comply with all relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.
We also reiterate our solidarity with Palestinian
prisoners and political detainees, particularly women
and children, who are being held in Israeli prisons and
subjected to inhumane ill-treatment by those authorities.
That has led to hunger strikes and even to the deaths of
some detainees. We call for the immediate release of all
Palestinians arbitrarily imprisoned by Israel. We call on
the international community to continue its efforts in
the context of a global campaign to show our solidarity
in connection with this important problem.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, of which Nicaragua
is a member, and the Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for the efforts made to ensure
the successful outcome of the recent meeting held in
Caracas in solidarity with the Palestinian people and the
achievement of the Palestinian State. The declaration
adopted at that meeting will give a solid impetus to
efforts undertaken in 2013, emphasizing the decision,
as the Chairman of our Committee has just said, to
request the General Assembly to make 2014 the year of
solidarity with Palestine, in order to undertake a global
campaign to put an end to the Israeli occupation.
We also welcome the regional Palestine seminar to
be held in Ecuador in the coming year, which represents
a unique opportunity for the Latin American and
Caribbean region to show once again its full support
for the Palestinian State.

35

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

Nicaragua reiterates its full solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their quest to achieve their
freedom and the exercise of their inalienable right
to self-determination, including with respect to the
establishment of a Palestinian State based on the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
laying the foundation for a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East with both States, Palestine and
Israel, living in peace in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and the aspirations of
all peace-loving countries.
Lastly, we reiterate that it is time to put an end
to the policy of double standards used by some
permanent members of the Security Council and their
allies. In Syria, instead of promoting dialogue and
reconciliation, they are promoting violence and the
militarization of the conflict, arming extremist groups
with a view to achieving regime change. Such violence
and militarization will have serious repercussions
throughout the Middle East, but nonetheless those
same members engage in delaying tactics so as to not
recognize a Palestinian State, whose recognition and
establishment would lead to the just and lasting peace
that is so needed in the Middle East region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to thank you for having convened
this meeting and to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency this month.
The Kingdom of Bahrain has consistently
reaffirmed its firm stance on the Palestinian question,
which is based on the need to implement the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
and to respect internationally agreed terms of reference.
Efforts to achieve a just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question can be successful only on the basis
of the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in keeping
with United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the decisions of the international Quartet and
the calls to lift the continued illegal Israeli siege on the
Gaza Strip. We call on the international community
to shoulder its responsibilities and to immediately
move to lift the siege and alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinian people living in the Gaza Strip.
At the summit held recently in Doha, His Majesty
King Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa of the Kingdom of

36

Bahrain stated that many recent developments and
variables had set new conditions and created platforms
for a peace in the Middle East based on the two-State
solution, through the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on its national soil, with holy
Jerusalem as its capital.
His Majesty also noted the need to adopt a new
approach to the peace process in order to achieve a just
and comprehensive peace in the region, as well as the
need to revitalize its mechanisms on all tracks, as those
mechanisms have been brought to a standstill by Israel’s
refusal to abide by all relevant international resolutions.
Such efforts should be carried out in coordination with
the international community as a whole, on the basis of
the terms of reference of international legitimacy, the
Arab Peace Initiative adopted at the 2002 Beirut summit
and the principle of land for peace, ensuring that an end
is put to the Israeli occupation, which started in 1967,
and to settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in particular holy Jerusalem.
A peaceful resolution of the Middle East problem
must ultimately lead to an end to the Israeli occupation
of the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan,
as well as the resumption of Israel’s withdrawal
from the remaining occupied Lebanese territories, in
keeping with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It must also entail the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State within the 4 June 1967 borders, with
holy Jerusalem as its capital, and offer a just solution that
would guarantee the return of Palestinian refugees to
their homeland, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III).
We would reiterate also the need to implement
all relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and to unconditionally abide by the
resolutions of international legitimacy, especially
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which prohibits any
demographic or geographical changes to areas under
occupation.
Let me say in closing that peace in the Middle
East is not just one option; rather, it is the only option.
That will require the implementation of the two-State
solution, of which the Arab Peace Initiative is one of the
most important foundations. That requires that Israel,
the occupying Power, stop its settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories, which only

13-31190

S/PV.6950 (Resumption 1)

undermine all efforts, be they Arab or international, to
achieve peace.
We call once again on the Security Council and
other mechanisms, including the Quartet, to exert
every effort to resolve this historical crisis in a manner
that serves the interests of the peoples of Israel and
of Palestine and preserves regional and international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Rwanda, as President of the
Security Council for this month, for convening this
meeting,. My delegation would like to express our
views on the situation in the Middle East and the
question of Palestine. We take note of the statement
by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs. My delegation would like to align
itself with the statement made by the Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The Government of Ecuador reiterates its concern
over the protracted discussions in the Security Council
on the Israeli/Palestinian conflict. At this time of
international political and economic upheaval, it is
important to struggle for a just international system.
In that context, the issue of Palestine has raised the
international community’s awareness of the question
of what the United Nations should do. Member States
should, now more than ever, be interested in ensuring
the implementation of existing international laws and
resolutions that advocate an end to the abusive use of
force by Israel in Palestine.
One hundred and thirty Member States of this
Organization supported the appeal made by the
President of the Palestinian Authority on 29 November
2012 to grant Palestine the status of Observer State. That
is an important achievement that must be supported and
must serve as the basis for full-fledged recognition of
the State of Palestine. It is time to seek out mechanisms
that allow us to make progress in the efforts for peace
and to enhance the capacity of the State of Palestine to
meet the security needs of its own people. It is up to the
Security Council to assume its responsibility for having
enabled the continued Israeli violations of international
law, which has allowed that country to maintain a status
of immunity and impunity.

13-31190

After the adoption of resolution 67/19, the Israeli
Government announced that it would not recognize
Palestine as a State or recognize any change in the
situation of Palestinians. After 28 November 2012,
in direct contravention of the peace process, Israel
intensified its settlement activity in the occupied
West Bank, and the situation deteriorated further with
illegal and arbitrary detentions of Palestinians and the
death of some of those detained. In the same vein, the
demolition of houses has caused Palestinians to be
displaced to neighbouring countries, undermining the
entire peace process and inviting the condemnation of
the international community against Israel.
Another Israeli reaction to the recognition of the
Observer State of Palestine was the withholding, for
the past few months, of Palestinian tariff revenues,
in complete disregard of the 1994 Paris Protocol,
which was signed by Israel and is still in force. My
country, Ecuador, believes that it is now time to
implement the Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (resolution 67/1),
which is applicable to all States in equal measure and
to international organizations, including the United
Nations and its principal bodies, so that the respect
and promotion of the rule of law and justice guides all
their activities. In that respect, my delegation would
like to call upon the Security Council to abandon its
passive attitude towards Israeli abuses, as that leads, to
a certain extent, to the Council’s becoming complicit
in them.
In conclusion, Ecuador appeals to the international
community to continue to support the request submitted
by the President of Palestine to promote it from the
category of Observer State to that of a full-fledged
Member State of the United Nations, within the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. That is
the only way that we will achieve peace and security in
the Middle East and thus peace for all Member States
of the United Nations.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

37
