S/PV.7015

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7015th meeting

Tuesday, 6 August 2013, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Fernández/Mr. Timerman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mammadyarov
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Carrera
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Amrani
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Letter dated 1 August 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/446)

13-41944 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1341944*

S/PV.7015

The meeting was called to order at 9.55 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first
meeting of the Council for the month of August 2013,
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency Ambassador
Rosemary DiCarlo, Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United States, for her service as President of the
Security Council for the month of July 2013. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing our
deep appreciation to Ambassador DiCarlo and her team
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
I should also like to extend, on behalf of the Council,
a warm welcome to the new Permanent Representative
of the United States to the United Nations, Her
Excellency Ms. Samantha Power.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Letter dated 1 August 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Argentina
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/446)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers, and other
representatives participating in today’s meeting. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter to be addressed.
Under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Georgia, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, the Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla,

2

Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. José Miguel
Insulza, Secretary General of the Organization of
America States, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas,
Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/446, which contains a letter dated 1 August 2013
from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
containing a concept paper on the item to be considered.
The last time the Security Council held a debate
from a broad perspective on the relationship between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations was on 13 January 2010 on the initiative
of the People’s Republic of China (S/PV.6257). As a
result of the debate, the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/1), which, while emphasizing
the Security Council’s primacy in maintaining
international peace and security, stressed the
importance of developing effective partnerships. The
Security Council also expressed its intention to consider
further steps to promote closer and more operational
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the fields of early
warning and prevention of conflicts, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and to ensure the
coherence, synergy and collective effectiveness of their
efforts.
The primary objective of today’s open debate
is to consider the role of regional and subregional
organizations, exploring options to strengthen the
bilateral relationships between the United Nations and
the spectrum of regional and subregional organizations
and arrangements.
It is worth mentioning that in recent years,
new subregional arrangements and organizations
have played a fundamental role, both in conflict
prevention and in the promotion and maintenance of
international peace and security. Other arrangements
and organizations have developed new capabilities for

13-41944

S/PV.7015

action in the maintenance of international peace and
security as evidenced in a number of peacekeeping
operations.
Members of the Council have before them a draft
presidential statement on behalf of the Council on the
subject of today’s meeting. I thank the Council members
for their valuable contributions to the draft statement. In
accordance with the understanding reached among the
members of the Council, I shall take it that the members
of the Security Council agree to the statement, which
will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/PRST/2013/12.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank President Cristina
Fernández and the Government of Argentina for
scheduling today’s important debate.
The architects of the United Nations Charter were
visionary in foreseeing a world where the United
Nations and regional organizations worked together
to prevent, manage and resolve crises. However, it is
hard to imagine that they could have anticipated the
interconnected nature of the threats we face today or
the range of cooperation between the United Nations
regional and subregional organizations.
Chapter VIII is as relevant today as ever. Many
regional and subregional organizations have long
histories of engagement in conflict prevention and
mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Others
are becoming increasingly active in these fields.As
Secretary-General, I have seen first-hand the value of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations across the globe.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, we have a
long history of partnership, including deploying joint
missions with the Organization of American States.
Today we work together in a range of areas from mediation
and dialogue to combating illicit trafficking. I welcome
the emergence of thge Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC) and the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR), and their contributions
to both peace and security and sustainable development
on the continent. I was pleased to participate in the
seventh general meeting of the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) last month to
discuss ways to address climate change, sustainable
development and transnational organized crime.

In Africa, we cooperate closely with the African
Union (AU) and subregional economic communities.
Through our joint peacekeeping and mediation
efforts in Darfur, the AU and the United Nations
remain committed to facilitating a comprehensive
and inclusive settlement to the conflict. In Somalia,
we have worked hand-in-hand with the African Union
Mission in Somalia and have assisted Somali partners
in successfully concluding an eight-year political
transition.
Collaboration with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the AU was
essential to our response in Côte d’Ivoire and is central
to our efforts in Mali. Here, the early deployment of
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali,
combined with ECOWAS-led mediation efforts in the
North, have laid the foundations for the peace process.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — supported
by 11 African leaders, the AU, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference for the Great Lakes Region and the United
Nations — represents the best opportunity for years for
forging a durable peace.
In the Middle East and North Africa, the United
Nations and the League of Arab States are working to
support inclusive political processes in Tunisia, Libya,
and Yemen. And we continue to search for a political
solution to the crisis in Syria, including through the
deployment of our Joint Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.
Regular joint consultations between the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
continue to create important opportunities for mutual
cooperation, including promoting peacebuilding,
reconciliation and political reform in Myanmar, and
preventive diplomacy in Mindanao.
We also work closely with our European partners.
Cooperation with the European Union (EU) is
geographically and substantively wide-ranging. In
recent years, we have strengthened collaboration in the
Middle East, Somalia, Mali and elsewhere. The EU is
a champion of the United Nations work in mediation
and recently facilitated a historic agreement between
Pristina and Belgrade. With the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, we partner to
advance human rights, confidence-building, counterterrorism and disarmament in southeastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia.

13-419443

S/PV.7015

Of course, we sometimes face challenges when
working together. Our organizations do not always have
the same approach to a given crisis. Our diverse mandates
and membership can lead to different perspectives.
This debate is a welcome opportunity to explore the
nature of these challenges and consider how to improve
cooperation. I strongly believe in the combined value
of our respective strengths. Regional and subregional
organizations have deep knowledge, unique insights
and strong local networks. These elements are critical
to mediation, planning a peacekeeping operation or
helping a country to build lasting peace.
To this equation, the United Nations adds its
universal membership and legitimacy, long experience
and operational capacity in the area of international
peace and security. Through concrete initiatives, we
are building on our collective strengths. In some cases,
we have established formal partnership agreements and
work plans that guide day-to-day collaboration. Staff
exchanges have created networks that help us respond
to evolving situations on the ground. Joint mediation
deployments, training and capacity-building have
enabled us to build common understanding and present
a united front.
However, there is always room for improvement.
We are better at sharing information and analysis on
brewing crises, but we have to work harder on swift
response and long-term prevention. We need to learn
from the lessons of our collaborations to build ever more
innovative and flexible partnership arrangements that
draw on our respective strengths. Let us also consider
how to expand cooperation and dialogue with a broader
range of organizations in the pursuit of international
peace and security. Only through cooperation will we
meet our shared aspirations for a more peaceful world.

The history of Latin America and the Caribbean has
changed. Two hundred years after our independence, the
ideas of “a Nation of Republics” and of “Our America”
envisaged by Bolívar and Martí, respectively, are
taking shape. Thus, our Heads of State and Government
decided in the Caracas Declaration that,
“in accordance with the original mandate of our
liberators, CELAC must move forward in the
process of political, economic, social and cultural
integration, based on a wise equilibrium between
the unity and diversity of our peoples, so that the
regional integration mechanism can become the
ideal space to express our rich cultural diversity
and also the forum to reaffirm the Latin American
and the Caribbean identity, our common history
and our ongoing struggles for justice and liberty”.
They also agreed that,
“recognizing the right of each nation to build freely
and peacefully its own political and economic
system, in the framework of the corresponding
institutions according with the sovereign mandate of
its people, the processes of dialogue, exchange and
political negotiation carried out by CELAC must be
pursued taking into account the following common
values and principles: respect for international law,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the prohibition
of the use and the threat of use of force, respect
for self-determination, respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity, non-interference in the internal
affairs of each country, and the protection and
promotion of human rights and democracy”.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba and President Pro Tempore of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.

Latin America and the Caribbean have resolved to
walk in closed ranks, like the silver in the roots of the
Andes. We have provided ourselves with institutions
that allow us to promote unity within our diversity,
integrate ourselves and cooperate, discuss among
ourselves the issues that are germane to us, and be in
solidarity to one another to solve the pressing problems
that still encumber Latin America and the Caribbean.
We intend to develop ourselves, live in peace, protect
human dignity and preserve and enrich our culture.

Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me first to thank you, Madam, and the
Government of the Argentine Republic for the invitation
conveyed to the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States (CELAC), which Cuba is honoured to
preside, to participate for the first time in a debate of
the Security Council.

We congratulate ourselves on the fact that CELAC
is reaching common views in areas such as social
development, education, health, the environment,
energy and financing, among others, and now is
preparing to work together in the areas of cooperation,
nuclear disarmament, fighting corruption, agriculture,
science and technology.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

4

13-41944

S/PV.7015

I pay tribute to President Hugo Chávez Frias, one of
the founders and principal architects of CELAC. I can
feel his presence among us.
Upon founding CELAC, our Heads of State and
Government reiterated “our commitment to the building
of a more just, equitable and harmonious international
order based on respect for international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the sovereign equality of States, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, respect for territorial integrity
and non-intervention in the internal affairs of States”.
They reaffirmed our commitment to the defence of
sovereignty and the right of any State to establish its
own political system, free from threats, aggression and
unilateral coercive measures and in an environment
of peace, stability, justice, democracy and respect for
human rights.
They expressed their conviction that the unity and
political, economic, social and cultural integration
of Latin America and the Caribbean constituted a
requirement for the region to successfully confront
the challenges before us. And they decided to promote
and project a unified voice for Latin America and the
Caribbean in the discussion of the principal issues and
in the positions of the region on the relevant global
events at international meetings and conferences, as
well as in the dialogue with other regions and countries.
Likewise, they reiterated that CELAC was an
important mechanism to promote the interests of
developing countries in multilateral organizations in
order to reinforce our capacity to react in a coordinated
manner to the challenges of a world in the process of
a profound economic and political change, as well as
our commitment to strengthen CELAC to promote and
project the interests and concerns of Latin America and
the Caribbean on the main issues of the international
agenda and to bring together positions and coordinate
ourselves, when possible, at international meetings and
conferences of global reach. In that regard, we highlight
the work done by the Permanent Representatives of
CELAC member States to the United Nations, who
have agreed on an internal mechanism for concerted
participation in the discussions at the various
committees to which the consensual position of
CELAC has been put forward. As a result, we commit
to strengthen coordination efforts at the Headquarters,
including promoting joint initiatives on issues of
interest to the region.

On several occasions, CELAC has put forward
before the United Nations its common vision about
some of the main challenges faced by the maintenance
of international peace and security and the prevention
of conflicts.
In relation to current United Nations peacekeeping
efforts, CELAC believes that, with the purpose of
achieving stability in the long term, as well as to prevent
the recurrence of conflicts, it is necessary to strengthen
the strategic, comprehensive and coordinated presence
of the United Nations in the field, not only in the
area of peacekeeping, which is essential, but also by
strengthening national institutions and promoting
reconstruction and economic and social development in
areas of conflict. In that regard, CELAC urges greater
interaction and coordination among Member States and
all the relevant organs of the United Nations. Regional
and subregional organizations have an essential role to
play in conformity with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. In that regard, CELAC recognizes
in particular the contribution made by the African
Union, which has proved to be most useful in some
peacekeeping operations, where its cooperation has
complemented the efforts of the United Nations.
CELAC reiterates that there can be no lasting peace
without development and the eradication of poverty,
hunger and inequality. That principle is the essence
of the solidarity and cooperation of CELAC members
countries towards the sister nation of Haiti — a
country whose heroic role in the independence of the
countries of the region continues to inspire our current
integration efforts. While recognizing the fundamental
role of the presence of the Organization in Haiti
through the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the efforts of the international
community to support Haiti, CELAC reaffirms that
those efforts will be effective as long as they are part
of a long-term sustainable project under the leadership
and guidance of the Haitian Government, with full
respect for its sovereignty.
It is high time for our region to contribute to
the equilibrium of the world with all the might of its
almost 600 million inhabitants, who are seeking equal
opportunities; its abundant natural resources, over
which we shall permanently exercise our sovereignty;
its economic capabilities, even in circumstances of
global economic crisis; and its extraordinary ancestral
culture and the unyielding determination of our peoples
to achieve peace, development, justice and progress.

13-419445

S/PV.7015

The fact that numerous countries and organizations
have found in CELAC a valid interlocutor with Latin
America and the Caribbean is a source of satisfaction.
We are pleased that the Community of Latin
America and Caribbean States is able to participate
in this Security Council debate. CELAC has already
started to appear before the United Nations as a united
force. Our common positions on numerous topics of
interest for the international community portend our
possibilities.
At the First CELAC Summit, we renewed our
countries’ commitment to multilateralism and to a
comprehensive reform of the United Nations system,
as well as to the democratization of international
decision-making forums, in particular the security
Council.
Latin America and the Caribbean is a zone of
peace free from nuclear weapons. CELAC has adopted
a unanimous position with regard to some far-reaching
topics on the international agenda, such as, for example,
Argentina’s legitimate claim in the dispute concerning
the sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands and — today,
on the anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima — on
so-called nuclear disarmament.
As for Cuba, which continues its struggle, I shall
say nothing on this occasion on which I am speaking on
behalf of CELAC.
We must now continue to go forward. Let no
difference hold us back. Let us remain united. Let
nothing prevent us from honouring the legacy of the
liberators of our America.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Minister
Rodríguez Parrilla for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Tekeda
Alemu, Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to
the United Nations, who will speak on behalf of the
Chairperson of the African Union.
Mr. Tekeda (Ethiopia): At the outset, I wish to
express our appreciation to Argentina for organizing
this open debate, for its concept note (S/2013/446,
annex) and for making it possible for the African Union
(AU) to participate in this important meeting. We also
appreciate the briefing by the Secretary-General.
In our view, this debate comes at the right time, when
Africa is making tremendous efforts at the continental
and subregional levels to address the peace and security

6

deficit that Africa continues to face. That has been
facilitated by a well-defined strategy encapsulated by
the African Union’s Peace and Security Architecture,
an initiative of the AU that, along with other positive
and innovative steps taken by the African Union in the
areas of human rights, governance and the protection
of constitutional order, signifies how meaningful the
transformation of the Organization of African Unity
into the AU has been. That needs to be underlined, all
the more so during the year when we are celebrating
the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment of the
Organization of the African Union/AU.
We in the African Union are absolutely convinced
that a principled, consistent and predictable cooperation
between the United Nations, on the one hand, and
regional and subregional organizations, on the other,
is indispensable to the maintenance of international
peace and security. We note with appreciation that, over
the past few years, significant strides have been made
in conflict resolution, peacekeeping, post-conflict
peacebuilding and reconstruction. That is indeed in
consonance with the overriding objective of the African
Union’s peace and security agenda, which is to create
an enabling momentum for a more integrated, peaceful
and prosperous Africa.
In this regard, the signing and implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) are examples of cooperation based on
flexibility and making the best use of the comparative
advantages of the African Union, subregional
organizations and the United Nations in conflict
prevention, effective mediation, peacekeeping, peace
support missions and peacebuilding strategies.
It is becoming self-evident that success, even
limited progress, in international and regional peace
and security requires effective cooperation between
regional and subregional organizations of the United
Nations within the context of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, consistent with the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for
ensuring international peace and security.
It should be stated quite frankly that while much
progress has been made in cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union and its
subregional organizations, much remains to be done to
ensure that the comparative advantages of each is put

13-41944

S/PV.7015

to optimal use. The Secretary-General could not have
put it better when he said in 2010 in his progress report
on the United Nations support to the African Union, in
which he said:
“The complex challenges in the world today
require a revitalized and evolving interpretations of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations”
(S/2010/514, para. 54).
He also reiterated in the same report “the need for the
Security Council to enunciate its vision of that strategic
partnership” (ibid., para. 55). “This would entail” he
added,
“a clearly defined expectation of the role of regional
organizations in maintaining international peace
and security, and would empower the Secretariat to
be able to help implement that vision” (ibid.).
As the representative of one permanent member of
the Security Council said early last year, “The United
Nations needs a strong African Union, and the African
Union needs a strong United Nations” (S/PV.6702, p. 15).
It would suffice to focus on two areas where
there is a need for greater cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union and its regional
organizations, regarding which, perhaps, the vision of
the Security Council might facilitate progress. The first
issue involves the perennial question of predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding for African Union
peace-support missions authorized by the Security
Council. There has indeed been some progress in this
area, as we can see in the much improved arrangement
for AMISOM with respect to the logistics package,
which is now funded from assessed contributions. But
this is still a far cry from what the African Union-United
Nations panel on modalities for support to African
Union peacekeeping operations had proposed some
years ago. The Secretary-General was even more
forthcoming on this point when he said again in the
aforementioned report to the Council that
“the support package for AMISOM should be
identical to the support provided to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and that action should be
taken to ensure parity between the reimbursement
rate for AMISOM contingent personnel and United
Nations contingent personnel” (op. cit., para. 61).
But the need for further enhancement of
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
and its subregional organizations ought not to be seen

only from the funding point of view, no matter how
critical that aspect might be. No less vital is the need
for consultation and effective coordination between the
two organizations. There is room for improvement in
this area, though in terms of formal interactions on the
question of peace and security, perhaps the AU and its
Peace and Security Council could be deemed to occupy
a privileged position, largely owing to the fact that the
majority of the issues before the Council are African.
Obviously, the AU and its subregional organizations
are better placed in terms of geographical proximity,
political and cultural familiarity with local conditions,
and shared experiences, which are critical to making a
real difference for peace. Hence, without prejudice to
the global mandate of the Council in the maintenance of
global peace and security, the smart thing to do would
be to raise the level of consultation between the two
organizations in more substantive terms. In this regard,
greater efforts are required to ensure that cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union is
more effective, including through joint planning and
joint assessment for peace operations in the continent.
These efforts must be guided by genuine respect for the
strength each can bring to bear on a given situation,
based on a mutually agreed division of labour that
focuses on results.
The mandate of the Security Council is clear.
It is the body that has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
But it should not be too difficult to apply Chapter
VIII of the Charter with flexibility and wisdom, the
goal being to address a common challenge. Indeed,
the results achieved in the Sudan, Somalia and other
regional security concerns are illustrative of what can
be achieved in this regard.
We would therefore like to emphasize the need
in the same spirit as the United Nations to intensify
such regional initiatives and to accelerate its efforts to
implement the United Nations-African Union 10-year
capacity-building programme for the African Union.
More efforts are also required to fully operationalize
the African Union continental peace and security
architecture, including the Standby Force and the
Continental Early Warning System.
Furthermore, the enhancement of cooperation
between the Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council, including the annual consultations, is vital for
reaching those objectives. It is our considered view that

13-419447

S/PV.7015

these meetings should result in concrete action-oriented
initiatives for the development of strategic partnerships
when addressing specific issues of mutual interest
and concern. In this regard, concrete steps should also
be taken to strengthen the policy-level coordination
between the two organizations, not only to avoid
conflicting initiatives but also a duplication of efforts.
At the operational level, the Secretariat and
the African Union Commission need to ensure the
complementarity of their efforts. Strengthening the
efforts of the African Union and its institutional capacity
to effectively plan, deploy and manage peacekeeping
operations is in the interests of both entities. All this
is bound to make the partnership, between the United
Nations and the AU more meaningful and productive.
We believe that there is scope in the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union to
move in this direction.
Our best intentions would, however, amount to
nothing if we failed to provide adequate, flexible and
predictable funding for AU peace support missions.
The AU is also determined to do its level best in this
area. At its recently held Summit in Addis Ababa in
May, the African Union noted “the need for increased
funding from within the continent to assert Africa’s
ownership and leadership, as well as the challenge
faced in building innovative and flexible partnership
with the United Nations and other stakeholders”. It has
also decided to do even more with respect to enhancing
Africa’s capacity for immediate crisis-response.
In conclusion, it is our considered view that much
has been done to ensure greater cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU to promote peace and
security in Africa, but much remains to be done. Africa
is ready for such cooperation because it is in its interest
to do so. No doubt, such cooperation is also in the
interest of the international community.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ethiopia for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Eda
Rivas Franchini, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Peru,
who will speak on behalf of the Union of South
American Nations.
Ms. Rivas Franchini (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of the Union of South American
Nations (UNASUR), over which Peru is honoured to
preside, I would like to extend my congratulations to the

8

Argentine Republic, in particular to President Cristina
Fernández, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, an auspicious occasion for UNASUR
and Latin America as a whole. We wish them every
success in carrying out that weighty responsibility,
which we will follow with the highest of expectations.
I also express my warmest congratulations to you,
Madam President, for initiating this debate, as well as
my thanks for being invited to participate, which allows
UNASUR, as a regional body, to address the Council
for the first time.
I would like, at the outset, to emphasize that our
South American integration process is based on the
fundamental pillars of peace and democracy.
South America is a region where we can say that
there are no inter-State conflicts that constitute a threat
to international peace and security, nor situations of
extreme violence. However, the member States of
UNASUR recognize that peace and security must be
preserved permanently. All South Americans are fully
convinced that the best way to achieve that is by striving
for integration based on respect for the fundamental
principles of international law, whose chief purpose is
development with economic and social inclusion, the
daily strengthening of democracy and full respect for
fundamental rights and freedoms.
UNASUR’s activities and its Constitutive Treaty are
fully consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and recognize the primary
role that the Charter entrusts to the Security Council in
the difficult task of maintaining international peace and
security. UNASUR also recognizes the complementary
role played in that regard by regional bodies. Likewise,
UNASUR attaches particular importance to respect for
the fundamental principle of the sovereignty of States.
Our members are convinced of the need for autonomy
for regional bodies with regard to States and bodies
foreign to them, in particularly with regard to security
matters.
In carrying out the responsibilities falling to
regional and subregional organizations, UNASUR
reiterates the need for such organizations to maintain
close cooperation with the United Nations, as well as
smooth communication channels with the Security
Council on the activities undertaken or contemplated by
those organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

13-41944

S/PV.7015

UNASUR was born as a distinct political body
compared to other regional forums. It also has an
important role in preventing conflicts and promoting
the peaceful settlement of disputes of any kind that may
arise in the region. Therefore, first and foremost, we in
South America believe in finding our own intraregional
solutions.
Since its establishment, in 2008, UNASUR
has conducted itself in full accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, with peace as its overriding purpose and
the aspiration of all its peoples, and its preservation
being a main element of our strategic vision for South
American integration. South American nations view
integration as a parallel process that is consistent
with strengthening multilateralism and promoting
full respect for international law, in a world where the
sovereign equality of States and the culture of peace
prevail and the use of force and non-legitimate means
of defence are excluded, including nuclear weapons and
weapons of mass destruction. One of the challenges for
UNASUR is therefore to promote total disarmament so
that the region is free of nuclear weapons and weapons
of mass destruction, a status that must be respected by
all States, in particular those with nuclear weapons, as
established by the Treaty of Tlatelolco and its Protocol
II.
As South America is a region with a vocation
for peace, the efforts of UNASUR are intended to
build links aimed at strengthening cooperation and
building trust among States. To that end, UNASUR’s
structure provides for a specific body for consultation,
cooperation and coordination on defence, namely,
the South American Defence Council, a forum for
international and intergovernmental cooperation that
respects diversity and seeks dialogue and a common
identity on defence. In its short existence, it has been
able to make effective contributions to regional stability
and the cause of peace. It has no offensive purpose and
is not structured along the lines of external threats or
enemies. Its main areas of activity include exchanging
lessons learned in the peaceful settlement of disputes;
conflict early-warning; undertaking humanitarian
activities; establishing confidence-building measures;
developing various forms of cooperation for technology
transfer; developing institutional capacity and human
resources in the area of defence; and immediate
response to natural disasters.

In 2001, for the first time in the history of South
America, we adopted a registrer of defence expenditures,
which includes a specific methodology for the region.
We are making progress on a South American military
inventory, which in its experimental stage is developing
a South American formula for military inventories. We
are also developing a manual for the systematic and
efficient classification of procedures for implementing
confidence- and security-building measures. We
believe that those registers are complementary to
those maintained by the United Nations and allow for
an exchange of information that avoids duplication. In
that regard, it is in our common interest that the United
Nations and UNASUR cooperate to further strengthen
confidence and security.
In another area of activity, our countries are
participating with resolve in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the Simon Bolívar
Brigade for Assistance and Humanitarian Aid and other
similar missions in other regions of the world. That
gives us an opportunity to carry out a fruitful exchange
experiences and to contribute to development.
The case of Haiti also serves to illustrate the
commitment of UNASUR to the cause of regional
solidarity with regard to the efforts of Haiti’s
Government and society to consolidate stability,
strengthen institutions, carry out reconstruction
efforts and bring about sustainable development with
social justice. To that end, UNASUR has established a
permanent technical secretariat in Haiti and put in place
a solidarity fund to which its member States contribute.
In our own region, UNASUR reaffirms its full
support for the peace process between the Government
of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia. This is a historic opportunity, fostered
by the environment of cooperation and dialogue that
prevails in South America. It is important to emphasize
the support provided by different countries in the
region to the process, in particular Venezuela, Chile
and Cuba. The success of the peace process, based on
the strength of democratic institutions we share, will
have far-reaching significance for Colombia and the
entire South American region, thereby allowing us to
concentrate increasingly on development.
An important step in reaffirming our commitment
to peace, democracy and socio-economic development
was the unanimous adoption by the representatives of
our region during the sixth UNASUR summit, in Lima,

13-419449

S/PV.7015

Peru, on 30 November 2012, of the Lima Declaration,
designating South America as a zone of peace.
UNASUR member States expressed their firm resolve
to maintain South America as a zone of peace and to
fully support that goal through regional and bilateral
cooperation.
The establishment of the zone of peace, as
contained in that important Declaration, reflects
UNASUR members’ respect for the principles and
norms of international law, including the international
treatises to which we are party and the Charter of the
United Nations. In particular, we confirm our States’
commitment to use peaceful means in the settlement of
disputes and to abstain from threats or the use of force
against the territorial integrity of another State.
The declaration of South America as a zone of
peace also affirms the goal of building confidence and
strengthening security and enforcement procedures
through tangible transparency action with respect to
military spending. The Declaration adopted in Lima
also includes strengthened efforts to establish South
America as a zone free of anti-personnel landmines in
the context of the obligations of States parties under
relevant international conventions and similarly focused
bilateral efforts. It also calls for continuing negotiations
under the South American Defense Council towards a
peace, security and cooperation protocol, which is a
Peruvian initiative, the complexity of which resulted
from thorough reflection and the gradual progress
made in efforts to achieve its ambitious goals.
UNASUR also spoke at the sixth ordinary summit
in Lima on the fight against terrorism by adopting
a special communiqué to support the fight against
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Through
the communiqué, the South American States reiterated
their strongest condemnation of that scourge as criminal
and unjustifiable in any circumstances, wherever
and by whomever committed, and because it poses a
serious threat to international peace and security and
to democratic institutions and values. They reiterated
their willingness to strengthen domestic legislation and
to take further steps to prevent terrorist activities and
acts that incite or encourage terrorism, and expressed
their commitment to preventing the cross-border
movement of terrorists.
Before concluding, I should like, in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Peru, to
briefly affirm my country’s long-standing commitment

10

to peace and respect for international law and to fulfilling
its international obligations, as well as its commitment
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Peru’s contribution to international
peace and security and regional cooperation goes back
to the beginnings of the Republic. At that time, we also
participated in the establishment of the United Nations,
itself the most universal of forums in which Peru has
always firmly advocated in favour of the pillars of
peace.
I thank you again, Madam, on behalf of UNASUR,
for your invitation to participate in this important
debate, which reflects the Council’s important
recognition of the work of our regional South American
organization in contributing to international peace and
security, particularly in ensuring conditions conducive
to strengthening and maintaining peace in South
America.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Minister
Rivas Franchini for her briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Fathalla, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations.
Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): I welcome the
presence of Ms. Cristina Fernández, President of
Argentina and Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General.
At the outset, I congratulate the Republic of Argentina
for presiding over the work of the Security Council
for the month. At the same time, I extend thanks
and appreciation for the convening of this high-level
meeting of the Security Council to discuss cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security. Cooperation between the League
of Arab States and the United Nations, as is well
known, goes back to 1981, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 36/24. It is important to support
that cooperation now, given current developments in
the Middle East and the problems generated by that
situation, the continuation of which represents a threat
to international peace and security.
That requires improved cooperation between the
two organizations in extending humanitarian assistance
to address the suffering of refugees and those adversely
affected by war, conflict and natural disasters, including
in the area of peacebuilding and in efforts to assist
States in building capacity and infrastructure in the
post-crisis period. This is a delicate moment requiring

13-41944

S/PV.7015

ongoing support in order to avoid the risk of relapsing
into further conflict.
In that connection, the League of Arab States has
issued numerous decisions calling on the Security
Council to assume its role in the maintenance of
international peace and security with regard to a
number of Middle East issues. In that respect, the
League of Arab States believes that one of the most
important pillars of international peace and security
is the Council’s credibility and effectiveness and the
scrupulous, genuine and full implementation of the
resolutions adopted by the Council, many of which
relate to our region.
Those resolutions have not been implemented
for many years; some, such as those on the question
of Palestine, have languished for more than 50 years.
The continued lack of implementation of those
resolutions constitutes one of the main reasons of
regional and international tension and instability.
On the other hand, the inability of the Council to
adopt a resolution — despite full knowledge that the
events occurring in some regions, particularly in
the Middle East, threaten international peace and
security — highlights the need to end that controversial
trend evident among members of the Council and to
seriously consider decisions of regional organizations.
In that context, I note in particular cooperation between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations, in
terms of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
I reiterate that this important principle is entrenched
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which encourages regional organizations to address
matters related to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to seek the peaceful settlement
of disputes in cooperation with the Security Council.
Frequently changing international situations
and developments and deepening regional and
international crises require strengthened cooperation
and the accelerated adoption and implementation by
the Security Council of decisions taken by regional
organizations. The various developments transpiring
in the Arab region must be reflected in a number of
pillars of international legitimacy, most important
among which are the agreements reached at the meeting
between the two organizations in Vienna in 2012. That
is a part of the periodic meetings held once every two
years to evaluate the achievements made and lay down

the parameters for cooperation, which is divided into
three parts: political, economic and socio-cultural.
Activities in that connection include preventing
the eruption of crises, and their management;
fostering cooperation; countering terrorism; and the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones and a zone
free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
Those issues are inextricably linked with the work of
the Security Council given their direct relationship
with international peace and security.
We view today’s meeting as important given that
it represents a point of contact between the Security
Council and regional organizations, including, of
course, the League of Arab States, in the light of the
developments under way in the Arab region, which
involve radical processes of transformation led by
Arab youth aspiring to build institutions based on good
governance, social equality and justice.
The Security Council meeting attended by the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States on
26 September 2012 (see S/PV.6841), at which the Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/20)
aimed at consolidating cooperation between the
League of Arab States and the United Nations in the
field of international peace and security, emphasized
the goals of cooperation between the two organizations.
It welcomed the intensifying cooperation between the
League of Arab States and the United Nations in the
wake of developments in the region reflecting the
legitimate aspirations of all peoples in the region for
freedom, justice and equality. It also emphasized the
need to strengthen cooperation on capacity-building
with the League of Arab States in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
At that same meeting, the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States put forward a number of
proposals aimed at consolidating the relationship
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. I would recall that the first and most important
of those proposals concerned the review and updating
of the 1989 agreement on cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States (General
Assembly resolution 44/7), to keep up with priorities
and emerging and future challenges.
Secondly, the Secretary-General emphasized the
need to hold regular meetings, as well as meetings
required by events, between the Security Council and
the League of Arab States, represented by the presidency

13-4194411

S/PV.7015

of the Arab Summit Conference, the presidency of the
Council of Ministers of the League, and the SecretaryGeneral of the League.
Thirdly, he stressed that the status of the
cooperation meetings held between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States must be enhanced so
as to enable them to deliver programmes which are
effective, particularly with regard to preventing and
resolving disputes and peacekeeping, so that the League
can cooperate in an integrated manner with the United
Nations.
Fourthly, he noted that greater importance must be
attached to cooperation between the two organizations
in the field of humanitarian assistance as well as to
devoting greater attention to addressing and alleviating
the suffering of refugees and those adversely affected
by conflicts and natural disasters.
And fifthly, emphasis was placed on the need to
support the capacities of the League of Arab States
and increase its competence in the humanitarian and
political fields, taking into consideration the work of
the United Nations Development Programme.
Almost one year has passed since that meeting
between the Council and the League of Arab States.
The Secretary-General of the League sent a letter to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on 17 October
2012 containing suggestions on matters relating to
cooperation support. One of those suggestions involved
the setting up of a joint, high-level working group
between the United Nations and the League to evaluate
and update the cooperation machinery so as to make it
more relevant to current events. The Secretary-General
of the United Nations agreed to that in his letter to the
Secretary-General of the League dated 12 February
2013, suggesting that the working group could
complete its work and consider the three aspects of the
issue — political, economic and sociocultural — in the
course of three months as well as assess the effectiveness
of the cooperation machinery, including a review of the
1989 agreement. That is an important and positive step
towards supporting the work of the two organizations.
Emphasizing our interest in cooperation with
the United Nations in resolving the Syrian crisis and
beginning a transitional phase to stop the bloodshed
and achieve stability and security in Syria on the
basis of good governance and a democratic system,
the Secretary-General of the League held a number of
meetings at United Nations Headquarters on 22 April,

12

the first of which was with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations. He also held tripartite talks with
the Secretary-General and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi on
helping the Syrian parties to initiate a transitional
political process designed to create a new Syria where
all factions will enjoy freedom.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations
appealed to the Security Council to be united and to
emphasize its support for the efforts of Mr. Brahimi,
an appeal that was approved by the Secretary-General
of the League. We hope that this will pave the way for
“Geneva II”.
Along those same lines, I participated, in my capacity
as Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations, in an informal high-level meeting
held under the sponsorship of Germany and Morocco
on 28 May 2013 to consider the issue of cooperation
between the two organizations. The meeting considered
political issues and the work of the Security Council and
regional organizations in addressing matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
finding peaceful solutions to conflicts, updating the
cooperation machinery, strengthening the capacities of
the League and drawing lessons from the experience
of the United Nations in the field of cooperation with
other regional and international organizations. During
the course of that meeting, I emphasized the need for
political will in connection with issues relevant to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
I also stressed the importance of the activities
and programmes adopted in Vienna, to which I have
just referred, particularly since that series of political
undertakings and programmes addresses a number of
significant issues, such as preventing the eruption of
crises. I would like here to recall the ideas put forward
at that meeting.
First, there is a need to upgrade the level of meetings
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States. Such meetings should devise
effective programmes, particularly as concerns the
eruption of crises and the maintenance of international
peace and security, so that the cooperation machinery
of the two organizations can work in concert. Increased
attention must be paid to cooperation between the two
organizations in the field of humanitarian assistance
and in connection with issues related to refugees and to
persons affected by war, conflict and natural disasters,
as well as in the areas of peacebuilding and in assisting

13-41944

S/PV.7015

States in the post-conflict rebuilding of their civil
institutions and capacities.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

I would like to add that a meeting was held in
Cairo, on 11 and 12 June, on sectoral cooperation
between the League and the United Nations with regard
to improving post-conflict civilian capacity-building,
with the participation of Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Special
Adviser and Assistant Secretary-General for Civilian
Capacities.

Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, and your delegation for
organizing this timely debate and for honouring us with
your personal participation this morning. In particular,
I would like to extend to you the warm and fraternal
greetings of our President, Mr. Otto Pérez Molina,
who has asked me to reiterate his admiration for your
national and regional leadership, which honours your
country, Latin America and the women of the world. The
long, deep and fraternal relations between our peoples
and Governments have been further strengthened by
Argentina and Guatemala in 2013 by the Latin American
and Caribbean presence in the Security Council, where
we share strong commonalities in our actions aimed at
maintaining international peace and security.

The League of Arab States, in cooperation with the
United Nations, has decided to address this issue in the
framework of a comprehensive vision and plans to take
action on three integrated and parallel pillars. The first
pillar is the exchange of expertise, the identification of
needs and the creation of frameworks for the provision
of services to the States of the region. The second pillar
is interaction with the States of the region to motivate
them to build their capacities and identify their needs
so that they can assume the primary role in preventing
crises. The third and last pillar is the work of the
League of Arab States in cooperating with civil society
and its general organizations in the areas of security
and regional development in order to galvanize and
strengthen their role in the aftermath of conflict with
a view to assisting local communities, supporting the
rule of law and effective accountability, and ensuring
other urgent requirements to prevent the resurgence of
conflict.
We welcome the issuance of presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/12 by the Security Council, which
incorporates the means and ways of cooperation among
the Security Council and all regional organizations and
specifies the most important areas in light of current
international regional developments. For our part, the
League of Arab State will consider the statement to be
one the key documents on which we rely with a view
to improving and reinforcing cooperation between the
League of Arab States and the Security Council.
In conclusion, I sincerely thank you, Madam
President, for the continued cooperation between the
Security Council and the League of Arab States in the
promotion of peace, security and development in our
region and the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States for
his briefing.

We also appreciate the presence this morning of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the representatives
of regional and subregional organizations from all parts
of the globe. I also welcome Ambassador Samantha
Power, whom we know to be committed to human rights
and humanitarian law, and who has written books on
Sérgio Vieira de Mello, a Brazilian and Latin American
hero in the fight for human rights and international
multilateralism. I thank Ambassador Power very much
for her presence.
I come from a country, Guatemala, and a
subregion, Central America, that have accumulated
more than 60 years of successful experience in the
realm of intraregional cooperation, driven by common
multilateral organizations. The degree of economic
interdependence among the countries of the Central
American Common Market and the Central American
Integration System is high in terms of trade and
reciprocal investment, and the ever wider and greater
integration of our markets and societies. In addition,
we have adopted a culture of intraregional cooperation
aimed at resolving common problems through
joint action, supported by a web of institutions and
intergovernmental mechanisms. One manifestation of
that network is the daily communications between our
Heads of State and other senior officials.
In addition, having overcome the internal
conflicts that affected our Central American region so
adversely in the 1970s and 1980s, the emphasis today
is on spurring our economic and social development.
Not only do we consider our region’s peace to be an

13-4194413

S/PV.7015

irreversible achievement, but the many affinities
and common interests between the countries of our
subregion have also contributed to strengthening
respect for the principle of resolving all conflicts or
misunderstandings among us by peaceful means, with
priority given to diplomatic-political dialogue.
I would further add that our culture of intraregional
cooperation extends to our entire region of Latin
America and the Caribbean. It should be recalled that the
so-called Contadora Group, which eventually became
the Rio Group and today inspires the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, was born of
the interest of brotherly neighbouring countries in
resolving Central American conflicts themselves.
Latin America, together with the United Nations,
contributed significantly to the establishment and
maintenance of peacekeeping missions that supported
El Salvador and my country in their return to the
institutional and democratic path. At present, as we all
know, the only specific item on the Council’s agenda
concerning our region, which enjoys the extraordinary
support of Latin America and the Caribbean, concerns
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in
which several Latin American countries and my own
country have the honour of participating with our
troops.
The fact that our region is no longer a threat to
international peace and security does not mean that
we are absent from the indispensable activities of the
Council at the international level. In that respect, since
we became a member, we have supported, as a general
objective, cooperation between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations, each in
its respective purview and based on their comparative
advantages. The long and fruitful association between
the Council and the African Union, which has even
given rise to joint efforts in peacekeeping, has provided
tangible and valuable benefits. Those benefits are being
reproduced at the subregional level by organizations
such as the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Southern African Development
Community, as well as the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region. The same is happening in the
Middle East, where the Council has collaborated with
the League of Arab States and the Gulf Cooperation
Council on some matters.

14

Naturally, the content and scope of the partnerships
of the Council with other organizations will vary from
one situation to the next, and could even vary over
time in the same situation, depending on changing
circumstances. Our general position of support for this
type of partnership is nuanced by the acknowledgment
that there are no universally valid formulas in this
matter. Rather, the exact characteristics of the
partnerships must be defined on a case-by-case basis.
In addition, it must be recognized that those
partnerships are not always exempt from difficulties,
which normally arise either from differences with
regard to the territorial issues of the parties or from
different criteria with regard to the course of action to
be followed. When there is no mechanism to reconcile
those differences through dialogue and understanding,
they can become serious obstacles to the proper
functioning of joint activity. That suggests that there
is a need to reconcile decisions taken by regional
organizations with those adopted by the United Nations,
including those of the Security Council, in light of the
provisions of Article 103 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
What is clear, in light of the experience of history, is
that regional and global efforts must acknowledge that
the overcoming of conflicts and the path to sustainable
peace depend on a joint endeavour intertwining the
agendas of security, justice, the respect for human
rights and sustainable development. In each of those
areas, there are diverse strengths and complementarities
among the United Nations and regional organizations,
and the acknowledgment of those strengths and
complementarities will open a distinct and fruitful
space for institutional cooperation at the multilateral
level among regional and global entities.
The twenty-first century is giving rise to
increasingly stronger and more responsible regional
institutions. The United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, should be pleased with that trend.
It reflects a slow but definite transition from the postwar world, which gave birth to the Council, towards
a multipolar world where dialogue and peace are
increasingly urgent and basic in order to preserve the
planet and the life on it, maintain human development
and overcome poverty. That is in addition to the need to
preserve peaceful coexistence based on mutual respect
and face the common challenges that threaten peace
and security at the global level. Regional organizations
are called upon to be active partners in this multipolar

13-41944

S/PV.7015

world by shouldering their responsibilities vis-à-vis
the international community to ensure peace and
sustainable development, thus complementing the
efforts made though the United Nations. This is a world
with more shared responsibilities, and therefore greater
demands on international cooperation — a world that is
more interconnected, not a fragmented one.
I would like to conclude my statement by thanking
you, Madam President, for the informative concept
note circulated by your delegation (S/2013/446, annex),
which helps guide today’s debate. I am also pleased to
express our full support for the presidential statement
that was adopted today (S/PRST/2013/12), which
reflects the content of our deliberations.
Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
I would like to thank the President of the Argentine
Republic, Her Excellency Ms. Cristina Fernández,
for presiding over this meeting on the very important
and timely topic of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. We are
also grateful to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
the representatives of the African Union, the League
of Arab States, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States and the Union of South American
Nations for their briefings. I would also like to join others
in congratulating the new United States Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, Ms. Samantha
Power. I hope that her first day will go very smoothly,
just as the other four years she will be here.
In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, States Members conferred upon the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and agreed that, in
carrying out its duties under that responsibility, the
Council acts on their behalf. At the same time, Chapter
VIII of the Charter encourages cooperation between
the United Nations and regional arrangements in the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Since the 2005 World Summit and the adoption of
resolution 1631 (2005), important progress has been
achieved in enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations and regional partners across a full range of
areas, from the maintenance of international peace and
security and humanitarian assistance to development
and the protection of human rights. Indeed, in a number
of instances, the relevant regional organizations
have proven to be indispensable mechanisms for

promoting international and regional peace, security
and cooperation, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. I would
like to refer to some such examples.
Over the past decade, the role of the African Union
has increased significantly. There is no doubt that the
challenges that Africa faces today and that are the
subject of a considerable part of the Security Council’s
deliberations can be better addressed through collective
political and diplomatic efforts. In that regard, we
welcome the progress achieved in developing the
strategic relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union in the area of peace and security.
The League of Arab States has also proved to be
one of those regional organizations that is able to take
the lead in promoting peace, security and stability
in the region. We are pleased to see that cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States has been instrumental in carrying out important
tasks in such areas as conflict prevention and resolution,
crisis response and management, and the fight against
terrorism and organized crime. We are confident that
continued engagement by the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, together with strengthened
cooperation between them, will effectively contribute
to peace and security in the region.
As a member of the Security Council and an
observer to the African Union and the League of Arab
States, Azerbaijan will further support the development
of partnership relations between those regional
organizations and the United Nations.
We also note the activities of new subregional
organizations such as the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations, and we welcome their presence at
this meeting and their contribution to our discussion.
Furthermore, the increasing role of organizations
formed on the basis of the shared cultural and linguistic
values of their member States, such as the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Cooperation Council
of Turkic-speaking States, gives rise to the need to
explore opportunities and appropriate approaches to
better serve the purpose of enhancing interaction and
cooperation between those organizations and the United
Nations across a broad agenda of mutual interests and
concerns.

13-4194415

S/PV.7015

At the same time, we should admit that serious
challenges remain. While regional organizations are
normally well positioned to understand the causes
of armed conflicts, owing to their knowledge of the
region, it is obvious that not all of them can boast the
ability, political will and institutional capacity to ensure
compliance by member States with their statutory
commitments.
First and foremost, it is crucial that all Member States
adhere to their obligations as laid out in the Charter
of the United Nations with respect to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States.
We express our concern at the attempts undertaken in
some situations of armed conflict to misinterpret the
norms and principles of international law and downplay
the relevance of Security Council resolutions. It is
therefore important that, at our meeting today, the
Council has stressed the importance of a coordinated
international response to causes of conflict and called
on the international community, including United
Nations organs and agencies, to assist with efforts at
the regional level aimed at the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the prevention and resolution of conflicts
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
Council has also stressed that regional partners must
at all times keep it informed of their activities in the
area of peace and security. As a matter of priority,
special attention should be given to the implementation
of Security Council resolutions, in particular those
related to the prevention, management and settlement
of conflicts.
It is also essential, when dealing with conflict and
post-conflict situations, that the relevant organizations
and entities ensure that peace and justice are both
present in a mutually reinforcing manner. Such an
approach ensures that no peace settlement is reached
that is inconsistent with international law. That
understanding is particularly important, as it would
provide guidance not only for the parties to the conflict
but also for the international community as a whole
and, when appropriate, mediation efforts undertaken at
the regional level.
In the presidential statement just adopted
(S/PRST/2013/12), the Security Council emphasizes
that ending impunity is essential in a conflict and postconflict society’s efforts to come to terms with past
wrongs and that regional and subregional organizations
should contribute to individual accountability. As a

16

country that is itself suffering from the occupation and
large-scale ethnic cleansing of a significant part of its
territory, Azerbaijan strongly supports that approach
in working to address protracted conflicts and their
humanitarian and human rights consequences in
different parts of the world.
In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
Argentina for convening this important meeting and to
welcome the adoption of the presidential statement as
its outcome. We also wish the delegation of Argentina a
successful presidency in August.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Allow me to congratulate
you, Madam President, on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. We have no doubt that it will be a successful
month, and Rwanda pledges to work with you. Allow
me to also congratulate you and your delegation for
organizing this important open debate. Your presence
here demonstrates your sincere commitment to peace
and security on our planet and the value you attach to the
role of national, regional and subregional organizations
in that regard.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his presence here and for the willingness
he has shown to engage with regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union (AU) and
the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), of which Rwanda is a member. I extend my
greetings and welcome to the representatives of the
various regional and subregional organizations who are
here with us this morning. And I would like to take
this opportunity to welcome my colleague Ambassador
Samantha Power of the United States, whom I look
forward to working with.
I fully endorse the statement made by
Ambassador Tekeda Alemu of Ethiopia on behalf of the
Chairperson of the AU, and I would now like to make a
few comments in my national capacity.
This debate is an opportunity for us to exchange
views and focus on how to strengthen cooperation
in maintaining international peace and security.
We believe that while primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security is vested
in the Security Council, the evolving nature of conflicts
and threats to peace and security around the world
necessitates partnership with regional and subregional
organizations for reasons such as geographic proximity,
expediency and burden-sharing.

13-41944

S/PV.7015

It is indeed true that regional and subregional
organizations have a significant contribution to make.
Experience has shown that regional organizations
have advantages of local knowledge, proximity and
the ability to mobilize and respond quickly that often
surpass the bureaucratic and procedural processes
typical of United Nations interventions maintaining
peace and security around the world. For instance,
on the African continent, the United Nations and the
African Union have cooperated on several initiatives,
notably the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Mission in Darfur and the African Union Mission
in Somalia. And the Economic Community of West
African States has exercised irreplaceable leadership
in support of the United Nations in Côte d’Ivoire and
Mali. Convincing evidence of regional organizations’
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security has also been strongly manifest in the joint
efforts of the African Union and the United Nations in
Burundi, Ethiopia and Eritrea, the Sudan and, more
recently, in Mali.
Furthermore, the AU, the United Nations, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community
have cooperated as guarantors of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. The ICGLR in
particular was established in recognition of the fact
that political instability and conflicts in its member
States have a considerable regional dimension and
thus require a concerted effort. That subregional
organization has been a major driving force in the quest
for peace and security in the region. We commend its
growing and important role there, and the steps it has
taken to confront the challenges that the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo poses for the region
and the international community.
Outside the African continent, we should recall the
role of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in
Cambodia and that of the Organization of American
States in Haiti and Nicaragua, as well as between
Honduras and El Salvador. Although the Security
Council was responsible for arriving at a final settlement
in most of those conflicts, the contributions of both
organizations were remarkable, and helped to make
the case for a greater role for regional organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

It should be noted, however, that despite those
significant developments, cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations has yet to reach its full potential and
should be substantially streamlined. We encourage the
Security Council to engage with such organizations and
to regularly take the position of the African Union and
its regional economic communities into consideration.
We therefore urge the Council to continue desk-todesk dialogues on issues of mutual interest, and to
increase consultations with regional and subregional
organizations on how to take that partnership forward
in a mutual and beneficial manner. We believe that
promoting cooperation between such bodies will
enhance complementarity and lead to effective
coordination, while at the same time minimizing
duplication of efforts.
Mutual respect and open communication are
the foundation of any successful and productive
partnership, especially in the case of complex joint
endeavours such as United Nations-authorized military
interventions, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction activities. We believe that efforts
to improve strategic cooperation should emphasize
ways whereby the Council can interact more regularly
and substantively with the executive representatives of
those organizations on matters that are directly linked
to peace and security in their jurisdictions.
In that regard, Rwanda looks forward to the annual
consultative meeting, scheduled for later this year,
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. In its capacity as Chair of the Ad-hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, Rwanda will also ensure that the Group is
involved in the preparations and follow-up for this
meeting, in accordance with paragraph 18 of resolution
2033 (2012). As has been to some extent the case with
the AU, the Council should consider extending that
practice to other regional organizations and holding
periodic meetings with their representatives for
discussing areas of common interest. Such a practice
would be an important step forward and might produce
other innovative ways to intervene.
I should not, however, underestimate the challenges
related to financial resources and technical capacity
that often compromise the goals and ambitions of
regional and subregional organizations. My delegation
will reiterate its call for enhancing the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing regional

13-4194417

S/PV.7015

organizations’ peace- and security-related efforts. It
is our view that they should be encouraged to assume
ownership of their initiatives as much as possible and to
strive for self-reliance. As a partner, the United Nations
should seek to actively assist such organizations in
capacity-building. The announcement by African
leaders in June that they will be establishing a rapid
reaction force, fully funded by African countries
themselves, is a good step in the direction of selfreliance.
Furthermore, regional organizations have a great
deal of expertise to share with member States and one
another, including in the areas of electoral supervision,
security sector reform, law enforcement, border control
and so on. In the spirit of South-South cooperation,
such best practices could be communicated more
systematically between regions and between countries.
Rwanda has been partnering with the United Nations
and regional organizations and member States wishing
to share its best practices, including those relating to
high-level police expertise with Somalia, Liberia and
Mali; and we stand ready to do so in the future.
In conclusion, I should stress that although
significant progress has been made in improving
mutual cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, it cannot hide the fact that
much remains to be done. It is important to take that
partnership forward, based on a solid strategic platform
that takes into account the comparative advantages of
regional organizations, recognizing that the complexity
of today’s conflicts means that no single organization
can effectively address them on their own.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
debate on United Nations cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. I also thank you,
Madam President, Foreign Minister Carrera, Foreign
Minister Mammadyarov and Ambassador Gasana
and all of my colleagues here, who have welcomed
me so warmly today. I am most honoured to be in the
Chamber for the first time representing the United
States in the Security Council, and I am especially
honoured to sit here among so many distinguished
Ministers, colleagues and guests. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the representatives of
the African Union (AU), the League of Arab States, the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
and the Union of South American Nations for their
briefings.

18

Their comments provide a glimpse into the critical,
essential contribution that regional organizations
make to global peace and stability. The United States
believes that regional organizations can be invaluable
partners for the Council as it carries out its unique
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That is why we in the Obama
Administration have intensified our engagement with
regional organizations, including the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the Organization of American
States, the African Union, and the League of Arab
States.
Anchored in their regions, such organizations
have a keen understanding of the political, social and
historical contexts that can drive conflicts there and can
help prevent them. Regional organizations can leverage
local knowledge, relationships and resources to mitigate
and, hopefully, end conflict, as well as support postconflict recovery and stabilization efforts. Because
instability in one State can and often does adversely
impact its neighbours, regional organizations have a
compelling interest and sense of urgency in addressing
conflicts in their neighbourhood. Preventing conflict
often depends upon early action to diffuse internal
and cross-border tensions, protect civilians and halt
mass atrocities. Regional organizations are essential
to such efforts, and, as we saw in Libya, the League
of Arab States was among the first to sound the alarm
that Al-Qadhafi’s regime was on the verge of killing
thousands of his own people. The League’s call helped
galvanize the Council to take decisive action to protect
civilians and give the Libyan people the chance to shape
their own future, free of oppression.
The United Nations strong partnership with the
African Union has been vital to stabilizing the volatile
relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan
and has helped prevent another outbreak of war. The
Security Council, the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy and the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei have provided critical political and material
support to the AU as it continues to seek solutions
to the difficult disputes that divide the Sudan and
South Sudan. They have contributed great creativity
and perseverance. Despite our best efforts, however,
prevention sometimes fails and conflict rages. In those
cases, too, regional organizations play an essential role.
As the twin governance and security crises
threaten the stability and unity of Mali, the Economic

13-41944

S/PV.7015

Community of West African States (ECOWAS) helped
broker a political deal that culminated in the signing of
an important peace agreement in June and nationwide
presidential elections just last month. African Union
and ECOWAS troops formed the nucleus of the United
Nations newest peacekeeping mission. Continued
cooperation among ECOWAS, the AU and the United
Nations will be vital to ensuring that the security and
constitutional order are fully restored in Mali. That
coordinated action serves as a good example of how the
United Nations and regional organizations complement
each other and underscores the value of offices like
that of the United Nations Office for West Africa,
where the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s productive partnership with ECOWAS serves
to facilitate regional and subregional approaches to
addressing the cross-cutting threats to peace and
security across the region.
Cooperation between regional and United Nations
efforts in the field is essential to success. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) has
begun vigorous outreach to the African Union to create
a dynamic, UNSOM-AU partnership that can bring
peace and stability to Somalia.
Finally, regional organizations help States and
people recover from conflicts and other crises. The
Security Council last met to discuss cooperation
with regional organizations on 13 January 2010 (see
S/PV.6257). That was just one day after a massive
earthquake devastated Haiti. Speakers that day voiced
profound sorrow at Haiti’s loss, yet expressed hope that
the international community would pull together to help
Haiti recover. Today we can see that United Nations and
regionally led efforts have made a major difference for
Haiti and its people. The Organization of American
States and the Caribbean Community led a joint observer
mission to monitor Haiti’s post-earthquake elections,
which helped ensure a credible democratic outcome,
while the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) worked with the Government of
Haiti to ensure security throughout the election period.
The United States applauds States around the region,
including many represented in the Chamber, for the
essential support they give to Haiti by contributing
troops to MINUSTAH, providing development
assistance and helping build Haitian capacity.
While United Nations cooperation with regional
organizations will remain important, we must also be
clear-eyed about its limits. Although the League of

Arab States has been at the forefront of pushing for a
political transition in Syria, well-known divisions have
prevented the Council from supporting that effort.
Moreover, as the Council continues its cooperation
with regional and subregional groups in order to fulfil
its core mandate to maintain international peace and
security, we must remember that collaboration needs to
be based on the facts of the crisis at hand, and solutions
need to be agreed on and pursued together.
As we look to the future, the United States will
continue to support and strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and its regional partners, and we
will look to leverage the valuable capabilities that
regional and subregional organizations can contribute
to our shared goal of building a more peaceful, just and
secure world.
Mr. Amrani (Morocco) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Madam President.
We also wish to express our gratitude to the delegation
of Argentina for convening this debate on a topic of
utmost importance, not only for all Latin American
countries — we note and welcome the presence of
many Foreign Ministers of Latin America — but also
for all the African countries represented in the Council
today. In that connection, I would like to express
our appreciation for the briefings given by so many
distinguished persons from the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the Union of South
American Nations, the League of Arab States and the
African Union, who have given us insights into this
important topic. We welcome also the presence and
contribution of the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Before I go on with my statement, may I offer
Ambassador Samatha Power of the United States our
congratulations. We assure Ms. Power our fullest
cooperation in working in the Security Council and
within the United Nations.
Today’s topic coincides with other recent efforts
by the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations aimed at strengthening alliances between
such organizations in order to confront the challenges
to peace and international security and deal with crisis
situations of many types that destabilize entire regions
and impact millions of people.
Morocco attaches particular importance to the
role of regional and subregional organizations and
their cooperation with the United Nations, consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations and in keeping

13-4194419

S/PV.7015

with the parameters established under the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In the light of their firm
commitment to peace, development and the respect
for human rights, some organizations have become
major actors in working with the United Nations.
Since Morocco became a Member State, our country
has consistently contributed to the achievement of
the aims and principles of the Organization, whether
in peacekeeping or in international security, and in
promoting cooperation for development, which are two
sides of the same coin.
Morocco is also a founding member of the African
Union and considers the stability and development
of the African continent to lie at the forefront of its
foreign policy priorities. On the basis of that longstanding international commitment, Morocco is now
participating in and seeking to step up cooperation
between the United Nations and the African continent
with full respect for the specifications defined
by individual Member States. In that context, my
country has participated in international and regional
endeavours to settle numerous disputes in Africa and in
various countries around the world.
It is in that same conviction that Morocco has also
supported the democratic processes that are taking
place in various countries. Morocco, an African
country with a long-standing tradition of solidarity
with and commitment to our African neighbours, has
undertaken to support all United Nations efforts aimed
at enhancing the security and stability of countries
throughout Africa. We also stand ready to actively
participate in any endeavour aimed at meeting those
challenges.
It cannot be denied that regional organizations and
arrangements play a major role in achieving regional
and continental aspirations. We have closely followed
everything that has been done in Latin America, in the
Union of South American Nations and in the Andean
Community, and we commend the approaches taken
there. We are now doing similar things in our continent,
Africa. In particular, we would emphasize the efforts
being deployed by the Gulf Cooperation Council, with
which Morocco has a strategic partnership for the
resolution of crises, like the one in Yemen, for example.
We have also worked hand in hand with other members
of this Council to seek the resolution of the conflict
in Mali through a regional approach spearheaded by
such African regional organizations as the Economic

20

Community of Central African States and the Economic
Community of West African States.
With that same goal in mind, we are now also
working to build the Arab Maghreb Union, which is a
priority for my country and which will contribute to the
stability and prosperity of the five member countries
of that organization. Developing our ambitions for the
Maghreb remains a priority for Morocco, since that will
lead to sustainable development and solidarity, both for
the countries of the Maghreb and for countries of the
broader region.
Recent events in Mali require that the countries
of the Maghreb and the Sahel and their partners step
up cooperation in order to deal not only with security
challenges, which are extensive, but also with the
democratic challenges and the challenges of economic
development. The phenomenon of insecurity calls
for major efforts at coordination and cooperation to
be undertaken today, with a view to promoting an
inclusive security approach of a preventive, concerted,
multidimensional nature that incorporates all aspects of
economic and social development. We thus commend
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel recently adopted by the Security
Council.
I will not dwell further on the aforementioned
matters except to say that in Africa today we have
the required major instruments and tools, such as the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States, which is working
to promote prosperity in the region.
I would also wish to praise the cooperation that
exists between the League of Arab States and the
United Nations. In order to strengthen that cooperation,
we worked with the German presidency of the Council
in September 2012 to bring about the adoption of a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/20), which led
subsequently to the holding of a seminar. We hope that
closer relations and enhanced cooperation between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations will
contribute to the success of the ongoing efforts on the
part of the United States Administration to promote the
conclusion of final agreements on a two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security, consistent with the strategic objective of
the Arab Peace Initiative.
In conclusion, at a time when the United Nations is
seeking to enhance its partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, I would like to say that, in

13-41944

S/PV.7015

order to promote international peace and security, we
must take into account the following six elements. First,
we must clearly understand and have a clear vision of
and respect for the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and of the charters of the various regional and
subregional organizations. Secondly, we must duly take
into account the principal responsibility conferred on
the Security Council to ensure international peace and
security. Thirdly, we must undertake assessments that
could help to avoid duplications that might hamper or
delay the solution of any conflict or dispute. Fourthly,
the United Nations and the regional and subregional
organizations must adopt a conflict and dispute
prevention strategy. Fifthly, we must resolve the root
causes of conflict and combat any trends that could
lead to the instability resulting from terrorism. In
that regard, the United Nations and all Member States
are called upon and invited to step up their support
for efforts to achieve sustainable development and
contribute to the success of reform, democratic change
and good governance. Lastly, where the intervention
of more than one regional organization is required,
experience has shown that it is of prime importance
to ensure that those organizations coordinate their
activities so as to avoid duplication. It is important
not only for development but also in the interest of
fostering and promoting interregional cooperation and
cooperation between subregional organizations in order
to enhance the complementarity of efforts and to place
all capacities in the service of peace.

peace and security. In 2011, we saw the successful
response on the part of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations to tensions on the Thailand-Cambodia
border, a commendable regional approach designed to
de-escalate a potentially serious dispute. Last month,
we in Pacific celebrated the tenth anniversary of the
successful regional assistance mission to Solomon
Islands, to which each of the 16 members of the Pacific
Islands Forum contributed and which has been decisive
in the recovery of Solomon Islands from conflict.
The role of regional organizations was of course
set out 68 years ago in Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, but they are playing an increasingly
instrumental role in a much more complex environment
and have enhanced their engagement with the United
Nations by necessity. We have seen this most clearly
with the African Union (AU) and African subregional
organizations. The United Nations retains primacy,
but, as Ambassador Tekeda Alemu said this morning,
speaking for the AU, the United Nations needs a strong
AU and the AU needs a strong United Nations. The
trajectory of cooperation will only continue.
I would like to briefly focus on three issues that we
believe are central to this partnership.

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the President for
Argentina’s initiative in convening today’s important
debate and for her presence here today. I also thank the
Secretary-General and today’s briefers and welcome
Ambassador Power.

First is the need for respective roles to be based on
comparative advantages that are distinct and understood.
The Council will have its most fruitful engagement
with organizations that have the mandate and capacity
to work on international peace and security issues.
For example, as the Pacific responded to the crisis
in Solomon Islands, the fact that the Pacific Islands
Forum already had in place the Biketawa Declaration of
2000, which set out a clear framework for a collective
response to regional crises, was instrumental.

To understand the importance of the partnership
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, we need only look to situations currently
on the Council’s agenda — Somalia, Mali and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — all of which
involve essential cooperation between the United
Nations and such organizations.

The comparative advantages of regional and
subregional organizations are clear, and others have
already mentioned them this morning. They include
deeper knowledge of context, cultural understanding,
an inherent political interest in staying the course, and
geographic proximity. These factors all contributed to
success in Solomon Islands.

From Australia’s experience in our own
region — the Asia-Pacific — we understand implicitly
the comparative advantage that regional organizations
can bring to conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, and we fully subscribe to the
complementarity of the roles that regional organizations
and the United Nations play in addressing threats to

The benefit of playing to comparative advantage
is clearly applicable to some current major challenges.
In Somalia, the AU has a comparative advantage in
peace operations, while the United Nations, through
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
brings critical skills to post-conflict stabilization and
governance. In the Sudans, the AU plays a central

13-4194421

S/PV.7015

mediation role, seeking to de-escalate tensions and
keeping the parties talking, which the United Nations
peacekeeping operations support in various ways. The
important point is that each organization plays to its
relative strengths.
The second area to focus on is in strengthening
dialogue, exchange and capacity-building. This is
obviously vital to enhancing coordination and ensuring
that organizations at all levels benefit from best
practices. The United Nations has extensive experience
in peacekeeping best practices; as these evolve, they
should be conveyed to relevant regional organizations.
Again, the United Nations dialogue, exchange and
capacity-building are most structured and advanced
with the AU as its own architecture has evolved to meet
the peace and security challenges on the continent.
This cooperation can point us to practices that may be
relevant to other regional organizations — recognizing,
of course, that one size does not fit all. This exchange
must be a two-way street; there is much the United
Nations can learn from regional and subregional
organizations.
The third area is partnerships on thematic,
human rights and humanitarian issues. The Council
has recognized the key role regional and subregional
organizations play in affirming the role of women in
conflict prevention, peacebuilding, peacekeeping and
humanitarian response; ensuring the protection of
children affected by armed conflict; and ensuring that
the protection of civilians is central to peacekeeping
efforts. The presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/12) embraces, as it must, close
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations on these three thematic issues.

para. 86 (d)). That is usually the case, but it must never,
ever deter us.
Resourcing is one such issue. When the Council
authorizes regional organizations to undertake
peacekeeping operations, we must do all we can to
ensure that they are appropriately resourced for the jobs
we are asking them to do. The Council must continue to
develop the framework to ensure that the United Nations
partnerships with regional organisations are effective,
and we believe that the presidential statement adopted
today is an important contribution in that regard.
In concluding, I would like to thank the regional and
subregional organizations, including those represented
here, for their growing and valuable work towards
international peace and security and our shared goals,
as enunciated in the United Nations Charter. As the
Secretary-General said this morning, it is the combined
value of our efforts that can be decisive.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank the Argentine presidency for having
organized this open debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. The presence of President Fernández
and the participation of many ministers bear witness to
the importance of the subject we are discussing today.
I thank the Secretary-General and representatives of
the Union of South American Nations, the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, the African
Union and the League of Arab States for their edifying
opening statements.
Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

We also welcome the Council’s recognition in the
statement that regional organizations have a crucial role
in addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. This is an issue on which many regions have
pressed for collective action. It is important to see the
Council encouraging, in return, regional organizations
to strengthen their collective response.

The Security Council has rightly recognized
the role and contribution of regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter. It is clear that
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations is not only
desirable but also necessary.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is, as we know, complex and
evolving. There will be ongoing challenges. In his
Supplement to An Agenda for Peace 20 years ago,
Boutros Boutros-Ghali recognized that the political,
operational and financial aspects of cooperation
“gives rise to questions of some delicacy” (S/1995/1,

Luxembourg
welcomes
the
long-standing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union. This cooperation now covers the
entire spectrum of response to international crises,
from immediate crisis response, humanitarian action,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding to development
beyond the European continent. The synergies between

22

13-41944

S/PV.7015

the United Nations and the European Union in the
theatre of operations where they work side by side
are significant, whether in Kosovo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia or now in Mali.
It is also on the African continent that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is the most developed.
Whether it is to finally pacify the Darfur region of the
Sudan or to normalize relations between the Sudan and
South Sudan, the United Nations and the African Union
are working hand in hand. We attach importance in this
regard to the Security Council’s ongoing strong support
for the mediation undertaken by the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel.
On 1 July, the transfer of authority from the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali was the culmination of
a close and fruitful cooperation between the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the United Nations. The combined efforts
of these organizations have contributed to stabilizing
the political and security situation in Mali and opened
the way for the holding, on 28 July, of the first round of
the presidential election that is to conclude the political
transition in the country.
On the other side of the continent, in Somalia, the
combined efforts of the United Nations and the African
Union have opened a new page in the history of that
country. With the African Union Mission in Somalia,
significant territorial gains have been made over
the past 12 months. Since 3 June, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia has provided integrated
support to Somalia while strengthening the strategic
partnership and collaboration with the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in all areas related to
the consolidation of peace. In this context, we look
forward to the results of the upcoming joint review of
AMISOM. We welcome the intention of the African
Union to work closely with the Secretariat in the context
of that review.
We hope that the same fruitful cooperation will
soon be established between the United Nations and
the African Union to resolve the crisis in the Central
African Republic, following the decision of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union to create
an African-led international mission support to that
country.

Before I conclude — while much more could, of
course, still be said with regard to the importance
of United Nations cooperation with other regional
organizations, in particular the League of Arab
States — allow me to address a topic that is close to
our heart, that is, the protection of children in armed
conflict. The contribution of regional and subregional
organizations and agreements to the protection of
children affected by armed conflict is undeniable, with
the regional cooperation initiative led by the African
Union against the Lord’s Resistance Army being a good
illustration.
In general, the increasing involvement of regional
organizations in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions poses challenges for child protection, in
particular with regard to the rules of engagement and
the conduct of operations. We therefore welcome the
fact that the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/12) reiterates the call made in the 17 June
presidential statement on children and armed conflict
(S/PRST/2013/8) for regional organizations to include
the protection of children in their policies, programmes
and planning activities and to assign child-protection
specialists to their field missions.
In this area as in others, the United Nations and
regional organizations can make a difference by working
together in a complementary manner. As a founding
Member of the United Nations, the European Union
and many regional organizations on the continent of
Europe, Luxembourg is a strong supporter of the cause
of cooperation and regional integration. The Council
can count on us to help to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the field of peace and security.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We are honoured
that the President of the Argentine Republic has
presided over this special meeting of the Security
Council. We congratulate Argentina on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
August, and we appreciate the valuable work being
done by Ambassador María Cristina Perceval and her
team in leading the Council this month.
We commend the United States for its effective
presidency of the Council last month. We warmly
welcome to the Council Chamber the new United States
Permanent Representative, Ms. Samantha Power, and
we look forward to working with her.

13-4194423

S/PV.7015

We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on this important subject.
We listened attentively to the presentations made
on behalf of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, the African Union (AU), the Union of
South American Nations and the League of Arab States.
We also appreciate the participation of the ministers
taking part in today’s debate.
It is evident from the briefings this morning that
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations are cooperating more closely than ever
before to maintain international peace and security and
to prevent, manage and resolve crises. The partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations
reinforce collective security, but they also present new
problems.
The past year has been good for partnerships. Under
the leadership of the Secretary-General, the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Great Lakes
and the Region was concluded. The Framework, which
is supported by 11 countries and four guarantors — the
United Nations, the African Union, the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community — should usher in
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbourhood. Similarly, the effective
cooperation among the United Nations, the Economic
Community of West African States and Economic
Community of Central African States has contributed
to the stabilization of the situations in Mali and the
Central African Republic.
The United Nations has supported the African
Union Mission in Somalia with core deployment,
rotations and operational and budgetary support. It has
also supported the International Security Assistance
Force under the framework of a United Nations
mandate, as well as the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. The cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations requires
a dynamic strategy to address the deficits in troops,
equipment and military expertise, as well as predictable
and sustainable funding. It also demands close oversight
by the Security Council and the harmonization of the
approaches of regional organizations and the United
Nations.
Regional organizations have unique perspectives
and deeper understandings of local conflicts and
cultural norms. That knowledge often gives them a

24

comparative advantage in preventing and resolving
conflicts. In many cases, they have enormous influence
over the parties to a dispute, which tend to place greater
trust in regional organizations.
A lot more can be done to consolidate partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
Every regional organization has a unique historical
background, distinct objectives and diverse membership.
In formulating strategies for cooperation, the specific
characteristics and capacities of each organization
should be taken into account. Regional organizations
help the Council to avert impending crises by sharing
information on a real-time basis. The United Nations
should therefore support the early-warning capacitybuilding of the relevant regional organizations.
Regional organizations should use their full
potential to dissuade parties from relying on arms
to settle their disputes, and encourage them to use
peaceful means.
We call on the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Gulf
Cooperation Council to use their extensive links and
clout to persuade all sides in Syria to attend the “Geneva
II” conference.
As we all know, African issues constitute the bulk
of the agenda of the Security Council. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union is
an important pivot for the maintenance of international
peace and security on the African continent. The
United Nations and its partners should continue to
address funding and capacity gaps to strengthen the
African Union’s ability to prevent conflicts under the
umbrella of the 10-year capacity-building programme
for the African Union.
We applaud the European Union for supporting
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities in Africa
by providing substantial funding for United Nationsmandated African Union peace-support operations. We
encourage other regional organizations that have the
capacity to do so to follow the example of the European
Union.
Regional organizations should step up their
endeavours to fight transnational crimes such as
terrorism, drug trafficking, the proliferation of weapons
and piracy. The success of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel depends upon interregional
cooperation to combat those threats.

13-41944

S/PV.7015

The United Nations has launched robust
peacekeeping in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Intervention Brigade must succeed despite the
challenges of the terrain, the presence of multiple rebel
groups and doctrinal issues, as its performance will
have an impact on similar missions and situations and
on the conceptual evolution of modern peacekeeping.
The latent issues between the Security Council
and regional organizations should be addressed by
promoting complementarity. The widely recognized
principles of consultation, the primacy of the United
Nations, the effective division of labour and consistency
of approach should be fully respected. Those are indeed
the broad parameters for the evolving interpretations of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Finally, for sustainable peace, the humanitarian
role and competencies of regional organizations should
be strengthened.
We fully endorse the comprehensive presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/12) finalized under your
presidency, Madam President. We also commend your
Mission for preparing a very well-structured concept
note (S/2013/446, annex).
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you very much, Madam President, for coming to New
York to preside over this debate, as well as for selecting
such an important and relevant topic. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General and the four briefers
for their important contributions this morning. Let me
also take this opportunity to congratulate Argentina
and Ambassador Perceval on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August, and
to warmly welcome our new American colleague,
Ambassador Samantha Power, to the United Nations.
The founders of the United Nations wisely created
provisions for United Nations cooperation with
regional organizations in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, but I doubt that they could have
foreseen the range and scope of regional and subregional
orgnanizations that have arisen since 1945 and the
important role that they have played and are playing
in conflict prevention and resolution. Let me provide
just four recent examples of effective engagement by
regional organizations in conflict prevention.
In Europe, the European Union-facilitated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina has led to significant
progress in relations between Serbia and Kosovo,

creating a framework for practical cooperation between
the two countries and lowering tensions in a fragile
region.
In Yemen in 2011, as the country encountered
political instability accompanied by serious violence,
the Gulf Cooperation Council played an invaluable role
in brokering an agreement that created the framework
for a negotiated political transition process, which
should lead to a new constitution and elections in 2014.
In South-East Asia, efforts led by the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations in 2011, under the
chairmanship of Indonesia and with the active support
of the Security Council, resulted in a cessation of
violence along the Thai-Cambodian border.
And in Africa, the patient engagement of
President Mbeki and the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel has played a major part in
managing tensions surrounding implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan
and South Sudan. The African Union road map of
April 2012 set the template for resolution 2046 (2012),
serving as a model for United Nations and African
Union cooperation in maintaining international peace
and security.
We can draw some useful lessons from these and
other examples. They show how regional organizations,
whose interests are directly affected by the prospect of
instability within the region, can bring a strong sense
of urgency and commitment to their engagement. They
show how regional organizations can apply detailed
knowledge of the social and political issues in play. In
some cicumstances, regional organizations may find
it easier to be accepted as peacekeepers or mediators
by the actors involved, and as the example of Kosovo
demonstrates, regional organizations can often make
good use of the range of incentives that exist through
common ties in the region to encourage a sense of
compromise and flexibility.
There are other ways in which regional organizations
can help maintain international peace and security.
They can play a valuable role as indepenedent election
monitors, able to deter abuse of electoral procedures and
to validate properly held elections. But with this role
comes an important responsibility. In circumstances
where there is credible evidence of serious irregularities
in the conduct of elections, regional oerganizations that
have monitored the elections must be ready to voice

13-4194425

S/PV.7015

these concerns clearly and objectively, unconstrained
by diplomatic or regional solidarity.
Regional organizations can also help uphold
international peace and security by establishing and
upholding standards of democracy and good governance
among their members. The African Union’s policy
of zero tolerance towards military coups and other
violations of democratic standards is an important factor
in the trend that has seen the widespread establishment
of multi-party democracy across the continent in place
of military or one-party regimes.
Within the Commonwealth, the readiness of the
Ministerial Action Group to take action suspending
members from participation in the organization has
served to uphold and entrench democratic standards.
I have highlighted positive examples of regional
organizations’ cooperation with the Unted Nations, but
it is also important to discuss difficulties, as well as to
highlight successes.
First, some conflict situations will be of relevance
to more than one regional organization and the views
of the different organizations may differ. In 2011, over
Libya for example, the League of Arab States and the
African Union arrived at strikingly different positions
on the ongoing revolution. In general, the Council is
always keen to take account of the views of relevant
regional organizations, but that becomes harder when
those views are discordant.
Secondly, we have seen circumstances where
the views of the relevant regional and subregional
organizations are at odds. Again in 2011, this was
the case when the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States took different
approaches to developments over Côte D’Ivoire, leaving
the Council having to assess a diversity of regional and
subregional perspectives.
Thirdly, the issue of capacity also needs to be
considered in a realistic way. Regional organizations
sometimes have the political will but not the practical
or financial capacity to take swift action in response
to peace and security challenges. On Mali in 2012, we
saw the regional and subregional organizations assert
their readiness to lead an international response, but
this was followed by a long hiatus during which time
insurgents steadily expanded their control over parts
of the country, requiring French forces to intervene to
arrest the mounting crisis.

26

Equally we in the Council need to look self-critically
at our own conduct. We need to acknowledge frankly
the occasions, as with Syria, when we have failed to
provide an effective response and clear international
direction in circumstances where the voice of the
relevant regional organization — the League of Arab
States — has been clear and forthright in setting out
what it expects of us.
So there are lessons to learn, as well as successes
to highlight. But the overall trend is clear — towards
increasing engagement by regional organizations in
conflict-prevention and therefore towards increasing
United Nations cooperation with regional organizations.
And that is a challenge we must embrace. We should do
so in a flexible and creative way. Today’s presidential
statement (S/2013/PRST/12) and the previous Council
products on cooperation with the African Union and
the League of Arab States set out valuable guidelines.
But we should avoid the temptations to overly codify
our relationships or to prioritize establishing a strict
theology of institutional cooperation over practical
action.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I would like to thank you for convening
today’s debate, and to welcome all the ministers and
other representatives who spoke before me. I would
also like to welcome the new Permanent Representative
of the United States, even if my time here at the United
Nations has been brief. Finally, I note that France aligns
itself fully with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union.
As I was said, I would like to thank you, Madam,
for convening this debate since it allows us to consider
a key issue of great importance to France — the
contribution of regional and subregional organizations
to the maintanence of international peace and security
and the pomotion of the rule of law.
The severity and number of conflicts in the world
require us to resort to all the means at our disposal. In
this context, the contribution of regional organizations
to maintaining international peace and security is
crucial. That contribution is provided for under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and responds
to several objectives. It allows regional organizations
working under the auspices of the United Nations to
enjoy strong political legitimacy. In return, it allows
the United Nations to draw on the know-how and
operational methods of regional organizations. We have

13-41944

S/PV.7015

seen a fine example of this in Mali, where cooperation
between the United Nations and the relevant regional
organizations — the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States — have made
it possible for the country to emerge from the recent
crisis.
Like some speakers before me, I wish briefly to
mention the European Union. The European Union
plays a major role within the international community.
I recall that peace and security are at the heart of the
European project, which arose in the wake of the Second
World War, like the United Nations. Among regional
organizations, the European Union stands out because
of its advanced level of cooperation with the United
Nations and other regional organizations. Its operational
capacities give it the ability to support diverse activities
and to develop institutional mechanisms for funding
and participating in peacekeeping missions authorized
by the Security Council, and to contribute to crisis
prevention and post-conflict stabilizaton. Today, this
cooperation extends to all continents.
In order to faciliate peace in Africa, since 2004 the
European Union has allocated €740 million in a variety
of modalities. It responds to urgent needs through its
rapid-response mechanism, and to longer-term needs
through peace-support operations that allow for
predictable financing. The mechanism has also enabled
the European Union to finance the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia since 2007, a good
example of cooperation among the European Union, the
African Union and the United Nations. The European
Union has also contributed significant support to the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, on the same basis. It also supports
strengthening the capacities of the African Union and
subregional African organizations.
Similarly, the European Union is coordinating its
intervention in Libya with the United Nations through
its European Union Border Assistance Mission for
border surveillance, just as it works actively with the
United Nations in Kosovo. Concerning Georgia, for
instance, the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations have participated jointly in the discussions
in Geneva, and the European Union is financing the
confidence-building measures between Abkhazians
and Georgians that are being implemented by the
United Nations Development Programme. Lastly, one
of the chief goals that the European Union and the

Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
set themselves at their summit in Santiago in February
was to contribute actively and jointly to international
peace and security.
The role of regional organizations is only
going to grow, in response both to the principle of
subsidiarity and to the mentality that encourages
regional stakeholders to assume responsibility and
ownership. France is contributing to that effort through
organizations of which it is a member, as well as through
its support for the establishment of a regional security
architecture. While we should continue our support for
that cooperative trend, we must continue to be wary
of the danger of a fragmentation of collective security.
The Security Council, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, is still the body with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, acting on behalf of the Members of
the United Nations as a whole to that end.
Dialogue between the United Nations and other
organizations often raises complex questions resulting
from a shortage of resources in the area of troops, for
example, but also in equipment, military expertise,
civilian know-how and funding; the implementation of
predictable and reliable financing; and the issue of the
degree of control that the Council can exercise over the
operations it authorizes. That should not, however, be
seen as an obstacle. On the contrary, it illustrates the
vitality of the relations between the United Nations and
such organizations. Responding to those issues quickly
and effectively is a challenge we should all address.
In conclusion, I would like to touch on one last
topic, which is dealt with in the presidential statement
adopted today (S/PRST/2013/12), namely, that your
country, Madam President, has decided to highlight
the fight against impunity and the historic importance
in that regard of the International Criminal Court, the
promotion of human rights and the rule of law, and the
role that regional organizations play in that area, for
which we are grateful. That is another demonstration
of your country’s unwavering commitment to such
matters, within the Security Council in particular and
the United Nations in general. France knows something
about that topic, since our two countries, together
with Morocco, promoted within the Organization the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Here we are
again, in the Security Council, some of the founding
countries of the International Criminal Court, of which

13-4194427

S/PV.7015

your compatriot, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, was the first
Prosecutor. The reference to the International Criminal
Court and the fight against impunity in a text on United
Nations cooperation with regional organizations is
therefore a welcome precedent, for which we are in
your debt.
It is also a useful reminder that the principles of
justice and the defence of human rights are founding
principles for many regional organizations. The
European Union and the Organization of American
States were built on the rejection of conflict and around
the goal of ensuring peace and security, and they have
developed basic mechanisms for promoting the rule of
law and defending human rights. The principles of the
Charter of the African Union enshrine the rejection of
impunity and the Union’s right to intervene in a country
where serious crimes, genocide, war crimes or crimes
against humanity have been committed. It is high time
to recognize the importance of such subjects in the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations. Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
for peace and security is therefore a matter of political
and operational necessity and must continue, in line
with the relevant stipulations and provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and under the auspices
of the Security Council. It is in that way that we will
simultaneously ensure consistency in international
action, transparency in United Nations activities and
respect for the Organization’s values.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Madam
President, to preside over the Security Council. We are
grateful to the Argentine delegation for its initiative in
holding an open debate in the Council on such a topical
issue as United Nations cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. The presence in the
Chamber of representatives of a number of leading
regional organizations testifies to its importance.
The global nature of today’s challenges and threats,
and the formulation of the collective approaches that
are essential to tackling them effectively, requires that
cooperation on international peace and security between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations be strengthened. That task consists in
ensuring that, with the United Nations in the role of
leader, those organizations, harmoniously and without
unnecessary bureaucracy, complement one another by
making use of their respective comparative advantages.

28

For the United Nations, those advantages are primarily
the universality of its membership and activities,
along with its universally recognized legitimacy. For
their part, regional organizations often have a more
nuanced understanding of circumstances in their areas
of responsibility, and, in a great many cases, preventive
and peacebuilding mechanisms adapted to regional
realities. It is nonetheless important that regional
organizations’ activities be focused on seeking peaceful
political solutions to emerging conflict situations, so
as to ensure that they are not overly influenced by
individual members, who may be pursuing their own
agendas.
The Security Council plays a key role in cooperation
between the United Nations and regional associations
on issues relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security. That has to do first and foremost
with its obligatory approval and monitoring of regional
and coalition peacekeeping operations where the use of
force is authorized. Only the relevant decisions of the
Council can lend the necessary international legitimacy
to the use of sanctions mechanisms.
Cooperation between this global Organization
and its regional partners brings with it a wider set of
problems. Along with peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks come the countervailing forces of proliferating
weapons of mass destruction, illegal sources of small
arms and light weapons, the fight against terrorism,
drug trafficking and organized crime. In the network
of traditional United Nations partnerships, the African
Union occupies a special place. The broad experience
of respectful cooperation that exists between both
organizations in various areas is also a helpful guide
for other regional organizations in building effective
models for collaboration.
There is great potential in the cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States.
We believe that there are good prospects for broader
contact between the United Nations and such rapidly
developing organizations as the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations.
For our part, we cannot ignore the importance
of United Nations cooperation with the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (STO), which are building
their political authority globally and are helping to
strengthen regional and international security. We

13-41944

S/PV.7015

associate ourselves with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the member States of the CSTO and STO
by the representative of Kyrgyzstan, the country that
currently presides over both organizations. There are
prospects for deeper cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO in the area of peacekeeping.
Serious work is being done within the CSTO to develop
its own peacekeeping potential, including acting
jointly with United Nations peacekeeping operations.
At the same time, the CSTO is actively participating
in international post-conflict reconstruction efforts
in Afghanistan and in neutralizing the threat of drugs
coming from that country’s territory. The STO is
making a serious contribution to stability and security
in the Eurasian region, directing its activity to fighting
terrorism, separatism and extremism. To that end, it
has established a regional antiterrorism body and is
developing cooperation on combating the spread of
weapons of mass destruction, drug trafficking and
transnational crime, as well as providing international
information security.
We have consistently campaigned for broader and
deeper cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, as laid down in Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, with the aim of
promoting our world Organization’s worthy goals. In
that respect, we feel that, on the one hand, regional and
subregional organizations must position themselves
more to actualize their own potential in the interests
of the United Nations, while on the other hand, the
United Nations itself must continue to duly prioritize
strengthened coordination and cooperation with such
organizations, based on strict compliance with the
principles of the universal Organization and its Security
Council.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank the
Argentine delegation for having organized this open
debate and welcome your presence, Madam President,
among us as a demonstration of the importance that
your country attaches to the subject.
I also thank the Secretary-General and all other
speakers for their statements. I welcome Ms. Samantha
Powers, the new Permanent Representative of the
United States of America, and wish her every success
in assuming her new function.
The numerous discussions held on the issue of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations have all indicated that the

United Nations is and must remain at the centre of the
international collective security mechanism and that,
in that context, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
However, the proliferation of increasingly complex
and multidimensional conflicts has required the
regional and subregional organizations to commit
firmly and with greater determination to the prevention
and resolution of crises in their respective geographical
spheres. Their important role has led to further
reflection on the nature and form of cooperation between
the world Organization and the regional actors. We
believe that such cooperation should not be limited to
its traditional context in the maintenance of peace, but
that it should go further and focus on finding the causes
of conflict and ways to prevent and resolve it, as well
as peacebuilding, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and the fight against impunity for perpetrators
of serious violations of human rights. My delegation
welcomes the fact that the presidential statement just
adopted by the Council (S/PRST/2013/12) stresses the
importance of all those issues in the framework of
cooperation.
Insofar as these issues are common to all regional
and subregional organizations, I will concentrate my
remarks on cooperation between the United Nations
and African organizations. In that regard, I welcome
and fully endorse the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia. However, I would first
like to acknowledge the important role played by all
regional and subregional organizations throughout the
world in the struggle to maintain international peace
and security.
In Africa, the main factor in the transformation
of the Organization of African Unity into the African
Union (AU) was the creation of the African peace and
security architecture, under which the continental
organization, in cooperation with the regional economic
communities, gradually assumed responsibility for
the maintenance of security on the continent, thereby
affirming its role as a major partner of the United
Nations. In that context, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) has played a key role in
the maintenance of peace. It has long been responsible
for its own fate by intervening in Liberia, GuineaBissau, Sierra Leone and recently in Mali in order to
restore peace before receiving international support.

13-4194429

S/PV.7015

Togo welcomes the development in recent years
of the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union based on the spirit of
subsidiarityy and the accountability of regional actors,
as recently manifested in the joint efforts to combat the
threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army in Central
Africa and the Great Lakes region, and especially the
support provided by the United Nations to the African
Union Mission in Somalia.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations should prioritize
the critical issue of the financing of peacekeeping
operations, which has always been a major challenge to
regional organizations in assuming the responsibility
of security in their regions. The United Nations and
its institutional partners must continue to promote the
greater diversification and sustainability of funding for
peacekeeping operations.

The positive momentum of that cooperation must
continue to strengthen. The creation 10 years ago of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and the active cooperation
with subregional organizations such as ECOWAS, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern African Development Community and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to
settle ongoing crises in West and Central Africa, the
Horn of Africa and the Great Lakes region form part of
such positive action.

We hope that this discussion will generate new
ideas and strategies in order to expand, deepen and
improve cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations with a view
to strengthening the capacity of the international
community to respond effectively to new and old
threats to international peace and security.

However, we believe it essential to further clarify
the relationship between the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council in order to better
define their respective responsibilities and to allow
both organizations to benefit from their respective
advantages in the spirit of resolution 1631 (2005).
That will assist in, inter alia, avoiding the frustrations
and misunderstandings that sometimes arise due to
differences in strategies or solutions between the two
organizations.
One advantage of their regional and subregional
experience and expertise is that the organizations are
often more quickly informed about evolving situations
that could lead to conflict. The United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, should therefore
strengthen ties with those organizations with a view
to responding faster and protecting people in danger.
An acceptable relationship must be found between
the willingness of those organizations to assume the
task of conflict management, or at the least to provide
leadership, and the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, as those organizations are in the best
position to assess the most appropriate approach to
conflicts in their region. In any event, there should be
no conflict of responsibility or procrastination in the
actions to be taken when people’s lives are at stake and
when the State’s capacity to protect them is lacking.

30

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Argentine initiative to hold this debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. We welcome the
presence of Ms. Cristina Fernández, President of
Argentina, to preside over today’s meeting.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing. I have listened carefully to the statements
made by the representatives of the African Union,
the League of Arab States, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations.
The United Nations is the essential mechanism of
international collective security. The Security Council
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, at a time when security
threats and challenges are proliferating and the national
security interests of countries are closely interlinked.
Strengthened cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations helps to
promote multilateralism and enhances the international
collective security mechanism and our joint efforts to
maintain international peace and security.
China attaches great importance to the role
played by regional and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution, the deployment of
peacekeeping operations, post-conflict reconstruction
and other areas. We support the efforts of the United
Nations to deepen its cooperation with regional and
subregional organization so as to better fulfil its

13-41944

S/PV.7015

responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Here I wish to highlight four points.
First, in strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and subregional and regional
organizations, we must be guided by the Charter of
the United Nations. The Council should encourage
and support such organizations in the quest to achieve
the peaceful resolution of a conflict through dialogue,
consultation, good offices and mediation, so as to
contribute to regional peace and security. At the same
time, the actions taken by regional organizations
should be in line with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and any actions taken
should be in accordance with the provisions of Security
Council resolutions and as mandated by the Council.
Secondly, the United Nations and regional
organizations can bring into play their respective
advantages and complement each other’s work in
working jointly to meet security threats and challenges.
China supports the unique role played by regional
organizations in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations in promoting the
peaceful resolution of conflict, as they are better
positioned geographically, historically and culturally.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations should help them to maximize their
respective advantages, better complement and facilitate
one another’s work and avoid overlaps and conflict.
Thirdly, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations should focus on
effectiveness and be tailored to the local situation.
The United Nations may engage in various forms of
pragmatic cooperation with regional organizations,
in accordance with their respective characters, in the
field of confidence-building measures, good offices
and crisis mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
In addition to existing dialogue and consultation
mechanisms, flexible and practical collaboration
mechanisms should be actively explored with regional
organizations according to their institutional structure
and functions, with a view to meeting the real needs
inherent in a particular situation.
Fourthly, the United Nations should strengthen
its assistance and support to regional and subregional
organizations. Enhancing the capacity of regional
organizations to deal with security threats and challenges
is an important means of effective conflict prevention.

Many regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union (AU), have made major efforts,
through good offices, to settle local hotspots, push
forward peace processes and promote post-conflict
reconstruction, with positive results. However, they
also face various constraints in terms of resources and
capacities. The United Nations should provide greater
assistance to such regional organizations as the AU
in personnel training, institution-building, logistical
assistance and financial support, so as to strengthen
their capacity-building and thereby help them to play
an important role in the maintenance of regional peace
and stability.
China attaches great importance to the unique role
of regional and subregional organizations. We will
continue to support such organizations in their proactive
efforts to maintain regional peace and security and
promote common development. China is ready to join
the rest of the international community in pushing
for strengthened cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
creating a more secure and prosperous future.
Lastly, China supports the statement to be made
by the representative of Kyrgyzstan, who will speak on
behalf of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to welcome you, Madam President, to the Council
Chamber, and thank you for having convened today’s
open debate on this important issue. I believe that your
presence, along with the briefing given by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, illustrates the increasing
significance of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. I would like also to thank
all the representatives of regional organizations for
their presentations this morning. Let me also extend a
warm welcome to Ambassador Samantha Power of the
United States; I look forward to working closely with
her in the days and months to come.
Almost seven decades ago, when the Charter of the
United Nations was being drafted, public discourse on
regional organizations was in its infancy. What inspired
that daring attempt to devote one whole chapter to
cooperation with regional arrangements proved to be
a great vision. Today the complexity and diversity of
threats to international peace and security require a
multidimensional response. The increasing role of

13-4194431

S/PV.7015

regional and subregional organizations, among others,
constitutes a major feature of that response.

continually exploring new ways to improve regional
capacity.

An important point is that the degree of intraregional
cooperation varies significantly between regions, based
on the unique historical and political background that
each region possesses. It is our view that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional arrangements
will be more fruitful when that reality is duly considered.
Any attempt to invent a singular, uniform modality
for cooperation would prove to be inappropriate. We
need to be flexible, responsive and adaptive. Most
importantly, we should aspire to be as imaginative as
the founding fathers of the United Nations.

The presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/12) covers comprehensive areas of
cooperation. We believe that the statement will serve
as a landmark reference on this issue. We appreciate
Argentina’s efforts in providing a valuable draft and
coordinating all efforts in the process. We would like
to highlight four specific points.

Located in an area where the role of regional
organizations is not prominent compared with other
regions, the Republic of Korea would like to add
value to today’s debate by pointing out that our
common efforts to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations should not
inadvertently lead to an imbalance where the weight
given to regional voices might result in an unintended
disadvantage to those countries that do not belong to
regional arrangements.
Having said that, my delegation would like to join
others in acknowledging that regional and subregional
organizations are better positioned to understand the
root causes and context of conflicts occurring in the
region to which they belong. Such organizations can
play a vital role in the full cycle of conflict, covering
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
In recent years, the situation in places such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Darfur and
the Central African Republic have demonstrated to
us both the valuable achievements and the limitations
of the cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. Experience
strongly indicates that a successful interaction between
the United Nations and regional organizations requires
the Security Council to bear the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.
Regional organizations play a complementary role in
principle and in reality.
It is critical, therefore, that regional organizations
enhance their own capacities in order to play a
meaningful role in restoring peace and security. The
United Nations should continue to support them by
sharing the lessons learned through experience while

32

First, ending impunity for violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law is the first
step towards establishing the rule of law in the postconflict peacebuilding process. In particular, violence
and crimes against women and children should not go
unpunished. We hope that regional and subregional
organizations will contribute to accountability through
their enhanced cooperation with international tribunals,
including the International Criminal Court.
Secondly, regional organizations can significantly
contribute to the effective implementation of the
Security Council’s sanction regimes by encouraging
their members at the regional level. We also hope that all
regional and subregional organizations will render their
full cooperation to the Council’s Sanction Committees
and their Groups of Experts.
Thirdly, coordinated efforts at the national,
regional and global levels are crucial to preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Sharing
information and experience between and among
regional organizations will help eliminate weak links,
which terrorists can exploit. The Republic of Korea, as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), will spare no effort
to enhance cooperation with regional organizations
with a view to establishing a living network of
non-proliferation.
Lastly, better coordination with regional
organizations with the United Nations and among
themselves will also lead to a synergic effect in
addressing transnational crimes such as piracy, human
and drug trafficking, and the illicit trade in small arms
across borders. The United Nations can lead the way in
enhancing regional and global partnerships to jointly
address all types of threats to peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.

13-41944

S/PV.7015

My country has now assumed the presidency
of the Security Council for the ninth time, but in an
unprecedented regional context. There are 14 Foreign
Ministers in the Council today, 12 of whom are from
the Latin America region. The representative of Cuba
spoke on behalf of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC), while the representative
of Peru took the floor on behalf of the Union of South
American Nations (UNASUR). Argentina is a founding
member of both of those regional and subregional
entities. However, the most important consideration is
that both bodies have had to deal with serious conflict
situations in the region to which they were able to
respond. That is essentially what the Security Council
must also do in the face of the various conflicts that
arise in different parts of the world, which make peace
and security very vulnerable values in today’s world.
One of the situations that we had to resolve when
we were not yet even CELAC, but rather the Rio Group,
which preceded CELAC, was the difficult situation
between Ecuador and Colombia, which almost ended
in an armed conflict. As a result of the intervention by
the Rio Group, which was at that time in the Dominican
Republic, the conflict was able to be successfully
resolved. Later on, UNASUR also successfully dealt
with different situations, including domestic situations
in various countries, which jeopardized democratic
stability — for example, the so-called Pando crisis,
which concerned the Government of Evo Morales
in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and gave rise to
the Moneda Declaration, agreed in Santiago under
President Bachelet, in her capacity as President pro
tempore of UNASUR. We also adopted the Buenos
Aires Declaration, which addressed the problem
concerning the removal of President Rafael Correa of
Ecuador and whereby we were able to halt the crisis and
ensure the perpetuation of the democratic system — an
issue that, for our region, is no minor concern. Rather,
it is something that has affected our potential for
economic growth and for that to take place essentially
in an environment of peace and security.
I therefore think that the lesson that we have
learned in terms of this debate with regard to how
regional and subregional organizations can cooperate
with the Security Council and the United Nations in
finding solutions has to do with some of the issues that
other representatives have outlined.
I cannot ignore the statement by the representative
of the League of the Arab States, who talked about

something that I think is at the crux of resolving conflicts
and — I underscore this aspect — the effectiveness
of the Security Council in resolving serious matters.
What did the representative of the League of Arab
States actually say? He said that all States Members
of the United Nations must implement United Nations
resolutions. It seems to almost go without saying, but
actually it is not at all obvious. The distinctive feature
here is that frequently, those that sit in this Chamber as
permanent members with the right to the veto make use
of that right, enshrined under the Charter of the United
Nations and under the rules of procedure of the Security
Council. However, they are the ones that obstruct real
conflict resolution.
I would like to compare that with what I would
term the South America doctrine. How do we adopt
resolutions in CELAC and UNASUR? In those
organizations, resolutions are adopted on the basis
of unanimity when there is a conflict. That is the
distinction we must make. Normally, all our States
and national institutions have what we call the right
of veto — something that is inherent to all executive
powers. But running a Government is one thing; dealing
with conflict is another. When managing conflict
includes the right of the veto, the situation becomes
much more difficult and, at times, even impossible.
We therefore believe that it is necessary to review
the operation of United Nations institutions in general,
specifically with regard to the Security Council, which
respond to a different rationale, one that was in place
when the Organization was established. During the
Cold War, faced with the danger of a nuclear holocaust,
the right of the veto was almost a safeguard to prevent
such a conflagration. Following the Cold War, all those
involved in it sit today around this table and are no
longer involved in major conflicts. We need to rethink
how the Organization’s bodies function, for this is a new
world, a new reality and new problems that cannot be
addressed with old instruments and old methods: they
will not provide us with answers. That is what we mean
when we talk about the need to reach consensus, not on
the basis of the particular interests of each country with
the right to the veto, but rather to genuinely guarantee
peace and stability.
In that connection, we can say that today South
America and Latin America are regions of peace.
My country is a leader in nuclear energy, but also a
leader in nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. The representative of the League

13-4194433

S/PV.7015

of Arab States talked about the conflict that is now
impacting the Middle East in terms of the refusal to
accept a Palestinian State, which has an effect not only
on Arab countries, but on so many other countries of
the world, including mine.
In our own region, as the representative of CELAC
mentioned, there is conflict owing to the failure to
respect a resolution of the United Nations concerning the
need for my country and the United Kingdom to begin
talks and negotiations in the context of what the United
Nations decided in resolution 2065 (XX), adopted in
1965, concerning sovereignty over the Malvinas. This
is not a capricious position, nor is it about again saying
“We are right”. We are simply saying that we want the
United Nations resolution to be implemented and that
both countries should sit down and discuss this litigious
and controversial matter. I believe that there is a way to
begin to unblock such conflicts.
It has been pointed out that there are differing
opinions. One can have such opinions on matters that
have not been resolved by the United Nations. However,
when the Organization, to which all of us have signed
on and whose resolutions we have all committed
to respecting, adopts a resolution in the General
Assembly — the highest organ of the Organization — it
is no longer a matter of differing opinions; it is about a
United Nations resolution and about whether or not we
are ready to comply with our obligations as Members.
I mention that just by way of example, for I do not
want to start a controversy here. But I do so because
I think that the issues that the world is experiencing
are so numerous and so serious that peace and security
becomes not just a military concept, but also essentially
an economic one. The 2008 crisis, which continues
today and has further compounded existing conflicts,
requires all of us to adopt a different attitude, rethink
how we function within our organizations and consider
how to change rules and conceive of and design new
instruments that allow us to be effective. For I think
that, at the end of the day, we will win the respect of
global society when we are able to show that we are
effective in the way we operate. Being effective in how
things are managed means mediating, and it means
achieving a solution from that mediation, especially
when the mediation is the subject of a resolution of the
highest organ. That is how it is in each of our States
when a parliament takes a decision and the executive
branch respects it. We must understand that similarity
if we want to deal with global governance.

34

Much has also been said here about human rights.
I am proud to say that my country is an example
when it comes to full respect for human rights,
having in the 1970s suffered from one of the most
terrible dictatorships, which led to the disappearance
not only of Argentine citizens but also of citizens of
other nationalities. We are also leaders in this area.
Along with other countries, we established the Human
Rights Council and welcomed the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance, along with France and other
co-authoring countries.
Those are the thoughts that I wanted to share, which
I do not purport bear the arrogance of holding some
revealed or absolute truth. I simply wanted to show
how we in Latin America have overcome very serious
situations in the region by using a formula by which no
one could leave the table until an issue were resolved
by consensus.
Finally, as I did with Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon when he kindly received me once again
in a private meeting, I wanted to express the need
to establish global rules to ensure the sovereignty of
States and citizens’ privacy around the world, in the
light of the recent well-known events. I think many
things have occurred since the fall of the Berlin Wall.
One of the clearest reasons for the fall of the Wall was
that, first of all, the citizens on the other side wanted to
live in freedom and without being watched. Yesterday,
I recalled an excellent movie, which I am sure we all
know won an Academy Award here in the United States,
“The Lives of Others”, in which citizens felt they were
being spied on and controlled. I think this shows the
values that served to forge the ideal of democracy,
the ideal that we can live and coexist in plurality and
diversity, with different ideas, but without our different
ideas leading us to become enemies of either the State
or other fellow citizens. Those values should be taken
up again, because those are the concepts that underpin
the Charter adopted in San Francisco and many
conventions that we have adhered to. I truly believe
that, at heart — granted, in some cases more at heart
than others — we all believe the same thing. It is not just
a question of sensitivity or intellectual generosity. It is a
way, perhaps the most intelligent one, of ensuring that
democracy is viewed by as many of the world’s citizens
as possible as the best way to live. I believe that peace
and security, economic growth, inclusiveness, respect

13-41944

S/PV.7015

for human rights and individual privacy are inalienable
rights that nobody is ready to give up.
That is why we wanted to hold this debate today on
how regional and subregional organizations cooperate
with our mother Organization, the United Nations, to
ensure that we have a world with more peace and more
security. We must also state that peace and security is
not a military concept. There are those who say that
peace and security is to be achieved only by arms, but
there are plenty of examples over thousands of years
of human history that show us clearly that what really
builds societies and ensures stability are the values and
ideals for which a given society, as well as millions of

individuals around the world, are ready to give their
lives. We have seen this in the emancipating revolutions
of the nineteenth century, in particular in the Americas,
and in Africa in the twentieth century. Today’s global
village requires a different type of emancipation and
independence.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are still 30 speakers on the list of speakers.
Given the lateness of the hour, I intend to suspend the
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

13-4194435
