United Nations

S/PV.6621

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6621st meeting
Thursday, 22 September 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sleiman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Alkalaj
Mr. Patriota
Mr. Yang Jiechi
Mr. Santos Calderón
Mr. Juppé
Mr. Bongo Ondimba
Mr. Westerwelle
Mr. Krishna
Mr. Jonathan
Mr. Coelho
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Zuma
Mr. Hague
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention
Report of the Secretary-General on preventive diplomacy (S/2011/552)
Letter dated 12 September 2011 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2011/570)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-50916 (E)

*1150916*

S/PV.6621

repercussions, not to mention the heavy humanitarian
consequences they entail.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict prevention
Report of the Secretary-General on preventive
diplomacy (S/2011/552)
Letter dated 12 September 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/570)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I warmly
welcome the Heads of State and Government, the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter to be addressed.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/552, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on preventive diplomacy. I also wish
to draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2011/570, containing a letter dated 12 September
2011 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Republic of Lebanon.
First, I would like to welcome the Heads of State
and Government and Ministers who accepted
Lebanon’s invitation to participate in this high-level
meeting, thereby affirming the importance of our
discussion on the subject of preventive diplomacy.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for the report he has prepared to enrich our discussion.
He has placed preventive diplomacy, which he
considers to be one of the smartest investments we can
make, among the top priorities of his second term. He
is right to have done so, since investing in preventive
diplomacy costs far less than conflicts and their

2

When addressing preventive diplomacy, we
cannot but refer to the man who authored and
developed this vision, the late Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjöld, who was the first to work to integrate it
into the United Nations system. The concept of
preventive diplomacy has since evolved and is no
longer restricted to simply pre-empting disputes before
they erupt, but also aims at preventing conflicts from
escalating or spreading, as described in the peace plan
prepared by former Secretary-General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali. This concept is still evolving, and now
extends to consolidating the pillars of peace after
conflicts end and preventing the recurrence of those
conflicts.
We firmly believe that wars and conflicts are not
inevitable; rather, the course of events can be
influenced to prevent their eruption and escalation.
However, this requires political will, mobilizing the
necessary resources, and adopting a clear preventive
approach that reinforces local capacities, including
building national systems capable of mediating,
facilitating dialogue and containing tension.
In this context, after adopting its national entente
document in 1991, Lebanon has been keen to
consolidate the pact and spirit of concord in its
approach to major national issues, and has resorted to
national dialogue conferences and committees to
promote an atmosphere of calm, moderation and
stability.
In general, the particular circumstances of every
conflict or crisis requires carefully selected preventive
diplomacy instruments, including early warning, factfinding, mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
These are all instruments to be developed and
promoted within the United Nations system.
Active prevention cannot be limited to State
institutions, but should also extend to civil society
bodies, particularly women’s and youth organizations,
media, universities and research centres, which can all
play an important role in promoting a culture of
prevention. Moreover, we must also ensure the
coordination of prevention efforts among relevant
United Nations entities.
We recall the Arab Peace Initiative to resolve the
Arab-Israeli conflict in a just and comprehensive

11-50916

S/PV.6621

manner that rejects any permanent refugee status for
Palestinians in the Arab countries.
It is well known that peacekeeping operations
constitute one of the tools of preventive diplomacy.
Although they are conducted after a conflict erupts,
they are highly important in containing the conflict and
preventing it from spreading. This has been our own
experience. The United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon has, since its establishment in 1978, helped
the Lebanese State to extend its sovereignty throughout
its territory.
Similarly, the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006),
to which Lebanon is committed, was necessary to put
an end to the destructive war Israel waged against
Lebanon in 2006. The international community, in
keeping with the requirements and objectives of
preventive diplomacy, should strive to compel Israel to
implement the resolution’s provisions by fully
withdrawing from all Lebanese territories and ceasing
its threats and daily violations of Lebanon’s
sovereignty by land, sea and air.
Indeed, the conflict between Lebanon and Israel
would not have escalated since 19 March 1978, the
date resolution 425 (1978) was adopted, nor would the
resistance have emerged and confronted the Israeli
occupation, had the international community
compelled Israel to fully implement that resolution,
which clearly called for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of its armed forces from all
Lebanese territories. We need practical measures to
guarantee that binding Security Council resolutions are
implemented.
Preventive diplomacy cannot be fully successful
unless we address the root causes of problems. The
roots of terrorism must be addressed. We reiterate our
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and reaffirm
our commitment to fighting that scourge. Conflict
prevention also calls for economic and social justice,
as well as the establishment of a fairer and more
equitable international economic and financial order
that is better aligned with moral values and based less
on speculation.
Finally, during its presidency of the Security
Council last May, Lebanon pointed to dialogue among
civilizations as a tool of preventive diplomacy. In this
context, we emphasize that dialogue, communication
and openness to others are the most important weapons
against fanaticism, extremism, prejudice and hatred.

11-50916

It is therefore clear that promoting a culture of
peace will contribute to conflict prevention. The
Preamble to the Constitution of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
states that it is in the minds of men that the defences of
peace must be constructed. Undoubtedly, the culture of
peace cannot be separated from the culture of justice,
without which no real or permanent peace can be
achieved.
Talking about preventive diplomacy is much
easier than implementing it. Furthermore, history
records and at times even glorifies the wars and
tragedies waged and caused by leaders more than those
they manage to avert. Let us unite our efforts to create
a world governed by the values of equality, justice and
respect for others.
I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I invite the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Preventive diplomacy’s
time has come once again. I am grateful to the
presidency of Lebanon and to President Sleiman for
this opportunity to take stock and chart the way
forward. I also want to thank Nigeria, which helped reenergize and refocus our discussion on this issue
during its presidency in July 2010.
When I took office almost five years ago, it was
clear to me that we needed to raise our ability to act
early and preventively against emerging threats to an
entirely new level. Building on the ideas and
accomplishments of my predecessors, I saw significant
untapped potential for what we could help achieve
through preventive diplomacy. We have sought to
reinforce our missions abroad, strengthen our envoys
and their teams, improve our expertise, deepen our
partnerships and reshape the Department of Political
Affairs to make this vision a reality.
Today, preventive diplomacy is being conducted
by a broader array of actors, including regional and
civil society organizations, using a wider and more
innovative range of tools. There is growing global
support for prevention, coupled with the creation of
new preventive capacities in multilateral organizations
and Member States. The pace, intensity and increasing
professionalization of our preventive efforts are
beginning to pay off. We have used diplomacy to

3

S/PV.6621

ensure a peaceful referendum in the Sudan, a
democratic transition in Guinea, and an end to the
violence in Kenya and Kyrgyzstan. From Afghanistan
to the Middle East, from West Africa to the Sudan and
Somalia, our missions are carrying out preventive
diplomacy every day, helping to sustain complex
political, peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes.
However, we still have a long way to go. Violent
conflict continues to wreak a shocking toll on
individuals, societies and economies. Every day, we
can see the costs of the failure to prevent. Despite
recent advances, preventive diplomacy continues to
face long odds and numerous challenges. A critical
factor is political will. If the parties do not want peace
or are unwilling to compromise, it is extraordinarily
difficult to persuade them or impose it from the
outside.
For this and other familiar reasons, we are still
too often unable to act until a situation visibly
deteriorates. But this should not deter us from trying to
resolve underlying tensions and, when conflict does
erupt, to stop its spread and mitigate the damage it can
cause.
My report (S/2011/552) outlines several areas of
focus. First, we must prioritize early action. Too often,
we find ourselves scrambling to manage emergencies
that could have been prevented from spiralling out of
control in the first place. It is incumbent on all of us —
Member States, regional organizations and the United
Nations — to act early and decisively. The Security
Council can do much to address an emerging threat,
whether or not it is on its formal agenda, precisely to
avoid it ending up there. I or my representatives come
before this Council virtually every day to talk about
conflicts we are trying to resolve.
Secondly, we must continue to invest in and
better equip the women and men who lead our
preventive diplomacy efforts on the ground.
Thirdly, while prevention is infinitely cheaper
than cure and is one of the smartest, most costeffective investments we can make, it still needs
adequate investment if it is to deliver results. At the
same time, we will continue to maximize the impact of
the resources we already have.
Fourthly, we must further strengthen our strategic
partnerships
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations. In crisis situations, we must be able to

4

decide quickly on who can do what to help.
Sometimes, preventive diplomacy is getting the
international community to speak with one voice. The
Security Council has a key role to play in that regard.
Finally, we must continue to support national
institutions and mechanisms for mediation and
dialogue. Including civil society organizations,
especially women and youth who can lead the charge
for peaceful change, in preventive efforts is critical.
Preventive diplomacy may not be effective in all
situations. Uncertainty, risks and evolving challenges
come with the terrain. Yet I firmly believe that better
preventive diplomacy is not an option; it is a necessity.
Prevention will remain a fundamental priority in my
second term as Secretary-General. I count on the
support of Member States, regional organizations, civil
society and other partners. I know that this is what they
expect of me, and it is what people everywhere expect
of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón, President of the Republic of
Colombia, to take the floor.
President Santos Calderón (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
and convened this high-level meeting, which highlights
the commitment of your Government to the high aims
of international peace and welfare. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his valuable report
(S/2011/552) and for his briefing today, both of which
enlighten us about the actions and accomplishments of
the United Nations in the field of preventive
diplomacy.
Colombia is pleased and grateful for the Security
Council’s decision to consider as a main topic of
debate that of conflict prevention through the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Our task today is to ensure that the
means for the prevention and settlement of disputes
become ever more agile and efficient. We should not
underestimate any of these means; each has virtues of
its own and they all have the same purpose.
I would like to stress, however, that some are
especially useful, in particular the less formal means
for dispute settlement, such as good offices and

11-50916

S/PV.6621

mediation. The intrinsic advantages of mediation are
evident if one looks at international practice. The
mediator must enjoy the parties’ trust. Without trust,
there is no point in even setting the process in motion.
This is why the existence of conditions conducive to
reaching agreement is essential if mediation is to
proceed smoothly.
A recent experience in our region was the
successful mediation carried out by Colombia and
Venezuela in order to assure the return of Honduras to
the Organization of American States and to contribute
to resolving the crisis that arose in that nation in 2009.
Today more than ever before, the recognized
leadership of institutions, Governments and highprofile personalities, both in the world arena and in the
regional sphere, has a role to play in contributing to the
attainment of peace through good offices and
mediation. By the same token, international
organizations should encourage and promote these
processes. We are referring, of course, to mediation
processes between States in which the United Nations
carries out its mandate, and not to situations involving
illegal actors who act outside the system and even
against it. We are talking about mediation that works,
that sets goals and time limits, and is useful in ending
conflicts, not in perpetuating them.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment in
his 2009 report (S/2009/189) that is surprising that
although mediation has demonstrated its effectiveness
as a means for the settlement of disputes, it has
attracted little attention and has not drawn many
resources from the United Nations system. That is why
we were pleased with the recent adoption of a General
Assembly resolution (resolution 65/283) that
strengthens the role of mediation in conflict prevention
and resolution. That document is destined to become
the roadmap of mediation.
In international disputes, just as with one’s
health, it is always better to prevent than to correct.
The most propitious moment to resolve a dispute is
when it is just emerging, before it starts escalating. For
this reason, the early intervention by the United
Nations or regional organizations and even the good
offices of certain countries in regional settings are
fundamental for the prevention and settlement of
conflicts.
I also want to stress the important role that
regional organizations and arrangements can play in

11-50916

this context, as recognized in Chapter VIII of the
Charter. This has been acknowledged by the Security
Council on numerous occasions, most recently in
today’s meeting.
When the Security Council acts under Chapter
VII, the dispute has already acquired such proportions
that it is more complex and more difficult to solve, so
much so that the Council is empowered to impose
sanctions and even to authorize the use of force. It
would be ideal not to have to resort to Chapter VII, and
therefore we must make every effort to strengthen
preventive diplomacy and make it more efficient and
more agile.
The Charter provides us with all the proper tools
to do that, such as direct negotiations, good offices,
mediation, fact-finding, conciliation, arbitration and
judicial settlement, as well as the possibility to call
upon the parties to settle their disputes by pacific
means and to suggest and recommend procedures for
adjustment. We only have to decide to use these
mechanisms and this power.
I want to conclude my intervention by making a
call to the Council that we assume our responsibilities
with a long-term vision. Let us take off the shelf these
instruments for prevention and settlement of disputes
provided for in Chapter VI of the Charter and put them
into practice.
More prevention and less intervention: this must
be our common goal, and this is the proposal and
invitation that Colombia is making.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
His Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma, President of South
Africa, to take the floor.
President Zuma: We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely debate, which allows us to
further explore ways to strengthen and consolidate
preventive diplomacy. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and for the report
(S/2011/552) on which it was based.
In our view, the theme of this year’s Security
Council summit complements the theme of the sixtysixth session of the General Assembly, which is “The
role of mediation in the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means”. It proves that the United Nations in
its entirety is focused on the primary objectives and
principles of the Charter. Preventive diplomacy is
anchored in the Charter of the United Nations. Article

5

S/PV.6621

33 specifically provides for the pacific settlement of
disputes.
In 2005, during the world summit, world leaders
reaffirmed this principle in the Millennium Declaration
by stating: “We are determined to establish a just and
lasting peace all over the world in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter” (General
Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 5).
Today we gather once again in this Council to
recommit ourselves to the noble objective of
international peace and its achievement through
preventive diplomacy. In fact, the necessity for
preventive diplomacy has been reaffirmed by this
Council many times before. Last July, under the
presidency of Nigeria, the Council acknowledged the
importance of a peaceful settlement of disputes. In
September last year, under the Turkish presidency, the
Council at summit level stressed that “the
comprehensive and coherent use of preventive
diplomacy,
peacemaking,
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding tools is important in creating the
conditions
for
sustainable
peace”
(see
S/PRST/2010/18).
It is a fact that preventive diplomacy initiatives
are more cost-effective than the deployment of
peacekeepers once a conflict has broken out. Thus
preventive diplomacy is an effective tool at our
disposal. To succeed, it requires a sustained injection
of resources. This will enable the United Nations to
plan and deploy in a timely manner appropriate human
and financial resources in potential conflict situations.
We welcome the progress that has already been
made by the United Nations through a plethora of
initiatives. These include the Secretary-General’s good
offices, special envoys, the establishment of an early
warning system, the deployment of special political
missions and of the Mediation Support Unit, the
deployment of country teams and regional offices, as
well as other diplomatic initiatives aimed at preventing
conflicts.
While these fulfil a central role in conflict
prevention, it is our opinion that a great deal can still
be done, especially through utilizing the unique
capacities and experiences that regional organizations
provide. The Security Council has often stressed the
importance of partnerships between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. In that
regard, we appreciate the efforts undertaken by such

6

regional organizations as the Organization of American
States, the Union of South American Nations and the
African Union (AU), to name but a few.
With regard to the African Union specifically, it
is important to note that since its inception, in 2002, it
has established and consolidated a comprehensive
Peace and Security Architecture. The Architecture is
based on a paradigm that recognizes preventive
diplomacy,
post-conflict
reconstruction
and
development as central to eradicating conflicts on our
continent. These mechanisms that the African Union
has put in place bear witness to the commitment of our
continent in addressing peace and security challenges
in a comprehensive manner.
The African Union has also made great strides in
developing its early-warning systems that help the
organization to determine which countries are likely to
lapse or relapse into conflict. These mechanisms afford
the organization the opportunity to avert an imminent
conflict. However, for these systems to be effective,
early warning should be followed by early action.
In our subregion, the Southern African
Development Community continues to play a critical
role in ensuring subregional peace and stability. In that
context, its Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
has undertaken numerous preventive efforts in quelling
potential conflicts. It has also spent a great deal of
energy and resources in resolving conflicts through
dialogue and mediation, such as in Madagascar.
Moreover, it is essential that the efforts of both
the African Union and the numerous subregional
organizations across the continent working on
preventive diplomacy be respected and supported by
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole. In fact, the Security Council has adopted
several decisions in which it expresses its intention to
build a strong partnership with the African Union in
that regard.
However, over the past few months, we have seen
that partnership falter as the African Union has been
undermined in its preventive diplomatic efforts, in
cases such as Côte d’Ivoire, the Sudan and Libya.
Especially in the case of Libya, the AU initiative to
ensure a political rather than military solution to the
Libyan crisis was deliberately undermined in spite of
the decision set forth in resolution 1973 (2011) to
support the African Union road map. Such blatant acts
of disregard for regional initiatives have the potential

11-50916

S/PV.6621

to undermine the
confidence that regional
organizations have in the United Nations as an
impartial and widely respected mediator in conflicts.
Although conflict prevention remains the primary
responsibility of Member States, civil society also has
a role to play. In addition, it remains imperative that
the international community, and the United Nations in
particular, provides support to local or national conflict
prevention mechanisms. These efforts can be executed
without negating the important principles of the
national sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States.
Most important, we must bear in mind the link
between development and security. Prevention will be
optimized if the root causes of conflicts are addressed
effectively. As the 2011 World Development Report, on
conflict, security and development, reminds us, the
root causes of conflict in the majority of instances are
related to a lack of resources or unequal development
or distribution of often scarce resources.
For the international community to address those
causes effectively, strengthened and enhanced
cooperation and information-sharing between the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies, such
as the Peacebuilding Commission, are required.
Furthermore, there is an essential need for greater
coherence, coordination and interaction between the
various United Nations organs and other international
organizations, such as the international financial
institutions. Furthermore, Member States should share
their experiences in building the United Nations
capacity in preventive diplomacy.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution in conflict
prevention diplomacy. We should be open to consider
important elements that can contribute to the
prevention of conflicts, including cultural orientation,
local preferences and local expertise in developing
strategies aimed at preventive diplomacy.
In that regard, the full and effective participation
of women at all levels and stages of the prevention of
conflict, as well as in all aspects of the peaceful
settlement and resolution of disputes, is critical. We
therefore reiterate our appreciation for the
establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, as an
institution that acknowledges the need to enhance the
role of women in all aspects of life and in society,
including preventive diplomacy.

11-50916

In conclusion, South Africa supports the draft
presidential statement before us, as we believe that it
makes a significant contribution to our preventive
diplomacy efforts and to the execution of the Council’s
mandate to uphold and preserve international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
His Excellency Mr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan,
President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, to take
the floor.
President Jonathan: On behalf of the
Government and the people of Nigeria, I wish to
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this crucial meeting to review the United
Nations efforts in the area of conflict prevention.
Nigeria considers it a subject of critical importance to
all humanity. I want also to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his tireless efforts in this regard and for the
incisive and comprehensive report (S/2011/552), which
has been invaluable in presenting a persuasive case in
all ramifications for preventive diplomacy.
When Nigeria convened the open debate on
preventive diplomacy in July 2010 (6360th meeting),
we were motivated by a profound concern that the
nature of conflict was outpacing our collective ability
to respond effectively to it. For so long, the
international community has accorded little attention to
mediation and preventive diplomacy. We have placed
far too much emphasis on and devoted too many
resources to the military dimensions of peace and
security without addressing the root causes of conflicts.
The report before us today indicates that this
trend was not strictly a result of failure to utilize
preventive strategies, but was principally due to
inadequate resourcing and coordination. The immediate
challenge before us must be how to address these key
questions.
Africa has, over the years, placed a great deal of
political weight on the application of preventive
diplomacy strategies by putting in place early warning
and mediation mechanisms. The African Union took
bold steps to develop a framework for preventive
diplomacy through the efforts of the African Union
Peace and Security Council.
At the subregional level, the Economic
Community of West African States has also made great
strides in this area, primarily through the steady

7

S/PV.6621

implementation of its conflict prevention framework
encompassing diplomacy, fact-finding and early
warning systems. It is imperative, therefore, that these
efforts at regional and subregional levels be supported
both financially and technically by the international
community and the United Nations system.
Today, a number of effective contact points have
been developed within the United Nations system for
these collaborative arrangements, especially through
the Secretary-General’s special envoys, the Department
of Political Affairs, United Nations regional offices and
the Peacebuilding Commission. As the SecretaryGeneral aptly observed, working with relevant partners
has created enabling environments in easing tensions,
building capacities for skilled interventions and
fostering dialogue.
Indeed, Nigeria has invested resources to support
the campaign for preventive diplomacy, especially
within our subregion. We have adopted the use of
preventive diplomacy in addressing complex questions
arising from armed conflicts.
It is therefore encouraging to note that the
Secretary-General has established a steering committee
to consider measures for enhancing cooperation across
the network of preventive diplomacy actors. In real
terms, preventive diplomacy is often most effective
when conducted behind the scenes, certainly well
before tensions rise to boiling point level. We believe
we can foster the growth of conflict prevention at both
normative and practical levels. We can standardize our
approach to political and peacekeeping missions to
reflect the strategic importance of preventive
diplomacy.
If indeed our primary responsibility in this
Council is to maintain international peace and security,
the work of the Council in managing international
peace and security should be viewed through the lens
of preventive diplomacy. If we are able to assist
nations and communities in restoring their social and
institutional fabric, if we can also apply ourselves to
the ongoing task of providing opportunities for people
and their livelihood, we can go a long way in reducing
opportunities for conflict. We can directly and
indirectly prevent conflicts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of
the Gabonese Republic, to take the floor.

8

President Ondimba (spoke in French): In a
world that remains prey to conflict, preventive
diplomacy is a crucial issue that inspires hope and that
my country considers highly important. I therefore
wish, Mr. President, to commend the positive initiative
taken by your country, Lebanon, in organizing this
debate. I welcome the participation of a number of
eminent persons in the debate. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his report (S/2011/552) and
his informative contribution.
In the past two decades, the world has seen a
resurgence of armed conflict, which we thought had
disappeared at the end of the cold war. Those conflicts,
largely intra-ethnic and sometimes both ethnic and
religious in origin, caused thousands of deaths and
internally displaced persons. They also caused
significant material damage to the economic fabric and
jeopardized hope for development.
Faced with that situation, the United Nations has,
since publication in 1992 of the Agenda for Peace by
former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, very
specifically defined its role and responsibilities in the
settlement of conflict situations. That role involves
both peacekeeping operations and preventive
diplomacy.
At the 2005 world summit, we solemnly renewed
our commitment to promote a culture of preventing
armed conflict, on order to effectively take on the
interdependent challenges of security and development.
For that, we deemed it necessary to strengthen United
Nations capacities in the prevention of armed conflict.
For its part, the Security Council, under the terms
of resolution 1625 (2005), emphasized the need to
adopt a comprehensive strategy on prevention of armed
conflict that would take into account their root causes.
From that perspective, we had to strengthen and
develop strategic partnerships, to ensure the
development of prevention mechanisms and allocation
of resources to preventive diplomacy. However, we
must do even more.
Our collective security requires a greater
mobilization of our common efforts. In that regard it is
more necessary than ever to bolster already existing
partnerships in the area of conflict prevention. It seems
encouraging to us that the United Nations has
considered this imperative in recent decades. Here we
welcome the increasingly frequent dispatch of
mediators, emissaries and joint United Nations-African

11-50916

S/PV.6621

Union peace missions, as was the case for the Sudan.
That type of partnership, as called for under Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter, merits further
development. In fact, a good understanding of
conditions on the ground where regional arrangements
operate is an indispensable asset for the success of
actions conducted in the framework of preventive
diplomacy.
We also believe that the United Nations and
regional organizations could widely exploit traditional
mechanisms for conflict prevention. We would also
benefit from greater involvement of civil society and
especially women’s organizations in the prevention and
resolution of disputes.
With respect to support for regional preventative
mechanisms, we urge that the United Nations,
particularly through its Office to the African Union,
contribute to strengthening the African architecture for
the maintenance of peace, where preventative
mechanisms should have pride of place. In that regard,
regional organizations should be assisted in building up
their early-warning systems. Such systems are
important tools for conflict prevention, if only because
early detection means prompt action, as was the case in
the crises in Kenya and Madagascar.
To a large extent, the success of conflict
prevention will also depend on making use of all the
advantages that it offers and taking into consideration
the specificities of each conflict situation. We remain
convinced that investing in conflict prevention — such
as mediation, analysis and assessment of conflict
risk — will make a significant contribution to
preventing
disputes
from
becoming
armed
confrontations. The work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in countries emerging from conflict also
plays a role.
In Central Africa we have put in place not only
channels of cooperation through confidence-building
measures, but also a subregional mechanism for the
detection of preliminary signs of conflict, which we
call the Central African Early Warning Mechanism, the
headquarters of which is in my country. We will ensure
that that tool establishes a true partnership with the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
mostly by supporting capacity-building in conflict
prevention for countries of the subregion.
The performance of our systems of preventive
diplomacy must be based on enhanced human

11-50916

resources. Preventive diplomacy initiatives must also
enjoy predictable financing if we are to maximize our
chances for success. Such initiatives represent a
possible future solution that is more certain and less
costly than peacekeeping operations of the past.
We welcome the fact that economic and financial
institutions are now grasping the connection between
peace and development. It is important to strengthen
partnerships with those institutions, so that they
participate in a more significant way in diplomatic
efforts in conflict prevention. The publication of a
document by the World Bank on this issue is eloquent
proof of the interest our development partners take in
questions of peace and security.
To produce the desired results, our efforts at
preventive diplomacy will require of the parties to a
dispute a manifest will and a genuine commitment to a
political solution to the dispute. International judicial
arbitration is also a possibility, if the parties are willing
to submit to it and to abide by its rulings, as was the
case with Nigeria and Cameroon in the Bakassi case.
In conclusion, in spite of all the options we could
contemplate to detect potential conflicts, any success
risks being limited if particular focus is not put on the
need to attack the underlying causes of conflict.
Governments must, in developing their own national
preventive mechanisms, have the courage to maintain
an ongoing dialogue with all national stakeholders and
to respect the rules of good governance. The peace,
cohesion and stability of States also depend on that
dialogue and respect.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Passos Coelho, Prime Minister
of the Republic of Portugal, to take the floor.
Mr. Coelho (Portugal) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, President Sleiman, for
the conduct of the Lebanese presidency of the Security
Council and especially for the organization of this
debate. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his excellent report (S/2011/552), which
provides us with concrete avenues of action through
which to make the preventive work of the Security
Council more efficient.
We are considering a very timely theme today. A
broad consensus exists as to the merits and utility of a
culture of prevention that allows us to identify crises

9

S/PV.6621

before they transform into conflicts, with all the human
and material costs that such conflicts always levy. It is
therefore time to transform that consensus into
concrete actions that ensure, moving forward, that the
Security Council uses the preventive instruments at its
disposal in a better, more systematic manner.
The international community faces new obstacles
to peaceful coexistence among peoples that challenge
the stability of whole regions. As Portugal recognizes
the central role played by the Security Council in this
area, we inscribed on the agenda of our presidency of
the Council, this November, a meeting on new
challenges to international peace and security. We
intend to promote an integrated vision that mirrors the
many challenges we face in the twenty-first century.
Today, no one questions the interlinkages among
those challenges. Security is now also related to
sustainable development, climate, energy, epidemics,
food security and access to water and basic
commodities. Indeed, what we used to characterize as
the roots of a conflict are very much at the surface
today, with a more direct and proportional impact on
our security and well-being. It is also important to
mention positive experiences in the field of shared
natural resources. Portugal has such a positive
experience in what regards the management of shared
water resources with our neighbour, Spain.
The United Nations represents a forum of
excellence for the debate on the broader concept of
security. We therefore see our discussions here today as
a value-added contribution to our meeting in
November. Preventive diplomacy is a central principle
of Portugal’s foreign policy. We have actively
supported Security Council initiatives that seek to
promote a better understanding of the causes of
conflict and that seek to discuss options to overcome
those obstacles, as was the case, for example, in the
tensions between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We have sought for those initiatives also to
reflect the priority that we accord to the promotion and
protection of human rights, humanitarian issues and the
protection of civilians. Moreover, we want to do so
while also promoting a closer collaboration with nongovernmental organizations and a better coordination
of efforts among the United Nations missions, the
European Union and the African Union. It is that
integrated vision of security — based on
complementarity, synergy and cooperation — that

10

should be encouraged, so as to strengthen the cohesion
of the international system.
We greatly appreciate, Mr. President, the most
useful concept paper presented by your delegation
(S/2011/570, annex), in which the key issues of this
debate are encapsulated, including the importance of
identifying the factors leading to tension, be they
political, cultural, socio-economic or environmental in
nature.
The United Nations has at its disposal the means
to promote timely detection and early warning of
conflicts,
thereby
avoiding
the
unnecessary
degeneration of tensions into open conflict. I think it is
necessary to refine the relationship between the many
relevant organs and organizations, thereby promoting a
culture of prevention that allows for the maintenance
and consolidation of peace in an integrated — rather
than sequential — manner.
Preventive
diplomacy,
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding are a complementary triumvirate that
together guarantee the emergence of sustainable peace.
It is not enough to make peace; it is also necessary to
help it take root and grow. That is certainly a more
difficult task, especially as it is intimately linked to the
rule of law and socio-economic development. Security
and development are, however, two sides of the same
coin.
I would like, in this context, to highlight the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission, in whose founding
Portugal was proud to participate. During the 2010
review process of the Peacebuilding Commission, its
preventive role was clearly underlined. The
Peacebuilding Commission has played a central role in
linking peace and security with economic and social
development and with humanitarian efforts. The
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission for West Africa, of which Portugal is a
part, are concrete examples of that function in action.
We believe that peacekeeping operations can and
should assume functions of early peacebuilding, in the
areas of security-sector reform, justice and the
correctional system, as well as in processes of
disarmament, demining and reintegration. Those
fundamental actions complement and reinforce the
socio-economic reconstruction undertaken by other
actors. I think that the positive experiences in the
Balkans and in Timor-Leste are clear in this respect,

11-50916

S/PV.6621

inspiring also possible solutions that are appropriate
for Libya.
For these reasons, Portugal has sought to
maintain an active participation in peacekeeping
operations, a principle that we will continue to honour
to the greatest extent possible.
I have highlighted the importance of an integrated
vision of security, in an international framework of
complementarity, cooperation and synergy. It is
essential that the links between the United Nations and
other regional and international organizations be
strengthened, consolidating or even institutionalizing
the lines of dialogue and communication. The actions
of one or another are always strengthened when
influential actors collaborate. Knowledge of the
situation and the actors on the ground is irreplaceable,
and for that reason Portugal has continuously defended
the participation of regional organizations such as the
African Union or the Arab League as part of a more
robust preventive diplomacy.
Allow me also to highlight here the efforts that
we have made in the context of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries to strengthen the
preventive element and support those of us that are in
situations of fragility.
The European Union, naturally, also has a role to
play in this context. The panoply of instruments that
the Union has at its disposal can and should be used to
complement the actions of the United Nations, thereby
mutually supporting their respective efforts for
preventive diplomacy.
The work of regional and international
organizations in conflict prevention cannot in any way
be seen as a substitute for the principle of national
ownership. National capabilities and capacities and the
support given to their consolidation must serve as the
foundation for preventive diplomacy, thereby
catalysing national strategies for the promotion of
peace.
Ultimately, the responsibility to prevent conflict
must lie with national institutions; otherwise, there is a
risk that the solutions that are found may not be
consistent or sustainable in the long run. Conflict
prevention should also be based on an inclusive
approach in which new civil society actors must also
participate. It is important to catalyse partnerships
between all relevant actors: civil society, parliaments,

11-50916

academic institutions and women’s and youth
organizations, as well as the labour and business
community.
Their presence on the ground and their very
nature and objectives make them particularly useful
and appropriate agents to warn of possible nascent
conflicts and to help find mutually acceptable
solutions. Their involvement is the best guarantee of
the success of preventive diplomacy, and this, in our
opinion, is the concept of security that should prevail
in this era of globalization and interdependence.
Today we have a much clearer perception of the
challenges facing international peace and security than
we did a decade ago. We also have a better
understanding of the instruments necessary to meet
these challenges.
The Arab world is undergoing an unprecedented
transformation that will have many geopolitical
consequences that are not yet fully understood or
defined but that certainly transcend the regional
dimension. The response of the international
community to that transformation is, and will continue
to be, crucial to ensure the success of political
transitions as well as international peace, stability and
security.
I am particularly heartened to highlight
democratic and inclusive pluralism, efforts to
strengthen civil society, the opening of society and the
economy, respect for the rule of law and human rights
as essential elements of this transformation.
Preventive diplomacy is certainly part of this
process, and its relevance is indisputable. For that
reason, it gives me great pride to participate in a debate
where we celebrate this fact.
Allow me to conclude by renewing and
strengthening Portugal’s commitment to the promotion
of peace and security and to continuing to strengthen
preventive diplomacy.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Mr. William Hague, Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, to take
the floor.
Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): The resolve and
effectiveness of the United Nations is tested whenever
lives are threatened. When conflict looms, the world
looks to the United Nations for a decisive response to

11

S/PV.6621

prevent violence through agile and creative diplomacy,
to stop aggression, to end conflict when it does happen
and then to help keep the peace, and be prepared to
stay the course so that fragile countries do not lapse
back into war.
I think we have shown this year that the United
Nations can take a lead in saving life and protecting
civilians. In Libya, we mustered legitimate diplomatic,
economic and military pressure to prevent a regime
from waging war against its people and to deter its
members from committing crimes. Our swift action
prevented a humanitarian catastrophe, saving the lives
of thousands of civilians. It led many to abandon the
Al-Qadhafi regime, so hastening its demise, and it
allowed the Libyan people to seize the opportunity to
determine their future.
In Côte d’Ivoire, acting with the unanimous
support of the Security Council, United Nations
peacekeepers undertook limited military operations to
protect civilians. The United Nations demonstrated
zero tolerance for attacks against civilians and United
Nations peacekeepers and for the desperate acts of a
ruler seeking to cling to power against the wishes of
the people.
These experiences hold lessons for us as we seek
to improve the role of the United Nations in preventive
diplomacy, because the first lesson is that the will to
act is the vital ingredient in conflict prevention.
Without international will and leadership, we risk
failing in our duty to uphold international peace and
security, giving comfort to the perpetrators of crimes
while causing victims to despair.
The increasing frequency of internal conflicts
rather than conflicts between States presents different
challenges but does not remove our responsibility to
protect the civilian population. The impact of conflict
is devastating and is not confined within national
borders. Lives are lost, people displaced, trade links
severed, economies crippled, and crime and terrorism
can flourish. The consequences are a burden on us all
and a danger to all.
We have a responsibility to use all the means
available to the United Nations to prevent conflict and
to ensure that it does not escalate. We must encourage
sustainable peace through mediation and dialogue,
through support to local conflict-prevention efforts, or
through more coercive measures, as the situation
demands. Military action may be necessary, as has

12

proved the case in Libya, but it is a last resort and is
appropriate only in certain circumstances. Britain is not
calling for this, for instance, in the case of Syria.
The second lesson is that actions to prevent
conflict must have a strong legal basis and attract
regional support, as we did in Libya working with the
Arab League and with a clear United Nations
resolution. We must also work with the grain of the
societies we are dealing with, recognizing that each
situation is different and that we cannot impose
solutions. Such legitimacy and wide support,
themselves the product of diplomacy, must always be
our goal, even when in the short term this can make it
harder for nations to act.
The third lesson is that we must develop our
capacity to anticipate and react to developing conflict,
both as individual countries and here at the United
Nations. The United Kingdom is now placing great
emphasis on effective conflict prevention. This means
not waiting for problems to become crises but using
our network of embassies as an early-warning system
and our role in international organizations to help
resolve disputes and create agreements.
We know that development is an indispensable
component of conflict prevention, so in Britain we will
not retreat an inch from our commitment to spend more
of our national income on development. We are
enshrining in our law our promise to spend 0.7 per cent
of our national income on alleviating poverty
elsewhere and ensuring that an increasing proportion of
it contributes to conflict prevention. By 2015, 30 per
cent of our official development aid will support
fragile and conflict-affected areas.
In the United Kingdom, we are also using our
new National Security Council to become better at
anticipating conflict, and we can share our analysis
with others. We also emphasize the need for strategic
patience in supporting States that are emerging from
conflict. Our experiences from the western Balkans to
the Horn of Africa show that a hard-won peace must be
preserved and not taken for granted. To cement peace,
it often takes generations, and so where we are
engaged, we must guard against turning our attention
and resources away too soon.
Looking forward, I believe that we must apply
these three lessons — political will and leadership,
international legitimacy and investment in conflict
prevention — to the immediate challenges we face.

11-50916

S/PV.6621

Each case will be different, but we need to apply
conflict prevention efforts in a way that is flexible and
according to our best ability to influence the situation
on the ground.
For instance, in Syria the United Kingdom
believes that a response from the Security Council is
long overdue. The time has come for a resolution
demanding an end to violence and real political reform
that applies effective pressure on the Syrian authorities
to this end. The consequences of inaction would weigh
heavily upon us if we were to turn a blind eye to
killings, abuses and repression.
In Libya, we must support the National
Transitional Council’s efforts to rebuild the State and
chart a new course for its country. I welcome the
Council’s decision last week to mandate a United
Nations mission for Libya. Attention must now be
given to the United Nations role in coordinating
international efforts at the request of the Libyan
Government and in support of its own plans.
In the Sudan, we must work more effectively to
establish a strong position to respond to the worrying
levels of violence in Darfur, Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile state. And in Yemen, the United Nations
should continue to use its good offices to help mediate
a peaceful settlement and an end to the appalling
violence. In parallel, we must intensify our work to
build up the United Nations capacity for preventive
diplomacy. This means greater cooperation between
United Nations agencies to identify threats and the
regular attention of the Security Council on countries
at risk.
We support the United Nations increasing use of
mediation specialists and special envoys, and we
welcome the Secretary-General’s call to increase the
number of senior female mediators in line with
resolution 1325 (2000). Above all, United Nations
Member States must be prepared to invest early on in
supporting fragile States where requested, as well as to
react rapidly when a crisis arises. Such preventive
action saves lives, protects fundamental human rights
and helps preserve peace. These are indeed our
essential tasks.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
His Excellency Mr. Alain Juppé, Minister of State for
Foreign and European Affairs of the French Republic,
to take the floor.

11-50916

Mr. Juppé (France) (spoke in French):
Preventive diplomacy — which was a mere concept
half a century ago, until formalized by former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali in his 1992
report An Agenda for Peace (S/24111) — has become
an essential means of action within the United Nations.
The stakes are clearly identified at the very heart of our
Charter. The method for preventing the emergence or
exacerbation of conflicts has been equally well
identified: early warning and speedy action; the need
for dialogue, mediation and partnerships; and a longterm vision. Preventive diplomacy also seeks to
stabilize social relationships so that peace can be built.
This concern, as stipulated in the report of 17 June
1992,
“to ease tensions before they result in conflict —
or, if conflict breaks out, to act swiftly to contain
it and resolve its underlying causes” (S/24111,
para. 23).
Now that our Council faces increasingly complex
crises, I believe that it would be useful to ask ourselves
what preventive diplomacy can bring to our current
actions. I would like to thank the Lebanese presidency
for having provided us with this opportunity to share
our considerations and views. I would also like to
thank the Secretary General for his excellent report
(S/2011/552).
Our Council holds the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security and must
therefore be the key actor in the field of preventive
diplomacy. This role is translated first and foremost in
the deployment of peacekeeping operations, which
contribute to preventing the escalation of conflicts. It
also requires taking action as early as possible in order
to prevent emergent conflicts from deteriorating.
In that regard, I endorse the statement by
Mr. Hague to the effect that our Council should adopt
as soon as possible a resolution condemning the
repression in Syria, which is taking on increasingly
intolerable forms as the regime is now attacking
children in their schools, according to the very reliable
information we receive from our ambassadors.
The concept, means of action and expectations of
preventive diplomacy have also broadened in scope.
The Council now has new tools at its disposal. It is no
longer merely about keeping the peace in conflict
areas; it is about intervening before a crisis even breaks
out. That is the purpose of the informal procedures for

13

S/PV.6621

monitoring high-risk areas — our so-called informal
interactive dialogues — which seek to anticipate and,
above all, to respond as rapidly as possible. Moreover,
the assessments undertaken by the Department of
Political Affairs and the information provided by
mediators and Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General are invaluable, as they shed light on
local situations, which are always complex.
Fortunately, the Council is not alone in its
involvement. Within the United Nations itself,
numerous institutions have actively developed
preventive diplomacy tools. I cite two examples.
Through its Education for Sustainable Development
programme, UNESCO has harnessed education in the
service of conflict prevention and the fight against
insecurity. The United Nations Development
Programme is equally involved in this area, inter alia,
through its disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, which has been implemented
in a number of African countries and seeks to
reintegrate former combatants into local economies. To
that end, it provides specific support to post-conflict
countries.
Above and beyond the United Nations, the main
regional organizations have also used this instrument.
These organizations include the European Union, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the African
Union. I have in mind, too, the actions undertaken by
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Southern African Development Community in
Madagascar.
I also stress the role played by non-governmental
organizations. There are too many examples to
enumerate here, but each and every one of them, by
working to forge more peaceful and harmonious
societies, is contributing to conflict prevention.
Preventive diplomacy must also prepare for the
challenges of the future. Indeed, we must address the
root causes of crises, as a number of speakers have
said. It is a question no longer merely of preventing
conflict, but of maintaining or even recreating the
conditions for peace. That is the preventive strategy
that the Secretary-General has called “structural”,
consisting of adopting an array of measures — not only
political, but also social, cultural, economic and even
environmental — that help reduce the factors
contributing to conflict.

14

Thus, in Guinea and Niger, post-transition
electoral processes that could have given rise to
confrontation were concluded through the joint
involvement of the various Special Representatives of
the United Nations, the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States. With
respect to the crisis in Madagascar, France has
supported the efforts of the mediator of the Southern
African Development Community.
I should like in particular to emphasize the
environmental dimension of crises, which I have no
doubt will grow even further in the years to come.
According to the United Nations Environment
Programme, 40 per cent of the conflicts of the past 60
years are rooted in issues involving natural resources,
be it timber, oil, arable land or water.
What will happen tomorrow, when 10 billion
people are living on the planet? Let us be frank. The
United Nations still lacks tools that could help it
prevent incipient catastrophe. In the absence of a
strong multilateral entity, future strife over resources or
commodities is likely to be resolved bilaterally, to the
detriment of the weakest, and on the basis of force.
We must rectify that situation by reforming
international environmental governance. The upcoming
United
Nations
Conference
on
Sustainable
Development will be a singular opportunity to register
progress in this field and to lay the foundation for a
global organization for the environment. We must seize
that opportunity.
Resolving crises is the duty of our Council, as is
preventing them. France believes that preventive
diplomacy in all its aspects is a key element of the just
and effective governance to which my country aspires
with all its heart.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Her Excellency Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America and
member of President Obama’s Cabinet, to take the
floor.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Thank you,
President Sleiman, for Lebanon’s leadership in
bringing us together today to discuss this very
important subject.
The late Dag Hammarskjöld pursued a vision of a
United Nations that would move from what he said was
a “culture of reaction to a culture of prevention”. That

11-50916

S/PV.6621

unfinished task lies before us today. Some 1.5 billion
people now live in countries shaken by conflict, and
few of those countries will see even one of the
Millennium Development Goals met.
The World Bank’s annual World Development
Report puts the cost of the average civil war at some
$65 billion, or just over half of the global aid budget.
While recent years have seen an unparalleled drop in
global poverty, countries devastated by conflict and
violence have been left out of that trend. Poverty is a
major driver of conflict. Let me highlight just one
statistic. In countries where the average person earns
only $250 per year — the poorest of nations — the
scientifically proven risk of civil conflict within a fiveyear time frame is 15 per cent. By contrast, in countries
with a per capita income of $5,000 per year — middleincome countries — the risk of civil conflict over the
same five-year period is less than 1 per cent. Economic
growth and development must therefore be viewed as
key to our strategies for preventing conflict.
It is especially difficult to prevent violence in
societies struggling concurrently with crushing
poverty, crumbling institutions, rampant discrimination
and deep-seated suspicions among ethnic or religious
groups. Any one of those maladies on its own is
difficult to address, but the mix is combustible and
requires a comprehensive approach.
We say that often, but today the Security Council
has given that mantra greater definition. The draft
presidential statement we will adopt squarely addresses
the links between security and development. Moreover,
it provides an outline for a comprehensive approach,
including several core elements for long-term conflict
prevention, including sustainable development, poverty
eradication, national reconciliation, good governance,
gender equality, the end of impunity, the rule of law
and, I would argue, most notably democracy and
respect for human rights. Those are the conditions most
often found in peaceful societies. Their absence creates
conditions conducive to conflict. We ignore them at our
peril.
Yet, as we dedicate ourselves to more
comprehensive and long-term conflict prevention, we
must be mindful that peace, prosperity and democracy
cannot be achieved quickly or endure if imposed from
outside. The solutions to the root causes of conflict
must be home-grown. The United Nations cannot do

11-50916

what others must do for themselves, but it can play an
indispensable supporting role.
The United Nations has vital conflict prevention
work to do on five fronts in particular. The first is early
warning, information and analysis. The United Nations
system has a significant presence in many countries
where the conditions conducive to conflict are rife. The
United Nations is thus well-placed to provide early
warning of potential concerns and to help us better
understand and anticipate what makes each situation
unique. Too often, we resort to cookie-cutter solutions,
as if each case were the same as the last, because we do
not know enough and we are reacting too late. The
United Nations knowledge should help us to act earlier
and smarter.
But the United Nations itself sometimes struggles
to find the best experts, and itself has limits to its
knowledge and information-gathering capabilities. The
United Nations must therefore work more closely with
Governments, regional and subregional organizations,
non-governmental organizations, academics and other
capable actors based on their comparative advantages.
To be truly effective, it must be able to draw upon all
sources of information.
Secondly, we need vigorous, sustained diplomacy
and mediation to prevent violence or its escalation.
Intensive diplomatic efforts by the Secretary-General,
his senior envoys and key staff in the field can pull
adversaries back from the brink, especially when
backed by a united international community. The
United States continues to strongly support the robust
use of the Secretary-General’s good offices and special
political missions to avert war. We strongly support
efforts to build and strengthen the cadre of seasoned
envoys. We welcome the United Nations recent efforts
to work together with regional envoys and independent
mediators when helpful. We urge the United Nations
and other international actors to recruit more women as
envoys, special representatives and chiefs of field
missions.
Thirdly, diplomacy requires leverage, and that
means both carrots and sticks. The credible threat of
consequences for aggressors and others who refuse to
abide by their international commitments should
include, when necessary, the imposition of targeted
sanctions. Effective mediation does not mean just
listening to all sides; it also means acting firmly when
needed so as to back diplomatic efforts. Here, the

15

S/PV.6621

Security Council has a particular responsibility,
including helping to mobilize wider political support
for diplomatic efforts and moving swiftly in the face of
emergencies.
Fourthly, societies emerging from conflict
continue to face the greatest risk of more bloodshed,
even with the presence of peacekeepers. Peace
operations are on the front lines of United Nations
prevention efforts, and they must be thought of
accordingly. We should cease to make false distinctions
between peacekeeping and prevention. In fact, they are
inextricably linked. The investments we make to
strengthen the ability of peacekeepers to detect
breakdowns in a peace process, to sound the alarm
bells in times of crisis and to quickly redeploy forces
to dangerous hotspots are indeed investments in
conflict prevention.
Fifthly, while the United Nations and other actors
can do a great deal through diplomacy and
peacekeeping operations, our long-term objective must
be to enable countries to prevent conflicts by
themselves. The United Nations, together with regional
organizations and the wider international community,
must help countries to walk the long, difficult road
from war to peace. We support making greater use of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund in more countries rattled by conflict. The highlevel review of international civilian peacebuilding
capacities commissioned by the Secretary-General
contains many good ideas and we look forward to their
prompt implementation.
All these instruments can save lives. They
provide hope and, when employed effectively, can
make a meaningful difference in the world. But they
require us to overcome our differences and unite
behind a common resolve in the Chamber. So let us
summon the political will to confront the atrocities
unfolding before our eyes, from Syria to Southern
Kordofan. Let us revitalize our will and ability to
prevent conflicts before embers start to blaze.
The President (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I
now invite His Excellency Mr. Yang Jiechi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China,
to take the floor.
Mr. Yang Jiechi (China) (spoke in Chinese): It
gives me great pleasure to attend this high-level
meeting of the Security Council on diplomacy. I wish

16

to thank Lebanon for its initiative and the efforts it has
made to make this meeting possible.
Over 60 years ago, world leaders jointly
established the United Nations, with a view to saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. They
made a solemn commitment in the Charter to take
effective collective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats to peace. That has given us both
theoretical guidance and a basis for action in
conducting preventive diplomacy and preventing the
outbreak of conflicts. Over the past six decades, the
United Nations has actively promoted the concept of
preventive diplomacy and put it into practice, making
important contributions to defusing tension, resolving
hotspot issues and restoring regional peace and
stability.
Our world today is undergoing profound and
complex changes. The international situation on the
whole is stable, yet regional hotspot issues keep
emerging, and traditional and non-traditional security
threats are intertwined. The new situation requires us to
have a keener appreciation of the importance of
preventive diplomacy and to employ diverse means to
add new impetus to the United Nations efforts in the
area of preventive diplomacy so that it can contribute
more to maintaining international peace and security.
Here, I would like to make a four-point proposal on
United Nations preventive diplomacy under the new
circumstances.
First, we should pay greater attention to
prevention and early warning. The successful
experiences of the United Nations in the past have
shown that it would be doubly rewarding to forestall
the outbreak and spread of conflicts with prompt and
appropriate actions at an early stage of a crisis. The
United Nations should truly change the mindset of
prioritizing treatment over prevention and the practice
of prioritizing peacekeeping over mediation. There
should be more input into early-warning mechanisms,
conflict prevention and peace mediation. This will help
save resources, improve efficiency and protect people
from the scourge of war. The Secretary-General and
regional offices of the United Nations have a bigger
role to play in preventive diplomacy.
Secondly, we should adopt an integrated strategy
and seek to address the root causes of conflict.
Conflicts in today’s world differ from each another in
nature, and the causes for disputes are increasingly

11-50916

S/PV.6621

complicated. The United Nations should formulate a
comprehensive, scientific and effective strategy on
preventive diplomacy. We may use such measures as
good offices, mediation and negotiation to mitigate
crises. At the same time, we should increase input into
development, particularly development in Africa. Only
by helping the countries concerned achieve economic
growth, social progress and sustainable development
and eliminate the underlying economic and social
causes of conflicts can we fundamentally prevent
conflicts. The United Nations, and the Peacebuilding
Commission in particular, has made some positive
efforts in recent years. They should continue to explore
new ideas and new practices in this regard.
Thirdly, we should enhance communication and
coordination and bring into full play the strengths of all
parties. Preventive diplomacy is a multidimensional
task and cannot be achieved without the support and
coordination of all sides. In recent years, the African
Union and subregional organizations in Africa have
played an important role in mediating hotspot issues in
Africa. Their success shows that regional and
subregional organizations have unique political, moral
and geographic advantages in preventing and resolving
local conflicts. The United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, should strengthen cooperation with
these organizations and fully realize their initiative in
using their unique strengths to actively engage in
preventive diplomacy. Other countries that can
influence the parties to a conflict should also play their
due role.
Fourthly, we should make use of all available
resources to build strong synergies. The work of the
United Nations covers a wide range of areas, and the
entities and agencies within the United Nations system
all have their respective and clearly defined mandates.
The United Nations as a whole is endowed with rich
resources and unique overall strengths. We hope that
the United Nations will coordinate its resources and
work in various areas, fully utilize the expertise of the
General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and other organs, and make good
use of the resources of the World Bank, the United
Nations Development Programme, the World
Food Programme and other specialized agencies,
programmes and funds. We hope the United Nations
will encourage all sides to enhance exchanges and
coordination so as to build synergies and conduct
preventive diplomacy more effectively. We support the

11-50916

Secretary-General in playing a more active role in
coordinating the efforts of all agencies.
As early as 2,000 years ago, the Chinese people
put forward the concept of guarding against potential
dangers and the idea that peace is of supreme value. As
a permanent member of the Security Council, China
has always advocated peace, development and
cooperation in the United Nations and the Security
Council and has exerted great efforts for the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict prevention. On the
basis of our practice over the years, we are more
convinced than ever that the peaceful settlement of
disputes, as one of the basic principles of the United
Nations Charter, remains highly relevant under the new
circumstances. It is a principle that should continue to
be respected and upheld. Preventive diplomacy
deserves more attention and input.
Let us work together to reaffirm the solemn
commitments made by the older generation of leaders
in the United Nations Charter, enable the United
Nations and the Security Council to better meet threats
and challenges and strive for a world of common
security and enduring peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
His Excellency Mr. S. M. Krishna, Minister for
External Affairs of the Republic of India, to take the
floor.
Mr. Krishna (India): I would like to begin by
congratulating Lebanon on its presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to
express my deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
personally presiding over this very important event. It
is indeed an honour to participate in the discussions
today and to convey to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Security Council, the good wishes of
my Government. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/552) and his
recommendations on the use of preventive diplomacy
by the United Nations.
If properly used, preventive diplomacy could
become an essential element in the global community’s
response to some of the major challenges facing the
international system today, and could help in conflict
prevention.
The adoption of the Charter of the United Nations
was supposed to herald the beginning of a new chapter
in international relations. One of the purposes of the

17

S/PV.6621

United Nations, as elaborated in Chapter I, Article 1,
paragraph 1 of the Charter, was to bring about by
peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law, adjustment or
settlement of international disputes or situations which
might lead to a breach of the peace.
The Charter therefore stresses the importance of
the adjustment or settlement of disputes by peaceful
means, which include negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement and resort
to regional agencies or arrangements.
Over the last six decades, peaceful interventions
by the United Nations have helped defuse a number of
conflict situations on a number of occasions. These
interventions, wherever they are undertaken with
impartiality, fairness and equity, have earned the
United Nations a reputation for effective mediation.
The challenge before the international community is to
build on this legacy and ensure that peaceful means for
the settlement of disputes remain relevant to current
realities.
Contemporary threats to international peace and
security differ qualitatively from those prevalent six
decades ago. Conventional war has been overtaken by
intra-State and even borderless violence. Low-intensity
conflict, non-State actors and the terrorist-criminaldrug-trafficking nexus threaten international stability
and progress. It is recognized that such conflicts are
extremely complicated and require complex solutions.
Unfortunately, recent developments seem to indicate a
worrying trend towards increased reliance on the use of
force as a mechanism for resolving some of these
conflicts.

worse than the disease itself. The international
community must not show undue eagerness to use
coercive arrangements in its hurry to bring peace.
We are often reminded of the shortcomings and
limitations of diplomacy and the need to intervene. It is
important, however, to remember that the tragic events
of the past that are cited to justify intervention took
place not because dialogue was ineffective but because
of a lack of will on the part of the international
community to act. Such failures do not in any way
detract from the soundness of the principle of peaceful
settlement of disputes or its means as mentioned in the
Charter itself.
Of course, it goes without saying that the
peaceful method is the more difficult one. The great
Indian Emperor Ashoka noted three millennia ago that
to do good is difficult. Preventive diplomacy takes time
and commitment. It requires a clear understanding of
the nature and context of the conflict and the ability to
discern realistic solutions. It requires the involvement
of the various stakeholders affected by conflict. It
needs to incorporate forces for stability and progress
into a particular situation.
The foremost responsibility of sovereign States is
the protection of their populations. It is also their
primary responsibility to prevent conflict. Thus,
actions undertaken within the framework of conflict
prevention by United Nations entities must be designed
to support and complement, as appropriate, the
conflict-prevention roles of national Governments.

The limitations of using force too frequently and
too quickly are many. Any respite that coercion brings
about in the absence of a political settlement is likely
to be only short-lived. Efforts at peaceful settlement of
disputes may also suffer if force is used prematurely
and without adequate deliberation. Very frequently, a
demonstration of a lack of patience in persisting with
peaceful efforts is also likely to play into the hands of
those who want these conflicts to persist.

India has always opposed and will continue to
oppose the use of force as a primary reaction to
conflict. As the major troop-contributing country to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, we are more
familiar than most with the limitations of force. We
note, however, that peacekeepers, who are also early
peacebuilders, are being asked to do more with less.
This resource gap must be addressed. The inability of
the international community to match its mandates
with resources ultimately affects the credibility of the
Security Council and its authority in resolving
disputes.

The use of force also leads to collateral damage.
Such damage, whether human or material, has
unpredictable effects on political conflict resolution
processes while creating moral or normative dilemmas.
In many places, the use of force has prolonged
conflicts, a situation where the cure turned out to be

There really is no sustainable alternative to
political processes and the principle that the primary
focus of the United Nations should be facilitating a
political settlement. Coercive measures should be
avoided and used as a measure of last resort,
implemented with extreme care and caution. Decisions

18

11-50916

S/PV.6621

to use force should be free of political motives. The
humanitarian imperative of providing succour to the
suffering should not be used to further one’s political
objectives. That does humanitarianism and diplomacy a
great disservice. Moreover, there are very good reasons
why international law is based on the principle of
consent. Efforts to circumvent this process are not
prudent and cannot be expected to address the drivers
of conflict on an enduring basis.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
time-tested principles of national consent, impartiality,
fairness and equity in all conflict-prevention activities
that the United Nations may undertake.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
His Excellency Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar
Patriota, Minister for External Relations of the
Federative Republic of Brazil, to take the floor.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me start by expressing
my satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council and by conveying President Dilma
Rousseff’s regret at being unable to attend today’s
debate. She asked that I transmit her respectful
greetings and congratulations for having chosen this
important topic for our high-level meeting.
The subject of this meeting allows us to call
attention to the diplomatic instruments available for the
promotion of peace in a world where we often witness
a tendency to hasten towards coercion, sanctions and
military intervention. Today’s debate helps us to
underline the priority role that the peaceful settlement
of disputes must have in achieving the central goal of
the United Nations, which is the promotion of
international peace on the legal basis provided by the
Charter.
Brazil has inscribed the principle of the peaceful
resolution of controversies in its Constitution. We
believe that peace results from collective efforts in
favour of building just societies. We have underscored
the interdependence between peace, security and
development. We know from experience that stability
and security are seldom achieved where there is social
exclusion. I was particularly pleased to hear SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon’s comment yesterday, when he
said that “development is ultimately the best prevention”
(A/66/PV.11). The promotion of socio-economic
development and the creation of political opportunities
to allow every country to fulfil its potential are
indispensable elements in any agenda for preventive

11-50916

diplomacy — and, by extension, in any agenda for
peace.
In Brazil, we are committed to fighting poverty
and improving governance. In our region, the Union of
South American Nations is consolidating itself as a
zone of peace, cooperation and democracy. We know,
however, that irrespective of how developed regional
cooperation becomes, we will always need a functional
and effective multilateral system. It cannot be repeated
too often that the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for promoting international peace and
security.
It behoves the Security Council to find solutions
that can both resolve the challenges posed by specific
situations of crisis and, at the same time, strengthen the
multilateral system itself. Recent episodes have shown
us the limits of military action as a means for
promoting stability, as well as the inappropriateness of
using force preventively or pre-emptively. Yesterday,
we took note of President Obama’s statement that “the
tide of war is receding” (A/66/PV.11). We might
emphatically add that we must usher in a tide of
diplomacy, dialogue and prevention.
The prevention of conflict and preventing its
escalation can be strengthened through many different
tools.
Peacekeeping
operations
are
valuable
instruments. The Peacebuilding Commission can play
an important role in staving off the recurrence of
conflict. I agree with the Prime Minister of Portugal
when he speaks of the mutually reinforcing triad of
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. But let us
not forget that disarmament and the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction will also greatly enhance
our capacity to avoid conflict. While we would not
disagree with those who associate poverty with conflict
and tension, let us not forget that, historically, it is the
very powerful militarily that have wrought destruction
on the widest scale.
As many have pointed out today, in order to fully
discharge its role in the field of peace and security, the
United Nations must support and promote women’s
participation in national and international political
processes. President Dilma Rousseff stressed our
commitment to that goal in her speech to the General
Assembly yesterday. Unfortunately, however, women
are still underrepresented in the different stages and
activities of the diplomatic agenda for peace.

19

S/PV.6621

We live in a time marked by mass demonstrations
in the Arab world, where a young generation demands
effective participation in the political future of their
countries and societies. From the beginning, Brazil has
not only stood with those who call for freedom of
expression and institutional progress, but has also
steadfastly promoted peaceful means to address the
tensions brought about by those processes. At the same
time, we have called for respect for international law
and underlined the need to fully respect the decisions
of the Security Council, in particular when Chapter VII
has been invoked.
Fulfilling our responsibility in the realm of
prevention involves favouring mediation, the good
offices of the Secretary-General and, at all times,
giving priority to the full range of instruments to
peacefully resolve differences, including giving due
consideration to regional organizations and refraining
from loose interpretations of Security Council
mandates. I think that the Council needs to take careful
note of the statement of President Zuma of South
Africa when he mentioned that the African Union was
widely sidelined in recent situations that have been
brought to the attention of the Council.
The wave of change that has swept the Middle
East and Northern Africa lends an even greater sense of
urgency to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for a State of their own. Defusing this enormous
focus of tension and instability through a two-State
solution and through due respect for Israel’s right to
live in peace and security can indeed, and should, be
portrayed as a way of advancing the concept of
preventive diplomacy.
The exercise of preventive diplomacy requires
that the Council participate effectively in defusing
tensions of varying degrees of intensity. In other
words, the Council will not be fulfilling its role if it
avoids the potentially most destabilizing situations. Let
us not forget that resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) were consensus decisions of this body. They
remain inescapable references for the future of peace in
the Middle East.
Brazil expresses its expectation that the Security
Council will show greater leadership in helping to
bring about, through dialogue and diplomacy, a just
and lasting peace to the Middle East. As President
Sarkozy stated yesterday,
(spoke in French)

20

“we must stop thinking that a single country, even
the biggest one, or even a small group of
countries, can alone resolve a problem of such
complexity. Such an approach sidelines too many
major players” (A/66/PV.11).
(spoke in English)
Updating the composition of the Security Council
in order to better reflect the realities of the world today
will greatly contribute to the strengthening of our
preventive capacity. Meanwhile, dialogue, persuasion,
diplomacy and the peaceful resolution of conflicts will
continue to be the guiding principles of my country’s
conduct in the Council and the Organization, where our
collective responsibility will require that additional and
more sustained efforts be invested in prevention as a
broad approach towards lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
His Excellency Mr. Guido Westerwelle, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany, to
take the floor.
Mr. Westerwelle (Germany): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2011/552) and his instructive
briefing today. Let me make three points.
First, it falls squarely within the responsibility of
the Security Council to prevent conflicts from
occurring wherever possible. In fact, it is one of its
central tasks. Conflict prevention is one of the chief
obligations set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations. It is the most efficient and cost-effective way
of promoting international peace and security.
Effective conflict prevention can avoid loss of life,
population displacements and economic chaos.
Working on improving prevention is therefore both a
humanitarian and a strategic necessity. Over the years,
the Security Council has considerably improved its
tools to shoulder that responsibility. Agreeing on the
right instrument from the broad spectrum available is a
crucial task and challenge for the Council.
At this point, allow me to add some remarks on
the current situation in Syria. Every day, peaceful
demonstrators are brutally repressed and innocent
civilians are killed. This has to stop. The Council
should send a strong and urgent message to the
leadership in Damascus in order to prevent the
continued senseless killing of people.

11-50916

S/PV.6621

In our view, early warning is of key importance
to prevent escalation. We welcome the fact that the
Security Council has been increasingly prepared to
tackle new threats and situations of incipient conflict.
That is the way forward.
Secondly,
in
addition
to
operational
improvements, we also need a long-term structural
perspective. Part of the Security Council’s
responsibility for conflict prevention is the need to
look at long-term threats to global security. To take one
example, it is our conviction that understanding the
implications of climate change for international peace
and security will be essential to prevent escalation in
many future crises.
Aside from facing these new threats, the best
prevention of conflicts remains respect for human
rights and economic development. There can be true
peace, sustainable development and shared prosperity
only when human rights are respected. A credible fight
against impunity can also have a preventive effect.
Thirdly, the Security Council cannot do this
alone. As stated in the Charter, the Security Council
shall encourage pacific settlement of disputes also
through regional arrangements. There has been a
notable growth in mediation efforts by regional
organizations such as the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, the African Union, the League of Arab
States and the European Union. Regional expertise
needs to be heard when dealing with conflicts in a
particular region. Germany has therefore always
underscored the central importance of the Arab
League’s stance on the developments in its region over
the last half-year.
The European Union has assumed its regional and
global responsibilities. The European Union actively
participates in conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. It has developed its own
instruments for enhancing stability and consolidating
peace, including crisis-management missions and
diplomatic initiatives. It also supports the African
Union and the United Nations in their efforts to bring
peace. Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations will be key to further improving
capacities and tools to deal with prevention. The
civilian capacities review also aims at making better
use of existing mediation capacities in Member States.
None of these efforts can replace direct talks
among the actors involved. We cannot make peace in

11-50916

their place, but we can encourage the forces of reason,
reconciliation and compromise. Mediation can be a
very useful tool in this regard. Establishing a culture of
prevention is a question of political will, first and
foremost that of parties directly affected. The
international community has to lend its support
wherever possible. Developing a culture of prevention
is also a question of the political participation of those
affected, in particular women. Women should be at the
core of prevention and sustaining peace.
We fully support the conclusions drawn by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2011/552), notably
with a view to building integrated partnerships on all
levels and improving early warning mechanisms. We
also need to adopt a long-term perspective regarding
new challenges to peace and security. I conclude by
expressing my delegation’s support for the draft
presidential statement to be adopted today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I invite His
Excellency Mr. Sven Alkalaj, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to take the floor.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank His Excellency President Sleiman of
Lebanon, as well as the delegation of Lebanon, for
organizing this high-level meeting of the Security
Council. I would also like to thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his insightful
remarks.
The topic we are discussing today represents one
of the most important issues for determining the further
course of action of the United Nations pertaining to the
prevention of conflict. Today, we are seeing a
significant number of crises and new global challenges
that have the potential to pull entire regions into
violence and consequently become a challenge to
international peace and security. In such a fragile
security environment, conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, as the founding
purposes of the United Nations and pillars of its
Charter, represent the main tools at our disposal.
The United Nations was founded as an
Organization that would act not only to prevent
conflicts between nations and avert future wars, but
also to strengthen cooperation among its Members.
Entrusted with the responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, the Security Council
needs to optimize the use of its preventive diplomacy
tools.

21

S/PV.6621

Bosnia and Herzegovina has shared the
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security through its membership in the
Security Council. We will stay fully committed to this
course. There is no doubt that in recent times, the
United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
have recognized the crucial importance of preventive
diplomacy. The question is: Can we make
improvements in this regard? I think that we can and
that we should.
I will echo the words that I said exactly two years
ago after the election of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Security Council. We believe that, based on the case of
my country, Bosnia and Herzegovina is going to be a
strong voice for preventive diplomacy and try to follow
up early warning signs anywhere in the world with the
utmost sensitivity. This approach is more important
today than it was two years ago, and today’s debate is a
clear evidence of that.
Reacting after a crisis has already started is
always a less efficient and less cost-effective method
for preserving peace and security. However, we have to
keep in mind that there is no universal solution that can
be applied to all crises; rather, each particular case
requires our full attention.
A number of regional and subregional
organizations have become more active in their role as
partner to the United Nations in the area of preventive
diplomacy. This reflects a growing conviction that
emerging crises should be addressed in appropriate
international
forums.
The
development
and
improvement of early warning systems, creating
mechanisms for rapid response, the establishment of
prevention structures and the use of the SecretaryGeneral’s special envoys, groups of friends and factfinding missions all have crucial roles to play in
preventive diplomacy capacities. We support the
strengthening of the strategic dialogue between United
Nations and regional organizations and a more regular
exchange of views and information in order to enable
the Council to make adequate decisions. Regional
organizations are often better informed than their
international counterparts for the early detection of
crises.
Despite of all the efforts and readiness of the
international community to assist in conflict
prevention, I wish to underline that the willingness of
the stakeholders involved in political processes in the

22

field to preserve peace remains the most crucial
element. The durability of peace agreements can be
achieved only by assisting national counterparts in
building the foundations for sustainable peace and
addressing the root causes of conflict, as well as
developing nationally owned institutions that can
prevent conflict through dialogue.
Today, I want to reaffirm my county’s
commitment to strengthening the international capacity
for preventive diplomacy in the interest of peace,
security and development. Bosnia and Herzegovina
stands ready to support those efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I invite the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to
take the floor.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Lebanese initiative to convene a Council
meeting is dedicated to one of the most important
challenges of global politics today. The current state of
international relations, as failure to resolve longstanding conflicts and the emergence of hotbeds of
instability have aggravated the threat to global security,
urgently calls for collectively agreed work in conflict
prevention and the pooling of the efforts of all major
members of the international community.
To avoid further shocks, international efforts
must refocus from reacting to outbreaks of conflicts
throughout the world to developing a comprehensive
strategy to prevent the initial causes of conflict,
ensuring long-term political stability and socio-economic
development, to which I would add the challenges of
counteracting global and cross-border threats and
challenges, above all international terrorism, illegal
drug trafficking, organized crime and the spread of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery.
In the past few years, the United Nations, through
its Security Council and the Secretary-General,
together with many regional and subregional
organizations, has done significant work in identifying
the reasons for and helping to prevent conflicts. Yet
fast, radical solutions to large-scale problems in this
area do not exist. The successful containment of
conflicts depends on a systemic application of early
warning instruments, using the capabilities of
preventive diplomacy, mediation and good offices
missions. Strengthening the capabilities of the United
Nations is one of the most important thrusts in the

11-50916

S/PV.6621

reform of the Organization, and priority attention
should be paid to it.
To ensure the success of our work in this very
important area, we need to observe a number of
conditions. First of all, there is no room for double
standards
dictated
by
short-term
political
circumstances or the preferences of particular States.
Why are efforts undertaken with regard to some
countries to establish a political process and a national
dialogue — for example, in Yemen — while sanctions
are imposed on the incumbent Governments of other
States whose opposition is primed for confrontation?
Secondly, bearing in mind that the majority of
conflicts are intra-State, it is very important to
understand that interference in domestic political
processes, regardless of the position of the receiving
parties, hardly answers the interests of long-term
stabilization. The experience of Iraq and Libya are
eloquent testimonies to the fact that, in the end, only
the people themselves can determine the fate of their
countries, and external armed intervention in internal
conflicts creates the risk of a spiralling confrontation in
those parts of the world.
Regarding the Middle and Near East, we can
affirm that such a scenario will, inter alia, reduce the
prospects for a settlement of the Palestinian problem. If
that is not solved, it will be a strong source of fuel for
extremist propensities in the region.
Today’s conflicts cannot be resolved by force.
There can be no ambiguity about that. Success in
resolving crisis situations resides in a painstaking
collective search for political and diplomatic solutions,
and a thorough and inclusive dialogue to address longstanding problems and ensure stable political
development in those countries.
Developments in the world show the growing role
of mediators in preventing and settling conflicts. Their
work requires great skill and, most importantly,
patience. We continue to see the need for good offices
missions of the Secretary-General and his special
envoys. We have all borne witness to the important
mediation efforts of the Quartet to find ways to resolve
the Middle East situation; the United Nations in the
negotiating process between the Cypriot communities;
the High-level African Union panel in the Sudan; Qatar
in the Darfur settlement process; and Egypt and other
States in the area of intra-Palestinian reconciliation.

11-50916

The responsiveness and effectiveness of the
United Nations anti-crisis machinery reside in its
peacekeeping missions. We do not support increasingly
popular assignment to peacekeeping missions of
protection of civilians and delivery of humanitarian
assistance tasks. As important as those roles are, we
must not forget the fundamental functions of
peacekeepers as facilitators of political process and the
maintenance of peace and security in their areas of
deployment.
We are prepared to continue to support
peacekeeping operations. We believe it necessary to
pay particular attention to increasing the military
expertise of the Security Council and stepping up the
work of the Military Staff Committee in conducting, in
particular, systemic analyses of the military and
political situations in problem areas of the world.
Important challenges in helping post-conflict
countries are handled by the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission, whose coordinating and
mobilizing we fully support. We believe that the efforts
being made to improve the United Nations civilian
capability and the deployment of civilian contingents
in post-conflict regions are steps in the right direction.
A significant role belongs to the Secretariat,
which must be responsible for monitoring and
analysing situations in different regions, forecasting
the development of crises, planning and expeditiously
informing the Security Council about potential
outbreaks of conflict.
The crises of the past year have helped open up
the potential of regional organizations in the prevention
and political settlement of conflicts. The African Union
has shown its mediation capabilities in the Sudan,
Burundi and Madagascar and was ready to do more in
Libya. In line with this African example, we see good
possibilities for partnerships between the United
Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), which are increasing their
political authority and contribution and strengthening
regional and international security.
We believe it extremely important that, as we
continue to actively rely on Chapter VIII of the
Charter, making use of the possibility of strong
regional organizations capable of assuming more
responsibility for situations in their regions will allow
the United Nations to be more focused on addressing

23

S/PV.6621

global questions in the interests of the entire
international community.
We support the practice of establishing United
Nations regional centres for preventive diplomacy as
effective instruments for identifying and preventing
conflicts, as well as in developing regional interaction.
We appreciate the work of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia and
its Head, Mr. Miroslav Jenča, based on the principles
of neutrality, objectivity and cooperation with the
Governments of the States of Central Asia and aimed at
interacting with regional integration organizations,
such as the Commonwealth of Independent States, the
Eurasian Economic Community, CSTO and SCO.
We share the opinion of the Secretary-General
about the importance of interaction with representatives of
civil society, parliaments, business groups and
academics so as to keep a hand on the pulse of, and to
monitor on a regular basis, the development of
potential conflict situations.
It is an acknowledged fact that conflict
prevention in all respects is much less costly than
subsequent settlement efforts. The material and

24

intellectual investment of the international community
in early warning and in strengthening the United
Nations potential for peace mediation, political
analysis and assessment of conflict situations will be
money well spent.
The Russian Federation supports the Lebanese
delegation’s draft presidential statement.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Council
has before it the text of a draft presidential statement
on behalf of the Council on the subject of today’s
meeting. I thank Council members for their valuable
contributions to this statement. In accordance with the
understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2011/18.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council has thus concluded its deliberations.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

11-50916
