99

Resolutions adopted on the Reports of the Sixth Committee

mercial arbitration and international legislation on
shipping;
( b) Continue to give attention to the ways and
means which would effectively promote training and
assistance in the field of international trade law;
( c) Keep its programme of work under constant
review, bearing in mind the important contribution
which the progressive harmonization and unification
of international trade law can make to economic cooperation among all peoples and, thereby, to their wellbeing;
(d) Give special consideration, in promoting the
harmonization and unification of international trade
law, to the interests of developing and land-locked
countries;
·
11. Recommends further that the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law should continue to collaborate fully with international organizations active in the field of international trade law;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions on the Commission's
report at the twenty-fourth session of the General
Assembly.
1809th plenary meeting,
12 November 1969.
2530 (XXIV). Convention on Special Missions
and Optional Protocol concerning the Compulsory Settlement of Disputes

The General Assembly,
Considering that the codification and progressive
development of international law contributes to the
implementation of the purposes and principles set forth
in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling that in its resolutions 1687 (XVI) of
18 December 1961, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November
1963 and 2045 (XX) of 8 December 1965 it recommended that the International Law Commission should
continue the work of codification and progressive development of the topic of special missions and that,
as recommended in General Assembly resolution 2167
(XXI) of 5 December 1966, the Commission submitted final draft articles on special missions in chapter
II of its report on the work of its nineteenth session,9
Recalling further that, in accordance with its resolutions 2273 (XXII) of 1 December 1967 and 2419
(XXIII) of 18 December 1968, it decided to consider
the item entitled "Draft Convention on Special Missions" during its twenty-third and twenty-fourth sessions, with a view to the adoption of such a convention
by the General Assembly,
Having completed the consideration of that item,
Noting that articles 50 and 52 of the draft Convention on Special Missions enable the General Assembly to issue special invitations to States which are not
Members of the United Nations or members of any of
the specialized agencies or of the International Atomic
Energy Agency or parties to the Statute of the International Court of Justice to become parties to the
Convention,
Convinced that multilateral treaties which deal with
the codification and progressive development of inter9 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/6709/
Rev.I and Corr.1).

national law, or the object and purpose of which are
of interest to the international community as a whole,
should be open to universal participation,
l. Adopts and opens for signature and ratification
or for accession the following instruments, the texts of
which are annexed to the present resolution:
(a) Convention on Special Missions;
( b) Optional Protocol concerning the Compulsory
Settlement of Disputes;
2. Resolves to consider at its twenty-fifth session
the question of issuing invitations in order to ensure
the widest possible participation in the Convention on
Special Missions.
1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
ANNEX
Convention on Special Miasions

The States Parties to the present Convention,
Recalling that special treatment has always been accorded
to special missions,
Having in mind the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations concerning the sovereign equality of
States, the maintenance of international peace and security
and the development of friendly relations and co-operation
among States,
Recalling that the importance of the question of special
missions was recognized during the United Nations Conference
on Diplomatic Intercourse and Immunities and in resolution I
adopted by the Conference on 10 April 1961,
Considering that the United Nations Conference on Diplomatic Intercourse and Immunities adopted the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which was opened for
signature on 18 April 1961,
Considering that the United Nations Conference on Consular Relations adopted the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations, which was opened for signature on 24 April 1963,
Believing that an international convention on special missions would complement those two Conventions and would
contribute to the development of friendly relations among
nations, whatever their constitutional and social systems,
Realizing that the purpose of privileges and immunities
relating to special missions is not to benefit individuals but to
ensure the efficient performance of the functions of special
missions as missions representing the State,
Affirming that the rules of customary international Jaw
continue to govern questions not regulated by the provisions
of the present Convention,
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE

1

Use of terms
For the purposes of the present Convention:
(a) A "special mission" is a temporary mission, representing
the State, which is sent by one State to another State with
the consent of the latter for the purpose of dealing with it
on specific questions or of performing in relation to it a
gpecific task;
(b) A "permanent diplomatic mission" is a diplomatic mission within the meaning of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations;
( c) A "consular post" is any consulate-general, consulate,
vice-consulate or consular agency;
(d) The "head of a special mission" is the person charged
by the sending State with the duty of acting in that capacity;
( e) A "representative of the sending State in the special
mission" is any person on whom the sending State has conferred that capacity;

100

General Auembly-Twenty-fourth Seasion

(f) The "members of a special mission" are the head of
the special mission, the representatives of the sending State
in the special mission and the members of the staff of the
special mission;
(g) The "members of the staff of the special mission" are
the members of the diplomatic staff, the administrative and
technical staff and the service staff of the special mission;
(h) The "members of the diplomatic staff" are the members
of the staff of the special mission who have diplomatic status
for the purposes of the special mission;
(i) The "members of the administrative and technical staff"
are the members of the staff of the special mission employed in
the administrative and technical service of the special mission;
(/) The ''members of the service staff" are the members
of the staff of the special mission employed by it as household
workers or for similar tasks;
(k) The "private staff" are persons employed exclusively
in the private service of the members of the special mission.
ARTICLE 2

Sending of a special mission
A State may send a special mission to another State with
the consent of the latter, previously obtained through the
diplomatic or another agreed or mutually acceptable channel.
ARTICLE 3

Functions of a special mis:Jion
The functions of a special mission shall be determined by
the mutual consent of the sending and the receiving State.
AllTICLE 4

Sending of the same special mission to two or more States
A State which wishes to send the same special mission to
two or more States shall so inform each receiving State when
seeking the consent of that State.
ARTICLE 5

Sending of a joint special mission by two or more States
Two or more States which wish to send a joint special
mission to another State shall so inform the receiving State
when seeking the consent of that State.
ARTICLE 6

Sending of special missions by two or more States in order to
deal with a question of common interest
Two or more States may each send a special mission at
the same time to another State, with the consent of that State
obtained in accordance with article 2, in order to deal together,
with the agreement of all of these States, with a question of
common interest to all of them.
ARTICLE 7

Non-existence of diplomatic or consular relations
The existence of diplomatic or consular relations is not
necessary for the sending or reception of a special mission.
ARTICLE 8

Appointment of the members of the special mission
Subject to the provisions of articles 10, 11 and 12, the
sending State may freely appoint the members of the special
mission after having given to the receiving State all necessary
information concerning the size and composition of the special
mission, and in particular the names and designations of the
persons it intends to appoint. The receiving State may decline
to accept a special mission of a size that is not considered
by it to be reasonable, having regard to circumstances and
conditions in the receiving State and to the needs of the

particular mission. It may also, without giving reasons, decline
to accept any person as a member of the special mission.
ARTICLE 9

Composition of the special mission
1. A special mission shall consist of one or more representatives of the sending State from among whom the sending
State may appoint a head. It may also include diplomatic
staff, administrative and technical staff and service staff.
2. When members of a permanent diplomatic mission or
of a consular post in the receiving State are included in a
special mission, they shall retain their privileges and immunities as members of their permanent diplomatic mission or
consular post in addition to the privileges and immunities
accorded by the present Convention.
ARTICLE 10

Nationality of the members of the special mission
1. The representatives of the sending State in the special
mission and the members of its diplomatic staff should in
principle be of the nationality of the sending State.
2. Nationals of the receiving State may not be appointed
to a special mission except with the consent of that State,
which may be withdrawn at any time.
3. The receiving State may reserve the right provided for
in paragraph 2 of this article with regard to nationals of a
third State who are not also nationals of the sending State.
ARTICLE

11

Notifications
1. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the receiving State,
or such other organ of that State as may be agreed, shall
be notified of:
(a) The composition of the special mission and any subsequent changes therein;
( b) The arrival and final departure of members of the
mission and the termination of their functions with the
mission;
( c) The arrival and final departure of any person accompanying a member of the mission;
(d) The engagement and discharge of persons resident in
the receiving State as members of the mission or as private
staff;
(e) The appointment of the head of the special mission
or, if there is none, of the representative referred to in paragraph 1 of article 14, and of any substitute for them;
(f) The location of the premises occupied by the special
mission and of the private accommodation enjoying inviolability
under articles 30, 36 and 39, as well as any other information
that may be necessary to identify such premises and accommodation.
2. Unless it is impossible, notification of arrival and final
departure must be given in advance.
ARTICLE

12

Persons declared non grata or not acceptable
1. The receiving State may, at any time and without having

to explain its decision, notify the sending State that any representative of the sending State in the special mission or any
member of its diplomatic staff is persona non grata or that
any other member of the staff of the mission is not acceptable.
1!1 any such case, the sending State shall, as appropriate,
either recall the person concerned or terminate his functions
with the mission. A person may be declared non grata or not
acceptable before arriving in the territory of the receiving
State.
2. If the sending State refuses, or fails within a reasonable
period, to carry out its obligations under paragraph 1 of
this article. the receiving State may refuse to recognize the
person concerned as a member of the special mission.

IOI

Resolutions adopted on the Repom of the Sixth Committee
ARTICLE 13

Commencement of the functions of a special mission
1. The functions of a special mission shall commence as
soon as the mission enters into official contact with the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs or with such other organ of the receiving
State as may be agreed.
2. The commencement of the functions of a special mission
shall not depend upon presentation of the mission by the
permanent diplomatic mission of the sending State or upon
the submission of letters of credence or full powers.
ARTICLE

14

Authority to act on behalf of the special mission
1. The head of the special mission or, if the sending State
has not appointed a head, one of the representatives of the
sending State designated by the latter is authorized to act
on behalf of the special mission and to address communications to the receiving State. The receiving State shall address
communications concerning the special mission to the head
of the mission, or, if there is none, to the representative
referred to above, either direct or through the permanent
diplomatic mission.
2. However, a member of the special mission may be
authorized by the sending State, by the head of the special
mission or, if there is none, by the representative referred
to in paragraph 1 of this article, either to substitute for
the head of the special mission or for the aforesaid representative or to perform particular acts on behalf of the
mission.
ARTICLE 15

Organ of the receiving State with which official business
is conducted
All official business with the receiving State entrusted to
the special mission by the sending State shall be conducted
with or through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or with such
other organ of the receiving State as may be agreed.
ARTICLE

16

Rules concerning precedence
1. Where two or more special missions meet in the territory of the receiving State or of a third State, precedence
among the missions shall be determined, in the absence of
a special agreement, according to the alphabetical order of
the names of the States used by the protocol of the State
in whose territory the missions are meeting.
2. Precedence among two or more special missions which
meet on a ceremonial or formal occasion shall be governed
by the protocol in force in the receiving State.
3. Precedence among the members of the same special
mission shall be that which is notified to the receiving State
or to the third State in whose territory two or more special
missions are meeting.
ARTICLE 17

Seat of the special mission
1. A special mission shall have its seat in the locality
agreed by the States concerned.
2. In the absence of agreement, the special mission shall
have its seat in the locality where the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the receiving State is situated.
3. If the special mission performs its functions in different
localities, the States concerned may agree that it shall have
more than one seat from among which they may choose one
as the principal seat.
ARTICLE

18

Meeting of special missions in the territory of a third State
1. Special missions from two or more States may meet in
the territory of a third State only after obtaining the express
consent of that State, which retains the right to withdraw it.

2. In giving its consent, the third State may lay down conditions which shall be observed by the sending States.
3. The third State shall assume in respect of the sending
States the rights and obligations of a receiving State to the
extent that it indicates in giving its consent.
ARTICLE

19

Right of the special mission to use the flag and emblem
of the sending State
1. A special mission shall have the right to use the flag and
emblem of the sending State on the premises occupied by
the mission, and on its means of transport when used on
official business.
2. In the exercise of the right accorded by this article,
regard shall be had to the laws, regulations and usages of
the receiving State.
ARTICLE 20

End of the functions of a special mission
1. The functions of a special mission shall come to an
end, inter alia, upon:
(a) The agreement of the States concerned;
(b) The completion of the task of the special mission;
( c) The expiry of the duration assigned for the special
mission, unless it is expressly extended;
(d) Notification by the sending State that it is terminating
or recalling the special mission;
(e) Notification 1,y the receiving State that it considers the
special mission terminated.
2. The severance of diplomatic or consular relations between
the sending State and the receiving State shall not of itself
have the effect of terminating special missions existing at the
time of such severance.
ARTICLE 21

Status of the llead of State and persons of high rank
1. The Head of the sending State, when be leads a special

mission, shall enjoy in the receiving State or in a third State
the facilities, privileges and immunities accorded by international law to Heads of State on an official visit.
2. The Head of the Government, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and other persons of high rank, when they take part
in a special mission of the sending State, shall enjoy in the
receiving State or in a third State, in addition to what is
granted by the present Convention, the facilities, privileges
and immunities accorded by international law.
ARTICLE 22

General facilities
The receiving State shall accord to the special m1ss1on the
facilities required for the performance of its functions, having
regard to the nature and task of the special mission.
ARTICLE 23

Premises and accommodation
The receiving State shall assist the special mission, if it so
requests, in procuring the necessary premises and obtaining
suitable accommodation for its members.
ARTICLE 24

Exemption of the premises of the special mission from taxation
1. To the extent compatible with the natUl"e and duration
of the functions performed by the special mission, the sending State and the members of the special mission acting on
behalf of the mission shall be exempt from all national
regional or municipal dues and taxes in respect of the premis~
occupied by the special mission, other than such as represent payment for specific services rendered.

102

General A1sembly-Twenty-fourth Session

2. The exemption from taxation referred to in this article
shall not apply to such dues and taxes payable under the
law of the receiving• State by persons contracting with the
sending State or with a member of the special mission.
ARTICLE 25

Inviolability of the premises
1. The premises where the special mission is established in

accordance with the present Convention shall be inviolable.
The agents of the receiving State may not enter the said

tected by the receiving State in the performance of his
functions. He shall enjoy personal inviolability and shall not
be liable to any form of arrest or detention.
7. The sending State or the special mission may designate couriers ad hoe of the special mission. In such cases
the provisions of paragraph 6 of this article shall also apply,
except that the immunities therein mentioned shall cease to
apply when the courier ad hoe has delivered to the consignee
the special mission's bag in his charge.
8. The bag of the special mission may be entrusted to
the captain of a ship or of a commercial aircraft scheduled
to land at an authorized port of entry. The captain shall be
provided with an official document indicating the number of
packages constituting the bag, but he shall not be considered
to be a courier of the special mission. By arrangement with
the appropriate authorities, the special mission may send one
of its members to take possession of the bag directly and
freely from the captain of the ship or of the aircraft.

premises, except with the consent of the head of the special
mission or, if appropriate, of the head of the permanent
diplomatic mission of the sending State accredited to the
receiving State. Such consent may be assumed in case of
fire or other disaster that seriously endangers public safety,
and only in the event that it has not been possible to obtain
the express consent of the head of the special mission or,
where appropriate, of the head of the permanent mission.
2. The receiving State is under a special duty to take
all appropriate steps to protect the premises of the special
mission against any intrusion or damage and to prevent any
disturbance of the peace of the mission or impairment of
its dignity.
3. The premises of the special mission, their furnishings,
other property used in the operation of the special mission
and its means of transport shall be immune from search,
requisition, attachment or execution.

Personal inviolability
The persons of the representatives of the sending State in
the special mission and of the members of its diplomatic
staff shall be inviolable. They shall not be liable to any form
of arrest or detention. The receiving State shall treat them
with due respect and shall take all appropriate steps to
prevent any attack on their persons, freedom or dignity.

ARTICLE 26

ARTICLE 30

ARTICLE 29

Inviolability of archives and documents

Inviolability of the private accommodation

The archives and documents of the special mission shall be

1. The private accommodation of the representatives of
the sending State in the special mission and of the members
of its diplomatic staff shall enjoy the same inviolability and
protection as the premises of the special mission.
2. Their papers, their correspondence and, except as provided in paragraph 4 of article 31, their property shall
likewise enjoy inviolability.

inviolable at all times and wherever they may be. They
should, when necessary, bear visible external marks of identification.
ARTICLE 27

Freedom of movement
Subject to its laws and regulatiol!S concerning zones entry
into which is prohibited or regulated for reasons of national
security, the receiving State shall ensure to all members of
the special mission such freedom of movement and travel
in its territory as is necessary for the performance of the
functions of the special mission.
ARTICLE 28

Freedom of communication
1. The receiving State shall permit and protect free
communication on the part of the special mission for all
official purposes. In communicating with the Government of
the sending State, its diplomatic missions, its consular posts
and its other special missions or with sections of the same
mission, wherever situated, the special mission may employ
all appropriate means, including couriers and messages in
code or cipher. However, the special mission may install
and use a wireless transmitter only with the consent of the
receiving State.
2. The official correspondence of the special mission shall
be inviolable. Official correspondence means all corespondence
relating to the special mission and its functions.
3. Where practicable, the special mission shall use the
means of communication, including the bag ·and the courier,
of the permanent diplomatic mission of the sending State.
4. The bag of the special mission shall not be opened or
detained.
S. The packages constituting the bag of the special mission
must bear visible external marks of their character and may
contain only documents or articles intended for the official
use of the special mission.
6. The courier of the special mission, who shall be provided with an official document indicating his status and
the number of packages constituting the bag, shall be pro-

ARTICLE 31

Immunity from jurisdiction
1. The representatives of the sending State in the special
mission and the members of its diplomatic staff shall enjoy
immunity from the criminal jurisdiction of the receiving
State.

2. They shall also enjoy immunity from the civil and
administrative jurisdiction of the receiving State, except in
the case of:
(a) A real action relating to private immovable property
situated in the territory of the receiving State, unless the
person concerned holds it on behalf of the sending State for
the purposes of the mission;
(b) An action relating to succession in which the person
concerned is involved as executor, administrator, heir or legatee
as a private person and not on behalf of the sending State;
(c) An action relating to any professional or commercial
activity exercised by the person concerned in the receiving
State outside his official functions;

(d) An action for damages arising out of an accident
caused by a vehicle used outside the official functions of
the person concerned.
3. The representatives of the sending State in the special
mission and the members of its diplomatic staff are not obliged
to give evidence as witnesses.
4. No measures of execution may be taken in respect
of a representative of the sending State in the special mission or a member of its diplomatic staff except in the cases
coming under sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of
paragraph 2 of this article and provided that the measures
concerned can be taken without infringing the inviolability
of his person or bis accommodation.

103

Resolutions adopted on the Reports of the Sixth Committee

5. The immunity from jurisdiction of the representatives
of the sending State in the special mission and of the members of its diplomatic staff does not exempt them from the
jurisdiction of the sending State.
ARTICLE

32

Exemption from social security legislation
l. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3 of this article,
representatives of the sending State in the special mission
and members of its diplomatic staff shall, in respect of
services rendered for the sending State, be exempt from
social security provisions which may be in force in the
receiving State.
2. The exemption provided for in paragraph 1 of this
article shall also apply to persons who are in the sole private
employ of a representative of the sending State in the special
mission or of a member of its diplomatic staff, on condition:

(a) That such employed persons are not nationals of or
permanently resident in the receiving State, and
(b) That they are covered by the social security provisions which may be in force in the sending State or a third
State.
3. Representatives of the sending State in the special
m1ss10n and members of its diplomatic staff who employ
persons to whom the exemption provided for in paragraph 2
of this article does not apply shall observe the obligations
which the social security provisions of the receiving State
impose upon employers.
4. The exemption provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of
this article shall not preclude voluntary participation in the
social security system of the receiving State where such
participation is permitted by that State.
5. The provisions of this article shall not affect bilateral
or multilateral agreements concerning social security concluded previously and shall not prevent the conclusion of
such agreements in the future.
ARTICLE

33

Exemption from dues and taxes

The representatives of the sending State in the special
mission and the members of its diplomatic staff shall be
exempt from all dues and taxes, personal or real, national,
regional or municipal, except:
(a) Indirect taxes of a kind which are normally incorporated in the price of goods or services;
(b) Dues and taxes on private immovable property situated
in the territory of the receiving State, unless the person concerned holds it on behalf of the sending State for the purposes of the mission;
(c) Estate, succession or inheritance duties levied by the
receiving State, subject to the provisions of article 44;
(d) Dues and taxes on private income having its source
in the receiving State and capital taxes on investments made
in commercial undertakings in the receiving State;
(e) Charges levied for specific services rendered;
(/) Registration, court or record fees, mortgage dues
and stamp duty, subject to the provisions of article 24.
ARTICLE

34

Exemption from personal services

The receiving State shall exempt the representatives of the

sending State in the special mission and the members of its
diplomatic staff from all personal services, from all public
service of any kind whatsoever, and from military obligations such as those connected with requisitioning, military
contributions and billeting.

ARTICLE

35

Exemption from customs duties and inspection
l. Within the limits of such laws and regulations as it
may adopt, the receiving State shall permit entry of, and
grant exemption from all customs duties, taxes, and related
charges other than charges for storage, cartage and similar
services, on:

(a) Articles for the official use of the special mission;
(b) Articles for the personal use of the representatives of
the sending State in the special mission and the members of
its diplomatic staff.
2. The personal baggage of the representatives of the
sending State in the special mission and of the members of
its diplomatic staff shall be exempt from inspection, unless
there are serious grounds for presuming that it rnntains
articles not covered by the exemptions mentioned in paragraph I of this article, or articles the import or cxrort of
which is prohibited by the law or controlled by the quarantine
regulations of the receiving State. In such cases, insrcction
shall be conducted only in the presence of the person concerned or of his authorized representative.
ARTICLE

36

Administrative and technical staff

Members of the administrative and technical staff of the
special mission shall enjoy the privileges and immunities
specified in articles 29 to 34, except that the immunity from
civil and administrative jurisdiction of the receiving State
specified in paragraph 2 of article 31 shall not extend to acts
performed outside the course of their duties. They shall also
enjoy the privileges mentioned in paragraph 1 of article 35
in respect of articles imported at the time of their first ,,:ntJ )"
into the territory of the receiving State.
ARTICLE

37

Service staff

Members of the service staff of the special mission shall
enjoy immunity from the jurisdiction of the receiving State
in respect of acts performed in the course of their duties,
exemption from dues and taxes on the emoluments they
receive by reason of their employment, and exemption from
social security legislation as provided in article J2.
ARTICLE

38

Private staff

Private staff of the members of the special m1ss1011 shall
be exempt from dues and taxes on the emoluments they
receive by reason of their employment. In all other respects,
they may enjoy privileges and immunities only to the extent
permitted by the receiving State. However, the receiving
State must exercise its jurisdiction over those persons in
such a manner as not to interfere unduly with the performance of the functions of the special mission.
ARTICLE

39

Members of the family,
1. Members of the families of representatiws of the
sending State in the special mission and of members of i1~
diplomatic staff shall, if they accompany such members of
the special mission, enjoy the privileges and immunities
specified in articles 29 to 35 provided that they are not
nationals of or permanently resident in the receiving State:.

2. Members of the families of members of the administra
tive and technical staff of the special mission shall. if thev
accompany such members of the special mission, enjov the
privileges and im1tunities specified in article 36 pru,,ick'
that they are not nationals of or permanently resi,Lnt ,;,
receiving State.

,,1,

General Auembly-Twenty-fOlll'th Se111ion

104
ARTICLE 40

Nationals of the receiving State and persons permanently
resident in the receiving State
1. Except in so far as additional privileges and immunities
may be granted by the receiving State, the representatives of
the sending State in the special mission and the members of
its diplomatic staff who are nationals of or permanently
resident in the receiving State shall enjoy only immunity from
jurisdiction and inviolability in respect of official acts performed in the exercise of their functions.
2. Other members of the special mission and private staff
who are nationals of or permanently resident in the receiving
State shall enjoy privileges and immunities only to the extent
granted to them by that State. However, the receiving State
must exercise its jurisdiction over those persons in such a
manner as not to interfere unduly with the performance of
the functions of the special mission.
ARTICLE 41

Waiver of immunity
1. The sending State may waive the immunity from jurisdiction of its representatives in the special mission, of the
members of its diplomatic staff, and of other persons enjoying
immunity under articles 36 to 40.
2. Waiver must always be express.
3. The initiation of proceedings by any of the persons
referred to in paragraph 1 of this article shall preclude him
from invoking immunity from jurisdiction in respect of any
counter-claim directly connected with the principal claim.
4. Waiver of immunity from jurisdiction in respect of
civil or administrative proceedings shall not be held to imply
waiver of immunity in respect of the execution of the judgement, for which a separate waiver shall be necessary.
ARTICLE 42

Transit through the territory of a third State
1. If a representative of the sending State in the special
mission or a member of its diplomatic staff passes through
or is in the territory of a third State while proceeding to
take up his functions or returning to the sending State, the
third State shall accord him inviolability and such other
immunities as may be required to ensure his transit or
return. The same shall apply in the case of any members
of his family enjoying privileges or immunities who are
accompanying the person referred to in this paragraph,
whether travelling with him or travelling separately to join
him or to return to their country.
2. In circumstances similar to those specified in paragraph 1 of this article, third States shall not hinder the
transit of members of the administrative and technical or
service staff of the special mission, or of members of their
families, through their territories.
3. Third States shall accord to official correspondence and
other official communications in transit, including messages
in code or cipher, the same freedom and protection as the
receiving State is bound to accord under the present Convention. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 4 of this
article, they shall accord to the couriers and bags of the
special mission in transit the same inviolability and protection as the receiving State is bound to accord under the
present Convention.
4. The third State shall be bound to comply with its
obligations in respect of the persons mentioned in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this article only if it has been informed
in advance, either in the visa application or by notification,
of the transit of those persons as members of the special
mission, members of their families or couriers, and has raised
no objection to it.
5. The obligations of third States under paragraphs 1,
2 and 3 of this article shall also apply to the persons mentioned respectively in those paragraphs, and to the official

communications and the bags of the special mission, when
the use of the territory of the third State is due to force
majeure.
ARTICLE 43

Duration of privileges and immunities
1. Every member of the special mission shall enjoy the

privileges and immunities to which he is entitled from the
moment he enters the territory of the receiving State for
the purpose of performing his functions in the special mission or, if he is already in its territory, from the moment
when his appointment is notified to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs or such other organ of the receiving State as may
be agreed.
2. When the functions of a member of the special mission have come to an end, his privileges and immunities shall
normally cease at the moment when he leaves the territory
of the receiving State, or on the expiry of a reasonable period
in which to do so, but shall subsist until that time, even in
case of armed conflict. However, in regpect of acts performed
by such a member in the exercise of his functions, immunity
shall continue to subsist.
3. In the event of the death of a member of the special
mission, the members of his family shall continue to enjoy
the privileges and immunities to which they are entitled until
the expiry of a reasonable period in which to leave the
territory of the receiving State.
ARTICLE 44

Property of a member of the special mission or of a member
of his family in the event of death
1. In the event of the death of a member of the special
mission or of a member of his family accompanying him,
if the deceased was not a national of or permanently resident in the receiving State, the receiving State shall permit
the withdrawal of the movable property of the deceased,
with the exception of any property acquired in the country
the export of which was prohibited at the time of his death.
2. Estate, succession and inheritance duties shall not be
levied on movable property which is in the receiving State
solely because of the presence there of the deceased as a
member of the special mission or of the family of a member
of the mission.
ARTICLE 45

Facilities to leave the territory of the receiving State and
to remove the archives of the special mission
1. The receiving State must, even in case of armed conflict, grant facilities to enable persons enjoying privileges
and immunities, other than nationals of the receiving State,
and members of the families of such persons, irrespective of
their nationality, to leave at the earliest possible moment.
In particular it must, in case of need, place at their disposal
the necessary means of transport for themselves and their
property.
2. The receiving State must grant the sending State facilities for removing the archives of the special mission from
the territory of the receiving State.
ARTICLE 46

Consequences of the cessation of the functions of the
special mission
1. When the functions of a special mission come to an
end, the receiving State must respect and protect the premises of the special mission so long as they are assigned to
it, as well as the property and archives of the special mission. The sending State must withdraw the property and
archives within a reasonable period of time.
2. In case of the absence or severance of diplomatic
or consular relations between the sending State and the
receiving State and if the functions of the special mission
have come to an end, the sending State may, even if there

Re1olutiom adopted on the Re(JOl"II of the Sixth Committee
is an armed conflict, entrust the custody of the property and
archives of the special mission to a third State acceptable to
the receiving State.
ARTICLE 47

Respect for the laws and regulations of the receiving State
and use of the premises of the special mission
1. Without prejudice to their privileges and immunities,
it is the duty of all persons enjoying those privileges and
immunities under the present Convention to respect the
laws and regulations of the receiving State. They also _have
a duty not to interfere in the internal affairs of that State.
2. The premises of the special mission must not be used
in any manner incompatible with the functions of the special
mission as envisaged in the present Convention, in other
rules of general international law or in any special agn:ements in force between the sending and the receiving State.
ARTICLE 48

Professional or commercial activity
The representatives of the sending State in the special
mission and the members of its diplomatic staff shall not
practise for personal profit any professional or commercial
activity in the receiving State.
ARTICLE 49

Non-discrimination
1. In the application of the provisions of the present
Convention, no discrimination shall be made as between
States.
2. However, discrimination shall not be regarded as taking
place:
(a) Where the receiving State applies any of the provisions
of the present Convention restrictively because of a restrictive
application of that provision to its special mission in the
sending State;
(b) Where States modify among themselves, by custom or
agreement, the extent of facilities, privileges and immunities
for their special missions, although such a modification has
not been agreed with other States, provided that it is not
incompatible with the object and purpose of the present
Convention and does not affect the enjoyment of the rights
or the performance of the obligations of third States.
ARTICLE

50

Signature
The present Convention shall be open for signature by
all States Members of the United Nations or of any of the
specialized agencies or of the International Atomic Energy
Agency or Parties to the Statute of the International Court
of Justice, and by any other State invited by the General
Assembly of the United Nations to become a Party to the
Convention, until 31 December 1970 at United Nations
Headquarters in New York.
ARTICLE 51

Ratification
The present Convention is subject to ratification. The
instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
AllTICLB 52

Accession
The present Convention shall remain open for accession
by any State belonging to any of the categories mentioned
in article 50. The instruments of accession shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

105

ARTICLE 53

Entry into force
1. The present Convention shall enter into force on the
thirtieth day following the date of deposit of the twentysecond instrument of ratification or accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention after the deposit of the twenty-second instrument of
ratification or accession, the Convention shall enter into
force on the thirtieth day after deposit by such State of its
instrument of ratification or accession.
ARTICLE 54

Notifications by the depositary
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States belonging to any of the categories mentioned in
article 50:
(a) Of signatures to the present Convention and of the
deposit of instruments of ratification or accession in accordance
with articles 50, 51 and 52;
(b) Of the date on which the present Convention will enter
into force in accordance with article 53.
ARTICLE 55

Authentic texts
The original of the present Convention, of which the
Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are
equally authentic, shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, who shall send certified
copies thereof to all States belonging to any of the categories
mentioned in article 50.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed the
present Convention, opened for signature at New York on
16 December 1969.
Optional Protocol concerning the Compulsory Settlemeat

of Disputes

The States Parties to the present Protocol and to the Convention on Special Missions, hereinafter referred to u "the
Convention", adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on 8 December 1969,
Expressing their wish to resort, in all matters concernin1
them in respect of any dispute arising out of the interpretation or application of the Convention, to the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice, unless some
other form of settlement hu been agreed upon by the
parties within a reasonable period of time,
Have agreed u follows:
ARTICLE I
Disputes ar1s1ng out of the interpretation or application
of the Convention shall lie within the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice and may accordingly be brought before the Coun by a written application
made by any party to the dispute being a Party to the
present Protocol.
AllTICLB II

The parties may agree, within a period of two months
after one party hu notified its opinion to the other that a
dispute exists, to resort not to the International Court of
Ju~tice ~t to. an arbitral tribunal. After the expiry of the
said period, either party may bring the dispute before the
Court by a written application.
AllnCLB ID

1. Within the same J?Ori<?d of two months, the partiea may
agree to adopt a conciliation procedure before resortiq to
the International Court of Justice.

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

106
2. Toe conciliation commission shall . make its r~commendations within five months after its appomt~ent. If its r~ommendations are not accepted by the parties t<:, the dispute
within two months after they have been delivered, e~ther
party may bring the dispute before the Court by a wntten
application.
.ARTICLE IV

The present Protocol shall ~ open for signatu~e by a!l
States which may become Parties. to the Conventlo~, until
31 December 1970 at United Nations Headquarters m New
York.
.ARTICLE V
Toe present Protocol is subject to_ ratific:ition. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
.ARTICLE VI

The present Protocol shall remain_ open for accession. by
all States which may become Parties to the Convention.
Toe instruments of accession shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
ARTICLE VII

1. The present Protocol shall enter into force on the same

day as the Convention or on the_ thirtieth day f~llow!ns
the date of deposit of the second instrument of ratification
of or accession to the Protocol with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, whichever day is later.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the present
Protocol after its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article, the Protocol shall enter into force
on the thirtieth day after deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification or accession.
ARTICLE VIII
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States which may become Parties to the Convention:
(a) Of signatures to the present Protocol and of the
deposit of instruments of ratification or accession in accordance with articles IV, V and VI;
(b) Of the date on which the present Protocol will enter
into force in accordance with article VII.
.ARTICLE IX

The original of the present Protocol, of which the Chinese,
English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally
authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, who shall send certified copies thereof
to all States referred to in article IV.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed
the present Protocol, opened for signature at New York on
16 December 1969.

2531 (XXIV). Settlement of civil claims in con•
nexion with the Convention on Special Missions

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Convention on Special Missions,
adopted by the General Assembly on 8 December
1969, 10 provides for immunity from the jurisdiction
of the receiving State of members of a special mission
of the sending State,
Recalling that such immunity may be waived by the
sending State,
Noting in addition that, as was recalled in the preamble to the Convention, the purpose of immunities is
10 Resolution 2530 (XXIV), annex.

not to benefit individuals but to ensure the efficient
performance of the functions of special missions,
Mindful of the deep concern expressed during the
deliberations of the General Assembly that claims of
immunity might, in certain cases, deprive persons in the
receiving State of the· benefit of a judicial settlement,
Recommends that the sending State should waive the
immunity of members of its special mission in respect
of civil claims of persons in the receiving State when
it can do so without impeding the performance of the
functions of the special mission, and that, when immunity is not waived, the sending State should use its
best endeavours to bring about a just settlement of the
claims.
1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
2532 (XXIV). Tribute to the International Law
Commission in connexion with the adoption of the Convention on Special Mission•

The General Assembly,
Having adopted the Convention on Special Missions10
on the basis of the draft articles prepared by the International Law Commission, 11
Expresses its deep gratitude to the International Law
Commission for its outstanding contribution to the
codification and progressive development of the rules
of international Jaw on special missions.
1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
2533 (XXIV). Consideration of principle11 of
international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among State■ in
accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1966 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, 2103
(XX) of 20 December 1965, 2181 (XXI) of 12 December 1966, 2327 (XXII) of 18 December 1967 and
2463 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, in which it
affirmed the importance of the progressive development
and codification of the principles of international law
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States,
Recalling further that among the fundamental purposes of the United Nations are the maintenance of
international peace and security and the development
of friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Considering that the faithful observance of the principles of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations is of paramount importance for the maintenance of international peace
and security and the improvement of the international
situation,
Considering further that the progressive development
and codification of the principles of international law
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States, so as to secure their more effective application,
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/6709/Rev.1 and Corr.1), chap.
ter II, section D.
