S/2016/232

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 March 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2211
(2015), in which the Council requested me to report on the implementation of the
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. 1 It covers developments since
the issuance of my report of 22 September 2015 (S/2015/735) and provides
information on peace and security developments in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes region until 29 February 2016.

II. Major developments
A.

Political and security developments
2.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework is entering its third year of
implementation. Progress in the implementation of regional and national
commitments remains limited, while the continued presence of illegal armed groups,
including the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the Allied
Democratic Forces, the Forces de résistance patriotiques de l ’Ituri (FRPI) and
several Mai-Mai militias, continues to threaten the security and stability of the
region and negatively affects the implementation of the Framework. Furthermore,
there was little progress towards the repatriation and demobilization of
ex-combatants, including from the former Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) and
FDLR, registered during the reporting period. The crisis in Burundi and its
far-reaching impact have also contributed to the deterioration of the political,
security and humanitarian situation in the region.

__________________
1

16-03458 (E)

In this context, the region is defined as covering the 13 signatories to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Uganda,
the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following four intergovernmental
organizations act as witnesses/guarantors of the Framework: the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African Development Community and the
United Nations. For further information, see S/2013/119 and S/2013/131, annex.

110316

*1603458*

S/2016/232

3.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned challenges, the region witnessed some
positive developments during the reporting period. These included largely peaceful
general elections in the Central African Republic, Uganda and the United Republic
of Tanzania. The Office of my Special Envoy, together with the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), the African Union and other
partners, organized the first Great Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference in
Kinshasa on 24 and 25 February 2016. The highly successful event attracted some
500 participants, including government officials, private sector actors, development
partners and experts. I attended the opening ceremony, alongside President Joseph
Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the Vice -President of Angola,
representing the Chair of ICGLR; and the African Union Commissioner for
Infrastructure and Energy, representing the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission.
4.
Another significant development was the signing, on 28 January, by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) of a technical arrangement related to the resumption of military
cooperation between the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)) and
MONUSCO.
5.
With regard to the neutralization of armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, FARDC continued operations against FDLR, the Allied
Democratic Forces and FRPI, as indicated in my reports on MONUSCO issued in
December 2015 (S/2015/1031) and March 2016. At the twelfth meeting of the
Technical Support Committee of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
held in Nairobi on 14 January 2016, the Congolese delegation reported that, of the
Congolese Government’s estimate of 1,200 FDLR combatants, 1,150 had been
neutralized. Among those, 150 were awaiting repatriation to Rwanda. The
delegation further attributed the recent upsurge in violations and abuses in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the remaining FDLR elements, the breakaway
FDLR-Ralliement pour l’unité et la démocratie, Nduma Defence of Congo/Guidon
(NDC/Guidon) and other groups with alleged ties to the former M23. During the
meeting, the Congolese delegation also reiterated its call on the international
community to help identify third countries for relocation of FDLR combatants and
dependants who had surrendered but were unwilling to return to Rwanda. The
delegation stressed the urgent need to repatriate or relocate to third countries all
ex-FDLR combatants and dependants currently in transit camps in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
6.
Almost two years after the signing of the Nairobi Declarations by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the former M23 rebel
group, implementation remains stalled. Hundreds of ex-M23 combatants are yet to
be repatriated from Rwanda and Uganda.
7.
On 23 October 2015, ex-M23 political leader Bertrand Bisimwa issued a
statement asserting that the former rebel group would not continue to honour its
commitments under the Nairobi Declarations on the grounds that the Government
had deliberately refused to implement its part of the agreement. He further stated
that the former rebel group would not accept any attempt to repatriate
ex-combatants outside the provisions of the Nairobi Declarations. Mr. Bisimwa also

2/16

16-03458

S/2016/232

communicated similar messages to the Chairs of ICGLR and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), respectively. He further noted that failure to
fully implement past agreements between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and rebel movements had ultimately caused the outbreak of
new rebellions.
8.
On 24 October 2015, the National Oversight Mechanism of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo issued a communiqué in reaction to t he statement by the
former rebel group. The National Oversight Mechanism denounced the lack of will
by ex-M23 leaders and recalled the Congolese Government’s efforts to fulfil its
commitments, notably by promulgating an amnesty law in February 2014 and by
initiating the repatriation of consenting ex-M23 combatants. The National Oversight
Mechanism also recalled the decision by the sixth high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism, warning ex-M23 leaders against obstructing the
repatriation process. On 10 November, Mr. Bisimwa appointed Désiré Rwigema as
the new ex-M23 coordinator tasked to oversee the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations in close coordination with the National Oversight Mechanism.
Mr. Rwigema replaced René Abandi, who had stepped down as coordinator in
January 2015 and is now in charge of transforming the former rebel group into a
political party.
9.
In order to overcome these challenges, the leaders of the region have
continued to push for the implementation of the Nairobi D eclarations. On
18 November 2015, the Ministers of Defence of ICGLR member States met in
Kinshasa to discuss this matter, in compliance with the decision of the ninth ICGLR
Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government held in Luanda on 18 May
2015. The Ministers reviewed the calendar for the repatriation of the remaining
ex-M23 combatants in Uganda and noted that repatriation should commence on
1 December 2015 and be concluded by 15 December 2015. Following this decision,
a task force, comprising representatives of the ICGLR secretariat, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Uganda People ’s Defence Force, the
Ministry of Defence of Angola (as Chair of ICGLR), MONUSCO and the Office of
my Special Envoy, visited Bihanga camp in Uganda from 3 to 15 December 2015.
10. During the visit, the delegation was informed that 646 ex-M23 combatants
were present, 490 were recorded as absent, 14 had been admitted to a hospital,
29 had received permission to leave the camp, 9 were in Kampala, 5 were under
arrest for crimes and various wrongdoings and 4 had died. The task force urged the
ex-M23 combatants present to seize the opportunity to return to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In response, ex-M23 combatants appealed to the
witnesses/guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework not to
focus solely on the issue of repatriation and to ensure instead that all provisions of
the Nairobi Declarations are fully implemented. Following the field mission,
13 ex-M23 combatants were repatriated to the Kamina military base in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with the support of MONUSCO. This brought
the number of ex-M23 combatants repatriated from Uganda to a total of 195. A total
of 309 ex-M23 combatants are still present in Rwanda. No repatriation from
Rwanda took place during the period under review. The aforementioned task force
visited Rwanda on 23 and 24 September 2015. During the visit, the Ministers of
Defence of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda met bilaterall y and
issued a joint communiqué on 24 September (see para. 24 below).

16-03458

3/16

S/2016/232

11. On the political front, on 28 November 2015, President Joseph Kabila
announced the convening of a national dialogue to discuss forthcoming electoral
processes in the country. Some opposition groups and civil society organizations
opposed the President’s proposal for a dialogue. On 4 January 2016, the Episcopal
Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo also called for a national
dialogue and announced the formation of a special committee tasked with
maintaining contact with political parties, encouraging mutual trust and advancing
initiatives aimed at enhancing the electoral process. On 14 January, the African
Union issued a statement supporting the national dialogue and urging all Congolese
to reach a consensus that would preserve the gains made in the areas of peace,
stability, security, development and democratization. The African Union further
requested Edem Kodjo, former Prime Minister of Togo and member of the African
Union Panel of the Wise, to travel to Kinshasa for consultations on the national
dialogue. On 16 February, the African Union, the United Nations, the European
Union and the Organisation internationale de la francophonie issued a joint
statement urging all Congolese political actors to spare no effort, within the
framework of the country’s Constitution, to ensure the successful holding of
elections, preserve peace and deepen democracy, including through a political
process. The four organizations also underscored the importance of dialogue and the
need for political actors to reach an agreement that upholds democracy and the rule
of law. In addition, they urged all Congolese political actors to extend their full
cooperation to Mr. Kodjo.
12. The crisis in Burundi remained a focus of attention for the region and the
international community during the period under review. On 28 December 2015, the
President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, presided over the ceremony for the
relaunching of the inter-Burundian dialogue in Entebbe, Uganda, on behalf of the East
African Community (EAC). Participants included representatives of the Government
of Burundi, the ruling National Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the
Defence of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) party, opposition actors from within and
outside the country, civil society and faith-based organizations. Also in attendance
were officials from the African Union, EAC, the European Union, the United Nations
and the diplomatic corps. President Museveni encouraged the parties to engage in
dialogue and to find a political solution to the ongoing crisis. He invited the parties to
resume talks in Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, on 6 January 2016. The
Government of Burundi, however, expressed concern about the proposed date an d the
participants in the dialogue. Acting on behalf of President Museveni, the Minister of
Defence of Uganda, Crispus Kiyonga, supported by the Tanzanian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Augustin Mahiga, in his capacity as
Chair of the EAC Council of Ministers, consulted the Government of Burundi in order
to reach consensus on the resumption of the dialogue. At the time of finalization of the
present report, consultations were still ongoing.
13. On 9 November, I appointed Jamal Benomar as my Special Adviser. Since his
appointment, Mr. Benomar has focused his attention on coordinating United Nations
efforts to help resolve the crisis in Burundi. He travelled to Burundi several times
and met senior Government officials, opposition leaders, civil society and the
diplomatic corps. He also visited Uganda to engage the Facilitator of the EAC -led
dialogue and travelled to Rwanda and the African Union headquarters in Ethiopia.
14. The situation in Burundi also featured prominently in the agenda of the
meetings of the Inter-Ministerial Committees of Defence and Foreign Affairs of the

4/16

16-03458

S/2016/232

ICGLR held in Luanda on 10 and 11 February 2016. The Ministers of Defence and
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of ICGLR member States reviewed the security
situation in the region, notably in Burundi, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. The Ministers for Foreign
Affairs also took the opportunity to review a list of candidates for the post of
Executive Secretary of ICGLR to replace Alphonse Ntumba Luaba of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, whose tenure ended in December 2015. At the
request of the Government of Angola, the sixth Ordinary Summit of the ICGLR was
rescheduled to the end of March 2016.

B.

Humanitarian situation
15. The humanitarian situation resulting from the influx of some 245,000 refugees
from Burundi into neighbouring countries since April 2015 remains a matter of
concern and priority. Countries in the subregion, especially the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania, have
been hosting large refugee populations and deserve greater international support to
attend to the needs of the refugees. The reported recruitment of Burundian youth for
armed groups, including in refugee camps, directly undermines the civilian
character of asylum and strains relations between Governments in the region. Inside
Burundi, the crisis has exacerbated the situation faced by an already vulnerable
population that includes 25,000 internally displaced persons. Protection of civilians
is a growing concern; over 445 people have been killed since violence erupted in
April 2015. The country’s instability has also caused the deterioration of already
fragile livelihoods, with the result that some 3.6 million people are considered food
insecure and 150,000 children under 5 years of age acutely malnourished.
16. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo also
remains dire, especially in the eastern provinces, whe re new displacement has
occurred daily, owing to the activities of armed groups, military operations against
them, ongoing intercommunal violence and the influx of refugees from
neighbouring countries. Some 1.5 million people have been internally displaced ,
while 7.5 million people are in need of assistance throughout the country. The
forced closure of the site for internally displaced persons in Mukoto, North Kivu, on
12 January 2016 caused new displacement. The humanitarian community has
offered to support the Government to ensure that it upholds its international
obligations on human rights and humanitarian principles, especially with regard to
the closure of sites for internally displaced persons.
17. Meanwhile, over 400,000 Congolese refugees remain in protracted exile in
neighbouring countries. The conflict in South Sudan has also caused the displacement
of nearly 5,000 South Sudanese refugees from the state of Western Equatoria in South
Sudan to Dungu territory in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

C.

Human rights and judicial cooperation
18. The rapidly deteriorating human rights situation in Burundi remains a key
concern. On 17 December 2015, the Human Rights Council, in its resolution S -24/1,
called on the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to urgently
dispatch a mission to swiftly investigate alleged violations and abuses in Burundi

16-03458

5/16

S/2016/232

and make recommendations to improve the situation. The African Union also
committed to deploy human rights observers and military experts to the country.
19. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, security and intelligence officers
have reportedly clamped down on activists and political opponents opposed to
changes to the country’s constitutional provision on presidential term limits. As
indicated above, the security situation in the eastern Democ ratic Republic of the
Congo remains volatile, with armed groups, particularly the Allied Democratic
Forces and FDLR, carrying out deadly attacks on civilians and committing acts of
sexual violence.
20. Efforts to hold individuals accountable for crimes committed in the region are
ongoing and demonstrate effective cooperation in judicial matters. The trial of
Bosco Ntaganda, who was charged with war crimes and crimes against humanity
allegedly committed in Ituri province, Democratic Republic of the Congo, in 2002
and 2003, commenced in September 2015 at the International Criminal Court in The
Hague. On 19 December 2015, Thomas Lubanga Dyilo and Germain Katanga were
transferred to a prison facility in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to serve
their respective prison sentences. This is the first time that the Court has designated
a State for the enforcement of prison sentences and demonstrates close cooperation
between the Court and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On 30 December, new charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity were
filed against Germain Katanga in the High Military Court in Kinshasa. This is the
first case in which new national proceedings have been brought against an
individual already convicted by the International Criminal Court.
21. In January 2016, a hearing was held at the International Criminal Court in The
Hague to determine whether to confirm war crimes and crimes against humanity
charges, including sexual violence and recruitment of child soldiers in Ug anda,
against former Lord’s Resistance Army leader Dominic Ongwen. The Court also
announced that it would issue its verdict in the case of Jean -Pierre Bemba, former
President and Commander-in-Chief of the Mouvement de libération du Congo on
21 March 2016. Mr. Bemba was charged for crimes allegedly committed in the
Central African Republic in 2002 and 2003.

III. Implementation of the commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework
A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
22. Information on the status of implementation of the national commitments of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is contained in my report on MONUSCO of
9 March 2016 (S/2016/233).

B.

Commitments of the region
23. Most signatory States to the Framework upheld their commitment “not to
interfere in the internal affairs of neighbouring countries ” (see S/2013/131, annex)
during the reporting period; however, the Government of Burundi has accused its
Rwandan counterpart of recruiting young people in refugee camps in Rwanda and

6/16

16-03458

S/2016/232

encouraging incursions into Burundi by armed elements through the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
24. The Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda held
a bilateral meeting in Kigali on 23 and 24 September to review the security
challenges facing the two countries and agree on comprehensive strategies to
address them. In a joint communiqué, they: (a) called on the Chiefs of Defence Staff
of the two countries, supported by their respective military intelligence units, to
develop practical ways to eradicate FDLR; (b) requested the establishment of a joint
bilateral team on repatriation of ex-M23 combatants cantoned in Rwanda and FDLR
combatants present in the Bahuma transit camp in Kisangani, Democratic Republic
of the Congo; and (c) agreed to hold bilateral ministerial security meetings on a
regular basis. National and international institutions were invited to support the
process. The implementation of the decisions adopted during the meeting is still
pending.
25. With regard to the commitment made by signatory States to facilitate the
administration of justice through judicial cooperation (ibid.), the Congolese
National Police arrested Ladislas Ntaganzwa on 8 December 2015, pursuant to an
arrest warrant and order to transfer issued by the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals on 7 May 2014. Mr. Ntaganzwa had been indict ed by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for genocide, direct and public
incitement to commit genocide, and crimes against humanity, in connection with his
actions during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. He had been at large since 19 June
1996 and was allegedly living in North Kivu under the protection of FDLR.
26. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has expressed its
readiness to extradite Mr. Ntaganzwa to Rwanda pursuant to the warrant, provided,
however, that the Government of Rwanda reciprocates by transferring the former
leader of the National Congress for the Defence of the People, Laurent Nkunda, as
well as other Congolese nationals who are the subject of arrest warrants issued by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On a related note, little progress was made
in bringing to justice six ex-M23 members who are sought on Congolese arrest
warrants for war crimes and crimes against humanity and who are also listed on
sanctions lists of the Security Council and the Government of the United States of
America.

C.

International commitments
27. As part of their collective effort to support the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, the Team of International Envoys and
Representatives for the Great Lakes Region visited Uganda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda from 9 to 15 December 2015. Their planned
visit to Burundi was cancelled following a request by the Government to postpone
this segment of the journey. The team comprised Assistant Secretary-General
Modibo Touré, representing Special Envoy Said Djinnit; my Special Representative
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO, Maman
Sidikou; the United States Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Thomas
Perriello; the European Union Senior Coordinator for the Great Lakes Region, Koen
Vervaeke; and a representative of the African Union Special Representative for the
Great Lakes region.

16-03458

7/16

S/2016/232

28. In their interaction with various regional stakeholders, the envoys expressed
concern over the worsening security situation in Burundi, as well as the rise in
violence and human rights abuses. They expressed their support for the EAC -led
mediation. The envoys also conducted field visits to Kisangani, Beni and Goma, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In Beni, the envoys met with the mayor and
members of his local security committee. They seized the opportunity to extend
their condolences to the local community, which continues to bear the brunt of
atrocities committed by the Allied Democratic Forces. In Kisangani, the envoys met
with a group of ex-FDLR elements cantoned in Bahuma camp and encouraged them
to accept being repatriated to Rwanda, their country of origin, without precondition.
In Goma, the envoys met the Vice-Governor of North Kivu, among others. The
discussions revolved around the neutralization of armed groups, with a focus on the
FARDC-led operations against FDLR and other local armed groups. Both sides
agreed on the urgent need to resume military cooperation between MONU SCO and
FARDC. The envoys and representatives were also briefed on the work of the
Extended Joint Verification Mechanism by the body’s Deputy Commander.
29. The implementation of the World Bank Great Lakes Initiative, for a total
commitment of $1.4 billion, has significantly advanced during the reporting period.
Six projects costing $717.2 million, which are intended to reduce vulnerability and
build resilience, on the one hand, and improve economic opportunities through
economic cooperation and integration, on the other, have been approved and are in
the early stages of implementation. Four other projects in the same areas, costing
$537 million, are at an advanced stage of preparation.
30. A number of analytical studies, funded by the World Bank and the Office of my
Special Envoy, were helpful in designing projects under the Great Lakes Initiative.
These included studies in the following areas: (a) addressing forced displacement;
(b) improving social protection for vulnerable groups, including women;
(c) enhancing food security; (d) improving access to health services; (e) supporting
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups; (f) enhancing access to energy;
(g) improving agricultural productivity; (h) expanding infrastructure to support
increased productivity and trade; and (i) removing barriers to trade.

D.

Oversight mechanisms of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
31. The Technical Support Committee of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework met on 14 January 2016 in Nairobi to review developments in the
region, notably the dialogue processes in Burundi and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the peace process in South Sudan. The Committee also discussed the
neutralization of negative forces in the eastern Democratic Rep ublic of the Congo,
including FDLR and the Allied Democratic Forces. The meeting further reviewed
the matter of the repatriation of ex-M23 combatants from Uganda and Rwanda and
the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations.
32. Building on lessons from previous high-level Regional Oversight Mechanism
meetings and on the outcomes of the ministerial retreat on the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, held in Nairobi on 10 July 2015, members of the Technical
Support Committee considered proposals to improve the meetings of the Mechanism
and the Committee and to strengthen ownership of the Framework by its signatories.

8/16

16-03458

S/2016/232

The Committee’s recommendations were submitted to the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the region for consideration.
33. On 28 January 2016, my Special Envoy and the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security convened a ministerial meeting of signatory States and
witnesses/guarantors of the Framework, in the margins of the twenty -eighth
ordinary session of the African Union Executive Council, held in Addis Ababa on
27 and 28 January. The meeting was chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Angola. Participants included the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, the United Re public of Tanzania
and Zambia. South Africa was represented by its Minister of Defence and Uganda
was represented by its Minister for Regional Cooperation. The Congo, Kenya,
Rwanda and the Sudan were represented by senior officials from their Ministries fo r
Foreign Affairs and Defence. In addition, representatives of the African Union,
ICGLR, SADC and the United Nations participated. Participants reviewed
developments in the region and discussed steps to enhance ownership and
strengthen the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
34. The Ministers also endorsed the recommendations of the Technical Support
Committee to strengthen the governing mechanisms of the Framework, notably by:
(a) dissociating the Regional Oversight Mechanism meetings from the African
Union summit and the United Nations General Assembly; (b) organizing one annual
meeting of the Mechanism as a stand-alone event in a signatory State; (c) convening
thematic ministerial meetings, as necessary, to address relevant c hallenges; and
(d) convening meetings of Ministers for Foreign Affairs, ahead of future meetings of
the Mechanism, to lay the groundwork for subsequent discussions and decisions by
Heads of State and Government.
35. The ministerial meeting further welcomed the recent elections in the United
Republic of Tanzania, as well as the progress achieved in the peace process in South
Sudan. It also welcomed progress in the peace process in the Central African
Republic and urged the parties to continue their efforts. Participants expressed their
full support for the ongoing EAC-led dialogue on Burundi. They further welcomed
the decision by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to resume
military cooperation between FARDC and MONUSCO.

IV. Activities of my Special Envoy
36. During the reporting period, my Special Envoy continued to promote the
implementation of key aspects of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
His office successfully organized the Great Lakes Private Sector In vestment
Conference on 24 and 25 February 2016 in Kinshasa in partnership with ICGLR.
Furthermore, my Special Envoy undertook consultations to support national
dialogue processes in the region, particularly in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. He also continued to support the neutralization of negative forces and used
his good offices to facilitate the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations,
particularly the repatriation of ex-M23 combatants from Rwanda and Uganda. My
Special Envoy also took steps to strengthen his collaboration with regional
organizations, promote women, youth and civil society, and help find durable
solutions to refugee issues in the region.

16-03458

9/16

S/2016/232

A.

Great Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference
37. During the period under review, my Special Envoy proceeded with
preparations for the first Great Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference. In
October 2015, his Office collaborated with the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and other partners on a
knowledge share fair on gender equality in the extractive industries. On 16 and
17 October, in Nairobi, my Special Envoy joined ICGLR and UN -Women in
organizing a regional forum to explore ways in which small and medium -sized
enterprises in the region could benefit from the Conference. Together with various
partners, the Office of my Special Envoy also organized private and public road
shows to promote the Conference and attract global investors at key high -level
events in Belgium, Ethiopia, the United Arab Emirates and the United States of
America. My Special Envoy also convened several meetings of the Steering
Committee of the Conference, which was established in September 2015 to oversee
preparations for the Conference. Furthermore, he held meetings with Congolese
government officials, including President Joseph Kabila, Prime Minister Matata
Ponyo and Minister for Foreign Affairs Raymond Tshibanda.
38. On 24 February, I joined President Joseph Kabila at the opening ceremony of
the Great Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference. In my address, I underscored
the importance of combining peace consolidation efforts with initiatives to rebuild
the economic fabric of communities and provide tangible peace dividends for all. I
also called upon the leaders of the region to work together towards inclusive
development and shared prosperity. Panel discussions focused on opportunities and
challenges in the seven economic sectors highlighted for investment, namely,
agriculture, energy, finances, infrastructure, information and communications
technologies, mining and tourism. Experts led plenary sessions on promoting
responsible business and improving the investment climate in the Great Lakes
region. Many business-to-business, government-to-business and government-togovernment meetings took place in the margins of the Conference, notably a
meeting between the Prime Ministers of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda. My Special Envoy will follow up with Framework signatories, witnesses/
guarantors and other partners to establish or strengthen mechanisms to build on the
outcomes of the Conference.

B.

Support to dialogue processes in the region
39. From 2 to 10 December 2015, at my request, my Special Envoy visited
Kinshasa, Brussels and Addis Ababa, where he conducted broad consultations
regarding the proposed national dialogue to be held in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In Kinshasa, he met with senior government officials, including
President Kabila, the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior, the Minister
of Justice, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the National Assembly. He
also met with representatives of the presidential majority, opposition leaders, faith based organizations, civil society, members of the Se curity Council, other members
of the diplomatic corps and Framework signatories. In addition, my Special Envoy
separately met with leaders of the opposition party Union pour la démocratie et le
progrès social, the African Union Commissioner for Peace and S ecurity and senior
representatives of the European Union. During his meetings, my Special Envoy

10/16

16-03458

S/2016/232

sought to clarify his interlocutors’ expectations regarding the role of a possible
United Nations facilitator of the proposed dialogue. He further sought their views
on the prospects for a credible and inclusive dialogue in the country’s current
political context. My Special Envoy subsequently summarized the findings and
outcomes of his consultations in a report that he submitted to me. Subsequently, the
African Union appointed Edem Kodjo, former Prime Minister of Togo, to serve as
facilitator of the national dialogue. The Office of my Special Envoy and
MONUSCO will support the African Union facilitation as needed.

C.

Cooperation with regional partners
40. On 21 September 2015, my Special Envoy met with the President of Angola,
José Eduardo dos Santos, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola, Georges
Chicoti, in Luanda. Discussions focused on issues of importance in the Great Lakes
region, notably the neutralization of negative forces; the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi; and ongoing efforts to strengthen the
functioning of the governance structures of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. President dos Santos suggested the holding of a high-level meeting to
address the slow progress in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations and the
neutralization of FDLR.
41. To strengthen the governing mechanisms of the Framework and enhance the
partnership of his Office with the African Union Commission, my Special Envoy
met the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Nkosazana Dlamini -Zuma,
on 25 November. With regard to the governing mechanisms of the Framework,
Ms. Dlamini-Zuma called for greater involvement by the Ministers responsible for
the implementation of decisions made by the Heads of State and Government. She
called on the United Nations, the African Union, ICGLR and SADC, as
witnesses/guarantors, to conduct an assessment of the Framework, with a view to
making results-oriented recommendations to advance its implementation.
42. My Special Envoy also built on his partnerships with the Ministers of Defence
and Foreign Affairs of the region during the reporting period. During an
extraordinary meeting of ICGLR Ministers of Defence, held in Kinshasa on
18 November, my Special Envoy conveyed strong United Nations support for the
full and rapid implementation of the Nairobi Declarations, as well as for initiatives
aimed at neutralizing negative forces operating in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. On 11 February 2016, my Special Envoy participated in a meeting of
ICGLR Ministers for Foreign Affairs (also known as Regional Inter -Ministerial
Committee), during which he reiterated United Nations support t o member States in
addressing ongoing peace and security challenges in the region, notably the
situations in Burundi, the Central African Republic and the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. He also briefed the meeting on preparations for the Great
Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference and recalled the recommendations
adopted by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Framework signatory States during
their meeting in Addis Ababa on 28 January.

16-03458

11/16

S/2016/232

D.

Regional strategic framework in support of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework
43. The Office of my Special Envoy continued to collaborate with United Nations
country teams, regional offices and development partners to establish a regional
strategic framework for the Great Lakes region. The integrated approach taken in
the framework will, inter alia, help relevant agencies provide timely and more
effective responses to crises in the region. The strategic framework comprises six
pillars, namely: (a) sustainable natural resources management; ( b) economic
integration, cross-border trade and food nutrition security; (c) mobility; (d) youth
and adolescents; (e) sexual and gender-based violence; and (f) justice and conflict
prevention.
44. In this context, my Special Envoy, together with the United Nations
Development Programme Assistant Administrator and Director, Regional Bureau for
Africa, and Chair of the Regional United Nations Development Group for Africa,
Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, convened a meeting in Nairobi on 7 December 2015 to
validate the regional strategic framework. The meeting brought together United
Nations resident coordinators in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania; United Nations regional
directors; country representatives of agencies, funds and programmes; heads of
subregional organizations; and representatives of regional organizations, including
ICGLR, EAC, SADC, the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries and
the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa.
45. The participants in the meeting concluded that the strategic framework had
passed the test of relevance, resilience and implementability. They further noted that
national budgets, development plans and the United Nations Development
Assistance Frameworks should be aligned with the strategic framework. They also
urged other signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework to
emulate the national implementation mechanisms in place in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The meeting recommended that United Nations country
teams in the region collaborate on cross-border initiatives that leverage comparative
advantages and meet the region’s needs in the areas of confidence -building and
promotion of shared prosperity. In the same vein, the need for better collaboration
and synergies with regional organizations was highlighted.

E.

Promotion of women, youth and civil society organizations
46. During the reporting period, the Office of my Special Envoy undertook a field
mission to monitor the activities of grass-roots women’s organizations that were
funded through the Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. These organizations are located in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. The outcome of the mission included the following
recommendations: (a) stabilization and peace consolidation initiatives in the region
should tap the significant potential of groups and individuals at the community level;
(b) local communities should be informed about the outcomes of high-level meetings
related to the Framework; (c) the Framework signatories should widely disseminate
their commitments and related activities in local languages at the community level;
and (d) grass-roots women’s organizations should participate in regional meetings
discussing the Framework, as well as national peace and dialogue processes.

12/16

16-03458

S/2016/232

47. On 30 November 2015, my Special Envoy chaired the fourth meeting of the
Advisory Board of the Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperat ion
Framework via videoconference. In attendance was my Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as representatives of UN -Women, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the Oak Foundation, MONUSCO, the Fonds pour
les femmes congolaises, the Ministry of Gender, Family and Children’s Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the ICGLR Regional Women’s Forum.
The meeting commended the field monitoring exercise. With regard to funding for
the Women’s Platform, Advisory Board me mbers noted that current funding had
been exhausted and called for collective action to mobilize new resources under my
Special Envoy’s leadership.
48. On 16 and 17 October 2015, the Office of my Special Envoy, ICGLR, the
Pan-African Chamber of Commerce and Industry and UN-Women jointly organized a
Regional Forum for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises from the Great Lakes
region. The Forum brought together more than 50 representatives of small and
medium-sized enterprises from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia.
Participants discussed how small and medium-sized enterprises could participate in
the Great Lakes Regional Private Sector Forum and the Great Lakes Private S ector
Investment Conference, as well as how they could support the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Participants underscored the important
role of small and medium-sized enterprises in generating jobs and transformative
economic initiatives for the benefit of women and youth in the Great Lakes region.
49. On 14 and 15 December 2015, the ICGLR Regional Civil Society Forum
organized the first meeting of its newly constituted Coordination Committee, in Dar
es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania. The meeting brought together the Chairs of
the ICGLR National Civil Society Forums of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and
Zambia, along with representatives from Burundi, the Central African Republic and
the ICGLR Regional Centre for Democracy and Good Governance. At the end of the
two-day meeting, the Coordination Committee agreed to submit a request to the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania to host the secretariat of the Forum.
50. My Special Envoy also continued to engage non-State actors in support of the
Framework. On 27 January 2016, he met with civil society representatives in Addis
Ababa during a meeting organized by Oxfam International, before th e twenty-eighth
ordinary session of the African Union Executive Council. The meeting offered my
Special Envoy an opportunity to engage directly with advocacy groups and other
non-governmental actors involved in the promotion of peace and stability in the
Great Lakes region. This year’s discussion centred on ways to facilitate genuine
dialogue between civil society, women, youth and leaders at local, national and
regional levels to promote, peace, stability and development.

F.

Promotion of durable solutions for refugees and internally
displaced persons
51. Protracted forced displacement remains a major challenge in the region, owing
to political instability and the activities of armed groups, which force civilians to
become internally displaced persons or refugees. At the same time, persistent

16-03458

13/16

S/2016/232

insecurity remains a significant impediment to the implementation of durable
solutions for the displaced in the subregion. Recognizing that durable solutions for
refugees and internally displaced persons will require concerted efforts by political,
humanitarian and development partners, my Special Envoy has continued to work
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Bank and
others to develop new solutions to protracted displacement that safeguard the
dignity of displaced persons and provide them better opportunities, while delivering
greater benefits to host communities.

V. Observations and recommendations
52. Notwithstanding some positive developments during the reporting period, the
Great Lakes region continues to face major political, security and humanitarian
challenges. I am particularly preoccupied by the continuing existence of several
armed groups, including FDLR and the Allied Democratic Forces, in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite efforts by FARDC and MONUSCO to
neutralize them. The continued threat to civilians by armed groups, the stalled
repatriation of ex-M23 combatants and dependants, the slow implementation of the
Nairobi Declarations and the crisis in Burundi remain sources of tension between
Governments in the region.
53. I urge the signatory States to fully implement their commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, the objective of which is to tackle the
root causes of instability in the region. In this regard, a top priority should be to
decisively conclude the neutralization of armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Effective military cooperation between FARDC and
MONUSCO would go a long way toward realizing this important objective. Once
again, I commend the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
FARDC for their sacrifices and their actions against armed groups. I welcome the
arrangement reached on 28 January 2016 for the resumption of military cooperation
between FARDC and MONUSCO and look forward to its implementation.
54. Renewed commitment and efforts will be required by all Member States in order
to address the impact of negative forces and the challenges discussed in the present
report. I urge the signatory States to abide by their commitments under the
Framework, in particular the commitment to “neither tolerate nor provide assistance
or support of any kind to armed groups” (see S/2013/131, annex). In this regard, I am
deeply troubled by repeated allegations of recruitment, training and infiltration of
Burundian rebel groups in neighbouring countries. I encourage I CGLR member States
to investigate and address these allegations through existing regional mechanisms,
such as the Extended Joint Verification Mechanism. I encourage the Governments of
the region, particularly those of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, and Uganda, to bilaterally address the security challenges confronting their
countries, particularly issues related to armed groups and the repatriation of ex -M23. I
welcome the reports of improved judicial cooperation between the States o f the region
and trust that efforts to fight impunity will intensify in the months and years ahead.
My Special Envoy remains available to support these efforts.
55. The situation in Burundi remains a major source of concern in the absence of
an inclusive political dialogue. I deplore the continued loss of life and urge all
Burundians, especially security and defence forces, to exercise maximum restraint. I

14/16

16-03458

S/2016/232

urge the Burundian authorities to protect the rights of all Burundians and ensure that
human rights teams from the African Union and the United Nations are able to carry
out independent investigations in an expeditious manner. I encourage all concerned
stakeholders to engage in a genuine, inclusive dialogue. I commend President
Museveni of Uganda for his efforts in this regard and the Governments of Angola
and the United Republic of Tanzania, for their support. As demonstrated by the visit
of the Security Council to Burundi in January and my own visit in February, the
United Nations, together with EAC and the African Union, will continue to assist
the people of Burundi and provide technical and political support to mediation
efforts in order to return the country to the path of stability and development.
56. The past six months have seen a number of electoral processes in the Great
Lakes region. Elections will continue to be held in the region over the next two years,
and the risk of attendant instability cannot be ruled out. Electoral processes must take
place in a fair, transparent, inclusive and non-violent manner. I call on national
authorities in the region to make it a priority to prevent human rights violations and
outbreaks of violence before, during and after elections. At the same time, I urge the
people of the region to refrain from using violence to resolve electoral disputes and to
engage in constructive dialogue with their Governments instead.
57. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is entering a crucial period marked by
preparations for a national dialogue ahead of upcoming general elections. I reiterate
my call for any dialogue to be inclusive and enable stakeholders to discuss
contentious issues in a climate of openness and mutual respect. I urge all Congolese
to commit to resolving their differences through dialogue and consultations, with a
view to creating the conditions for peaceful, inclusive and credible elections in an
environment that provides adequate political space and in which human rights are
respected. I express the full support of the United Nations for the former Prime
Minister of Togo, Edem Kodjo, in his role as facilitator of the national dialogue.
58. Progress in economic cooperation will no doubt contribute significantly to
peace and confidence-building in the region. The just-concluded Great Lakes
Private Sector Investment Conference was held at an opportune moment, as it came
in the wake of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. I welcome this important initiative, which sets the stage for a new era of
economic integration in the region. I commend my Special Envoy, ICGLR, the
signatory States, and the witnesses/guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for their continued commitment to the Framewo rk.
59. I encourage the Governments of the region to create an environment conducive
to business and investments that are responsible, sustainable and aligned with the
Framework, the United Nations Global Compact and other pertinent instruments.
This is essential for long-term economic growth and confidence-building. I call on
African private sector leaders to strengthen productive capacity, create decent jobs
and livelihoods, improve economic governance and foster inclusive development
and shared prosperity to ensure durable peace and development. I call on
international partners to help integrate the region into international value chains that
transform the nature of exports from raw materials to value -added exports.
Furthermore, I invite business leaders and investors worldwide to join the people of
the Great Lakes region in building bridges to regional integration that will create
larger markets and pools of resources.

16-03458

15/16

S/2016/232

60. I welcome the efforts of my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, the
Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Technical Support Committee to reinvigorate the
governing structures of the Framework and strengthen the signatories’ ownership.
These efforts should now be translated into concrete actions and deliverables. I am
glad that the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of signatory States and the guarantors of
the Framework, at their meeting in Addis Ababa on 28 January, endorsed the
recommendations made by the Technical Support Committee to operationalize the
decisions of the Regional Oversight Mechanism.
61. Lastly, I thank my Special Envoy and his Office for their continuous efforts to
monitor and coordinate the implementation of the Framework in a challenging
regional context. I call upon the Security Council and the international community
to remain engaged and assist the signatory States with the implementation of their
commitments.

16/16

16-03458
