S/PV.7707

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7707th meeting

Wednesday, 8 June 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Ibrahim
Ms. Schwalger
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Pedros Carretero
Mr. Yelchenko
Ms. Mulvein
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the evaluation of the methods
and work of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (S/2016/441)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-16387 (E)
*1616387*

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

08/06/2016

Letter dated 17 May 2016 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2016/453)
Letter dated 17 May 2016 from the President of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2016/454)

2/31

16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the evaluation of the methods and
work of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (S/2016/441)
Letter dated 17 May 2016 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/453)
Letter dated 17 May 2016 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2016/454)

S/PV.7707

Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/441, which contains the report
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
evaluation of the methods and work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. I also wish to
draw the attention of members to document S/2016/453,
which contains the text of a letter dated 17 May 2016
from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the
President of the Security Council. I furthermore wish
to draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2016/454, which contains the text of a letter dated
17 May 2016 from the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius: I am deeply honoured to address
the Security Council once again as President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and to do so under the presidency
of France. I would like to thank the President for the
attention his country has given, and continues to give,
to the matters that the Tribunal currently has pending
before the Council.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia to participate
in this meeting.

In the Tribunal’s completion strategy report
(S/2016/454, annex), of 17 May 2016, members will find
a comprehensive statement of activity covering the past
six months. Further to that report, please allow me to
give a brief overview of the current status of the Tribunal
and measures undertaken to complete its mandate and
ensure a smooth transition to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia; Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and

We are reviewing the performance of the Tribunal’s
completion strategy at the best possible time with regard
to results. I am pleased to report that, since my previous
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7574), in December
2015, every single case scheduled to be completed
within the reporting period has been disposed of on
time. Judgments were delivered in the appeal case
of Stanišić and Simatović and in both the trials of

16-163873/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

Radovan Karadžić and Vojislav Šešelj. In addition, on
14 December 2015, the judges of the Appeals Chamber
delivered the final judgement in the largest appeal
case ever adjudicated by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, namely, the Nyiramasuhuko et al.
case, otherwise known as the Butare case. Following
those judgments, only two trial cases, involving two
individuals, and two appeal cases, involving eight
individuals, are ongoing. One of the appeals, namely,
the Stanišić and Simatović case, is scheduled to be
finally disposed of on 30 June, as I promised to the
Council in December.
In relation to the trial of Mr. Goran Hadžić,
the Council will recall that, on 26 October 2015, the
Trial Chamber found, by a majority decision, that the
accused was fit to stand trial, but decided to stay the
proceedings for an initial, renewable period of three
months and to continue his provisional release. The
prosecution appealed that decision and, on 4 March,
the Appeals Chamber, presided over by me, granted the
appeal in part. The Appeals Chamber invited, inter alia,
the Trial Chamber to reassess as promptly as possible
the accused’s fitness to stand trial. On 24 March, with
a public redacted version filed on 5 April, the Trial
Chamber found, by a majority decision, that the accused
was unfit to stand trial and stayed the proceedings
indefinitely. I can share with members of the Security
Council that I have been personally monitoring the
developments in the Hadžić case throughout this entire
period, mainly due to the advanced stage of the accused’s
illness. However, there have been developments since
the completion strategy report was issued that I would
like to update members on.
First, concerning the judges on the Bench, I
reported to the Council in May that one judge had been
transferred as of 1 May to the International Criminal
Court to assume his functions as judge there, while
remaining available at the ICTY for any pending matter
on the Hadžić case. At the same time, the two other
judges on the Bench indicated their readiness to explore
cost-neutral solutions to their remuneration during
the indefinite stay of the trial. Arrangements were in
the process of being made with both judges when, on
19 May, the Prosecutor filed a motion for the formal
termination of the proceedings in the Hadžić case.
The defence has responded, and also agrees that the
case should be terminated. I expect the Trial Chamber
to issue a decision soon, hopefully before the end of
this month.
4/31

08/06/2016

Following the delivery of appeal judements in the
Stanišić and Župljanin case and the likely termination
of the Hadžić case, the terms of office of four judges
will come to an end and the Tribunal will be left with a
total of seven judges. In line with existing downsizing
plans, staff members assigned to those cases will either
depart the Tribunal following the completion of the
cases or be reassigned to other cases.
With regard to the Mladić trial, I am very pleased
with its progress and can confirm that the existing
forecast of November 2017 remains unchanged. In
relation to the Prlić et al. appeal, I again wish to draw
to the Council’s attention the fact that the case is the
most voluminous appellate case in the history of the
Tribunal, and will require not only time but adequate,
uninterrupted resources. I can assure members that
the Appeals Chamber, with myself as presiding judge,
remains fully committed to completing the case by that
date. I am pleased to note that the projected completion
date of November 2017 has remained unchanged since
it was first reported to the Council, in the November
2012 completion strategy report, and confirmed in all
subsequent reports.
Let me now move on to contempt matters. As
the Council is aware, following the arrests of Ratko
Mladić and Goran Hadžić, in 2011, there are now no
outstanding ICTY fugitives charged with serious
violations of international humanitarian law. However,
in a pending contempt case, there are currently three
ICTY indictees whose arrest warrants are yet to be
executed: Petar Jojić, Jovo Ostojić and Vjerica Radeta.
I emphasize that the arrest warrants were issued over
16 months ago, on 19 January 2015. On 18 May 2016,
the Representative of the Republic of Serbia informed
the Trial Chamber of a first-instance ruling of the
same date, issued by a single judge of the War Crimes
Chamber of the High Court in Belgrade, which held
that the conditions for surrendering and arresting the
accused had not been met. This ruling was confirmed
on 18 May by a chamber of three judges of the same
Court, and the Republic of Serbia communicated both
rulings to the Tribunal on 20 May.
Interference with the administration of justice
strikes at the heart of what the Security Council and the
Tribunal have, together, painstakingly and at great cost
endeavoured to build since the birth of the Tribunal, and
undermines the Tribunal’s ability to carry out its work
efficiently and fairly. Significantly, the single judge
in Serbia who has now decided that the conditions for
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

transfer of the three indictees have not been met is the
same judge who eight years ago in the Petković case
decided exactly the opposite. Something is not right.
Significantly also, and contrary to its own previous
decisions, the High Court in Belgrade has now, to my
enormous surprise, affirmed that Serbia has no duty to
cooperate with the Tribunal on matters of contempt.
This is very troubling and makes it imperative for
me to express my serious concerns. I consider this
development to be a grave step backwards from the
status quo on cooperation with the Tribunal and an
unacceptable disregard of the primacy of Tribunal
law over domestic law of Serbia, mandated by the
Security Council.
The Republic of Serbia has a duty to fully cooperate
with the Tribunal in accordance with Security Council
resolutions and the statute of the Tribunal. This means
that Serbia has the duty to take any measures necessary
to implement the provisions of both Security Council
resolutions and the statute, including the obligation to
comply with requests for assistance or orders issued
by the Trial Chamber under article 29 of the Statute.
Concluding these contempt proceedings is of the utmost
importance to the Tribunal. I repeat that interference
with the administration of justice undermines the
integrity of our entire system. I remain hopeful that if
there is good will, a solution can and will be found that
will ensure compliance. On the Tribunal’s part, I can
assure Council members that everything is ready to
ensure a speedy and fair trial once those three indictees
are transferred to the Tribunal.
Turning to other matters, as Council members can,
see our trial and appeal activity is in the final stretch.
Given the Tribunal’s results in the last reporting
period, any concerns about the Tribunal’s commitment
to concluding proceedings by the end of 2017 should
be put to rest. At the same time, one serious hurdle
remains — the matter of staff retention. As previously
reported, this is an enormous challenge that cuts
across all areas of the Tribunal’s operations. While
we are fully committed to the downsizing process, I
must again stress the urgent need for the Tribunal to
be able to retain our experienced and specialized staff
members in order to complete our work on time. In
our penultimate year of operation, experienced staff
members continue to leave the Tribunal to take up more
secure employment, and there is no doubt that the rate
of attrition will increase as the end draws near.

S/PV.7707

The Tribunal is doing all it can to retain its staff,
but without appropriate assistance and concrete
measures it may face serious problems. The impact
of staff attrition will be particularly damaging in the
second half of the final year of the Tribunal. Past
Presidents and I have called upon the Secretariat, the
Security Council and the General Assembly to assist
us in implementing strategies to retain staff. I again
call upon the Council to assist us before we reach the
point of no return. As President of the Tribunal, I have
the ultimate responsibility of ensuring that all cases are
concluded and that the Tribunal itself is closed on time.
I also have the responsibility to ensure that our highly
qualified administrative and judicial staff are working
in motivating conditions that are also satisfactory at the
contractual level. Affording the Tribunal appropriate
predictability by providing staff with incentives, such
as an end-of-service grant, will be a necessity if we
are to maintain a high quality of staff and the capacity
to conclude all our judicial work on time. This last
chapter of the life of the Tribunal presents not normal
but exceptional operational circumstances that call for
or require exceptional remedies.
I take this opportunity to acknowledge the
sterling work of my colleagues — all the judges of
the Tribunal — as well as the immense contribution
made by the Tribunal’s staff in ensuring that cases are
finished on time. In particular, I would like Security
Council members to be aware of the critical role
that staff members have played towards meeting the
completion dates in the Stanišić and Simatović, Butare,
Karadžić and Šešelj cases during the reporting period.
I also want to thank staff members in the Stanišić and
Župljanin appeal, over which I preside, who have been
working literally around the clock to ensure that the
30 June 2016 target date is met. While this will not
be the last hardworking team of the Tribunal, I wish
to go on record, on behalf of my colleagues on the
Stanišić and Župljanin bench, in praising the team’s
tireless efforts and personal sacrifices in the name of
international justice. We have been very fortunate to
work with such dedicated and loyal staff. For everyone
working at the Tribunal, our work represents more than
just a paid service; it is the fulfilment of an ideal and a
contribution to justice and the promotion of peace and
security in the former Yugoslavia.
As President of the Tribunal, I am determined
to strengthen and consolidate the Tribunal’s image,
particularly throughout the former Yugoslavia. In order

16-163875/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

to ensure that the Tribunal has a truly lasting impact, its
work must be complemented by outreach and capacitybuilding efforts to increase local communities’ access
to information about its achievements, and to promote
a greater understanding of the Tribunal’s work and its
contribution to peace and justice in the region. While
primarily focusing on its core business, the Tribunal
has also been diligently working on these matters. It
is my intention to highlight and increase these efforts
during the Tribunal’s remaining life.
The Tribunal is engaged in a historic endeavour
and must continue to be supported until the very end.
We have come a long way in cementing the rule of
international law and safeguarding the fundamental
principles of peace and justice. Despite the challenges
that the Tribunal is facing, we stand committed with
the Security Council to ensure the efficient and orderly
closure of this institution by the end of 2017.
Let me conclude by expressing, on behalf of
all the judges and staff members of the ICTY, our
sincere appreciation for the continuous support of the
Governments represented on the Council. I would also
like to thank the Secretariat for its invaluable advice,
and last, but certainly not least, for the support received,
especially from the Office of Legal Affairs.
Our joint efforts to bring to justice those who
committed the most atrocious crimes in the former
Yugoslavia send a powerful message to the world. Even
though more than two decades have passed, and even
though it has been a time-consuming and laborious
process, we must and will continue to fight against the
culture of impunity and for accountability and justice.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Agius for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is an honour to appear before
the Council once again to report on the work of the
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals.
(spoke in French)
But first I wish to congratulate you, Sir, as
Ambassador of France, on your country’s accession to
the presidency of the Security Council. As a permanent
member of the Council, France plays a key role with
respect to issues of international justice, and I convey
my heartfelt wishes for success to the Security Council.
6/31

08/06/2016

(spoke in English)
I also wish to express my gratitude to the Security
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals and to offer my particular thanks to Uruguay,
which has assumed leadership of the Group. I very
much look forward to working with His Excellency
Ambassador Rosselli and Minister Patricia Benítez
going forward.
I would be remiss if I did not once again express
my sincere gratitude for the assistance provided to
the Mechanism by the Office of Legal Affairs, and in
particular by the Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, a tremendous ally for international
justice; by the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, Mr. Stephen Mathias; and by their whole team.
Finally, I wish to acknowledge both President
Carmel Agius of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the new Prosecutor
of the Mechanism, who is also the long-serving ICTY
Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz. It is a pleasure to
appear before the Council with both of them today.
I had the privilege of appearing before the Council
six months ago as the Mechanism was undergoing the
first review of its work by the Council. We appreciate
the direction and guidance of the Council as to our work
going forward as set forth in resolution 2256 (2015)
and have paid attention to those matters, as my written
report (S/2016/453, annex) demonstrates.
The past six months have seen a number of important
developments at the Mechanism. On 15 December 2015,
the ICTY Appeals Chamber delivered its judgement
in the case of Stanišić and Simatović, ordering a
retrial. Consistent with the transitional arrangements,
the Mechanism is responsible for this retrial. I have
assigned the case to a three-judge panel, and pre-trial
proceedings are already well under way.
The month of March saw the delivery of two
important trial judgements at the ICTY, in the cases
of Karadžić and Šešelj. The pre-appeal proceedings in
these cases are already under way in the Mechanism,
where I have assigned the cases to two panels of judges
in the Appeals Chamber.
During the pre-appeal proceedings in these
cases, as in the pre-trial proceedings of Stanišić and
Simatović, the full panel of judges is called upon to
take part in addressing requests only if and as needed,
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

a practice that produces substantial reductions in the
costs of judicial activities.
In addition to the three cases I have just mentioned,
the Mechanism’s judges continue to address a wide
array of requests for various forms of relief, working
on matters ranging from requests to provide assistance
to national judicial authorities, to applications alleging
contempt of court, and issuing nearly 200 decisions and
orders during the reporting period. From the Republic
of Korea to Portugal and from Madagascar to Uruguay,
the Mechanism’s judges have been active throughout
the reporting period, working remotely from their
homes and offices around the world and carrying out
their judicial functions carefully, diligently and to the
highest possible standards.
The reporting period saw a number of important
advances in other areas of Mechanism responsibility
as well. With the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in December 2015, the
Mechanism assumed responsibility for the remaining
functions of the ICTR as of 1 January 2016. Once again,
the transfer of these functions occurred seamlessly.
Preparations are under way for the Mechanism to
relocate to the new premises of the Arusha branch later
this year as the construction project nears completion.
We remain deeply appreciative of the support of the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania and
the sustained assistance from various offices of the
Secretariat in connection with the construction of the
new, minimalist facilities designed to house the Arusha
branch.
Important progress continues to be made in a
number of other areas of the Mechanism, from the
transfer of the Tribunals’ records to the Mechanism and
continued efforts to enhance access to the Tribunals’
records, to the improvement of processes related to
the provision of assistance to national jurisdictions.
The legal and regulatory framework of the Mechanism
has been strengthened and augmented during the
reporting period, with a recent amendment to the rules
of procedure and evidence and the issuance of a number
of new practice directions and policies.
The Mechanism has also continued to benefit
from regular audits by the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, and I have been personally involved, and
invested, in the ongoing study related to governance
and institutional culture. I am confident that, as was
the case with the review process, we will gain valuable

S/PV.7707

insight into how the Mechanism can become even better
as a result of this process. In the meantime, we continue
to seek to maximize efficiencies and apply innovative
new approaches to our work, such as by exploring
ways to deploy cloud computing and telecommuting
to facilitate the work of the judges carrying out their
functions remotely.
As many members of the Council may recall, when
last I appeared before the Council in December (see
S/PV.7574), the then-Prosecutor of the Mechanism,
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, reported that one of the
remaining fugitives indicted by the ICTR, Mr. Ladislas
Ntaganzwa, had been arrested. That was a significant
achievement, not just for the Mechanism, but for
international justice and for all of us who seek to
ensure accountability. In March, and consistent with
the referral of his case to the Republic of Rwanda for
trial by the ICTR, Mr. Ntaganzwa was transferred to
Rwanda. In accordance with its statute, the Mechanism
is already monitoring the proceedings in Rwanda with
regard to Mr. Ntaganzwa, thanks to the assistance of
monitors from the Kenyan section of the International
Commission of Jurists. The monitoring of the other
cases referred for trial to Rwanda and France is ongoing.
With eight fugitives remaining — of whom three
are to be tried by the Mechanism — the Mechanism’s
fugitive-tracking activities continue under the able
leadership of the Mechanism’s new Prosecutor,
Mr. Serge Brammertz. However, we cannot do this
alone. The sustained support and involvement of
Member States in relation to those tracking activities
is essential if we are to ensure that the remaining
fugitives are apprehended and thereby carry out one of
the essential functions entrusted to us.
The Mechanism is also reliant upon and deeply
grateful to those States that have agreed to enforce
sentences imposed by the ICTR, the ICTY or the
Mechanism itself. I am very pleased to announce that
a new agreement on the enforcement of sentences was
recently concluded with the Republic of Mali. That new
agreement reflects best practices in the field of detention,
including the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules
for the Treatment of Prisoners, adopted by the General
Assembly last December (resolution 70/175). I sincerely
hope that as we move ahead, additional States will step
forward and enter into such enforcement agreements,
thereby helping to expand the Mechanism’s critically
important enforcement capacity. In the meantime,
I wish to acknowledge the important cooperation

16-163877/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

and support received from the Government of the
Republic of Senegal as the final steps are being taken
to commence enforcement of sentences in Senegal.
The Mechanism continues to explore options to
address the increasingly urgent situation of the small
number of individuals in Arusha who have been
acquitted by the ICTR or who have completed their
sentences imposed by that Tribunal. However, despite
our best efforts, we are, as the Council is well aware,
dependent on the international community to help
resolve this long-standing humanitarian challenge.
Pending such resolution, the Mechanism has carefully
reviewed the broad array of support that has been
provided by the ICTR to those persons in Arusha, and is
implementing a more limited, cost-effective approach.
As we move ahead into the next two-year period of
our operations — one that will see the historic closure
of the ICTY and the transfer of all remaining functions
to the Mechanism — the Council has my pledge that
we will continue to encapsulate and promulgate best
practices, to innovate wherever possible and to seek
ever greater efficiencies, while never forgetting our
fundamental role as a court or the terrible atrocities that
led to our establishment. In doing so, I am confident that
the Mechanism will not only fulfil its responsibilities
to its predecessor tribunals, to affected communities
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, to courageous
victims and witnesses and to the Council, and do so
to the highest possible standards, but that it will also
serve as an emblem of what an international court and
a United Nations institution can and should be — an
embodiment of the international community’s profound
commitment to justice and the rule of law.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Meron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank Council members for
the opportunity to again address them on the work
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
I will first address the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICTY.
In this reporting period, judgements were issued in
three cases, bringing the ICTY closer to completing its
mandate at the end of next year. Last December, the
8/31

08/06/2016

ICTY Appeals Chamber granted my Office’s appeal
in the Stanišić and Simatović case, revoked the Trial
Chamber’s judgement and ordered a retrial. In March
this year, the ICTY Trial Chamber unanimously
convicted Radovan Karadžić of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. He was sentenced
to 40 years of imprisonment. Also in March this year,
the ICTY Trial Chamber by majority acquitted Vojislav
Šešelj of the charges against him. The Mechanism has
appealed the acquittal. Further proceedings in all three
of those cases will be conducted by the Mechanism,
in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010) and the
transitional arrangements.
My Office looks forward to the delivery of the
appeal judgment in the Stanišić and Župljanin case at
the end of this month. In relation to the Prlić appeal, we
are continuing our preparations for the appeal hearing,
which is anticipated next spring. We also continued our
work in our two final trials, those of Ratko Mladić and
Goran Hadžić. In the Mladić trial, the defence is in the
final phase of presenting its evidence. It is anticipated
that the final defence witness will be heard this month,
and that closing arguments by both parties will be
presented this fall. In the Hadžić trial, three weeks
ago my Office filed a motion for termination of the
proceedings. At this time, we see no alternative but to
take that step.
In this final phase of the Tribunal’s work,
State cooperation remains essential to enabling the
completion of our mandate. That includes my Office’s
access to documents, archives and witnesses in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. My Office
regrets that Serbia has turned away from the path of
full cooperation with the Tribunal. As the President
reported this morning, for a year and a half Serbia has
failed to execute the Tribunal’s arrest warrants and
transfer three indictees to the Tribunal’s custody. It
should be noted that in the past, Serbia executed arrest
warrants in similar contempt cases without problem or
significant delay.
Unfortunately, that is unfortunately not the only
reason for concern. It is troubling that Serbia has not
yet appointed a new Chief War Crimes Prosecutor,
despite having had at least a year to do so. It is difficult
to understand why that crucial position remains vacant.
And Serbia has not yet executed the sentence imposed
by the Bosnian State Court in the Djukić case, which
is widely recognized as an important test of Serbia’s
commitment to regional cooperation.
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

While my Office welcomed before the Council
the adoption of National Strategy for the Prosecution
of War Crimes for the Period 2016-2020, the overall
situation raises legitimate doubts that Serbia has a real
commitment to the goal of impartial accountability for
war crimes. The continued glorification of convicted
war criminals in that country compounds those doubts.
It is now up to Serbia to demonstrate that it will honour
its pledges to cooperate with the Tribunal, support
accountability for war crimes and promote effective
regional cooperation.
In regard to the Category II cases transferred
by my Office to national prosecutors in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, prosecutorial decisions have been taken
in all but one case. Indictments have been confirmed
and trial proceedings are now under way. For some
Category II cases, Bosnian prosecutors have sought
cooperation from Croatia. A number of delays
and miscommunications have, however, prevented
meaningful progress so far. My Office calls upon the
Croatian Government to review its policy in relation to
regional cooperation and to facilitate the processing of
war crimes cases in the region. We will continue to liaise
with our counterparts and to monitor developments.
As my Office has reported, in recent years there
have been many positive developments in national war
crimes justice and regional cooperation. Unfortunately,
the political situation throughout the region is moving in
the opposite direction. Too many politicians and public
figures are denying well-established truths, inflaming
ethnic tensions and repeating nationalistic slogans of
the past. What would have been difficult to imagine
just a few years ago is sadly commonplace today. As a
result, the positive trend in regional cooperation in war
crimes justice appears to be reversing.
Turning to the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, this reporting period marked the beginning
of trial and appeal activities in The Hague. As discussed
in more detail in my written report (S/2016/453, annex
II), appeal proceedings have commenced in two
Mechanism cases, Karadžić and Šešelj, and pretrial
proceedings have commenced in the Stanišić and
Simatović case.
Consistent with the Security Council’s directions,
the Mechanism’s Office of the Prosecutor has utilized
double-hatting and roster arrangements in order to
ensure that the transition of responsibilities from the

S/PV.7707

ICTY is smooth and cost-efficient. While respecting the
different mandates of the two institutions, the one-office
approach that has been put in place now allows staff to be
flexibly deployed across both institutions, without the
need to conduct time-consuming recruitment exercises.
These measures have permitted the Mechanism’s Office
of the Prosecutor to carry out its ad hoc activities while
remaining a small, temporary and efficient structure.
With regard to activities in Arusha, my Office has
continued to monitor the cases referred and transferred
to the national courts of France and Rwanda. In one
case referred to Rwanda, the trial judgement was
delivered in December 2015, convicting the accused
and sentencing him to life imprisonment. My Office
commends the Rwandan National Public Prosecution
Authority for its work on this case. We now look forward
to the expeditious completion of the appeal, as well as
the trials in the two other referred cases. With respect
to the two cases referred to France, I received updates
on the status of those cases during my mission to Paris
a few weeks ago. My Office will continue to liaise
with French authorities and encourage the expeditious
completion of those cases.
The Mechanism’s Office of the Prosecutor is also
firmly focused on locating and securing the arrests
of the remaining eight fugitives indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
including the arrest warrants against Kabuga, Mpiranya
and Bizimana. Beginning in March, we reviewed
our tracking efforts and strategy, as part of which we
redeployed resources from within existing capacity to
provide further support. We also identified new avenues
to pursue. My Office notes that State cooperation and
the Council’s support remain essential to locating and
arresting fugitives.
The truth of what happened during the Rwandan
genocide has been repeatedly established in the ICTR’s
judgments. Yet, today, genocide denial continues. To
safeguard future generations, it is essential that there be
education about the dangers of genocide ideology and
discrimination. My Office urges all States to actively
promote the truth and to stand against revisionism in
all its forms.
In conclusion, the transition of responsibilities
from the ICTY to the Mechanism continues, as foreseen
in Security Council resolutions. My Office will
also continue, within existing resources, to monitor
and support national courts prosecuting war crimes

16-163879/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. In
accordance with the completion strategies, greater
accountability now depends on the ability of national
criminal courts to continue the work of the ICTY and
ICTR.
Finally, to support national justice efforts, it is
important that we disseminate our experiences and
lessons learned in the prosecution of these crimes. In
that regard, my Office hopes that our publication on
prosecuting conflict-related sexual violence, which was
launched yesterday, is a helpful tool.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Brammertz
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to express appreciation for the comprehensive
briefings on the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals delivered by
President Carmel Agius, President President Theodor
Meron and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate Judge Theodor Meron on
the renewal of his mandate as President of the Residual
Mechanism and Mr. Brammertz on his appointment as
Prosecutor of the Mechanism.
As current Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, I congratulate my predecessor,
Ambassador Cristián Barros Melet, and his entire team
for their excellent work leadingh the Informal Working
Group over the past two years. I also appreciate the
ongoing support of the Office of Legal Affairs and the
United Nations Secretariat in fulfilling this task.
I wish to express Uruguay’s firm commitment to
the work of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the Residual Mechanism.
My country recognizes their important contribution
to international justice in situations of crimes against
humanity, war crimes and crimes of genocide, as
well as their contribution to national reconciliation
in the countries concerned. We note with satisfaction
the progress achieved in the judicial activities of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and
we welcome the forecast that these activities will be
concluded by the end of 2017.
We welcome the fact that since the arrest of Ratko
Mladić and Goran Hadzić in 2011, no other fugitives
have been accused by the Tribunal of grave violations
10/31

08/06/2016

of international humanitarian law. We take note of the
pending challenges of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia in carrying out their completion
strategies and the difficulties encountered along the
way. The problem of staff retention, especially of
middle- and high-level officials, was clearly described
by President Agius, and his call for attention should be
heard. Impediments to effective cooperation have also
been highlighted by the President and Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Political obstacles, technical difficulties, the
lack of a regional legal framework are some of the
reasons behind the situation. Faced with this, we must
immediately open dialogue to find possible solutions,
in particular in relation to the lack of information on
arrest warrants, as noted in the report (S/2016/454,
annex I). We also note Prosecutor Brammertz’s
statement concerning the lack of information on the
disappeared, which represents for their families one of
the main problems to be solved.
Uruguay recognizes the importance of making
progress in identifying human remains and understands
that it is not just an obligation to the victims’ families,
but that it also serves as a vital step towards national
reconciliation. This conviction is based on my own
country’s recent experience. We went through the
processes of truth, justice, recognition and reparations
in order to move along the path to national reconciliation.
In regard to the Residual Mechanism, Uruguay is
pleased to note that the forecast timeline of its legal
activities are the same as those provided in the previous
report of November 2015 (S/2015/883, annex I) with a
few provisos in the latest report (S/2016/453, annex I).
That means that, without prejudice to the Tribunal’s
particular manner of operating or the unforeseen or
extraordinary events that may arise to affect it, there is
a timeline that remains in effect, which we interpret to
be a positive sign.
We recognize and value the important work of the
Mechanism in supporting and protecting witnesses,
in sentence enforcement and in monitoring the cases
that have been forwarded by the ICTY and the ICTR
to national jurisdictions. We take note of the priority
that the Mechanism is giving to the search for and
prosecution of the eight persons indicted by the ICTR
who remain fugitives, as well as the importance of the
cooperation of States to achieving those ends and to
enforcing sentences, to having access to documents and
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

files and to reaching witnesses. We therefore take note
of the appeal to the international community to reflect
on measures that could be taken to encourage States to
cooperate.
We would make a similar appeal with respect to
the problems posed by the reintegration of released or
acquitted persons and to the dialogue the Mechanism
is undertaking with the States that have indicated their
willingness to receive one or more of those persons. In
that regard, we welcome and especially appreciate the
efforts and the arrangements made by the President of
the Mechanism.
Finally, we would like to express our full readiness
to consider any new and updated proposal that the
authorities of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the Mechanism consider
to be of interest in the search for a solution to those
and other problems. As Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Criminal Tribunals, we are
committed to making every effort to achieve that end.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
welcomes today’s briefing on the International Criminal
Tribunals, organized by the French presidency of the
Security Council.
I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY); Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I especially the
judges for their respective reports (S/2016/453, annex
and S/2016/454, annex) and for their comprehensive
briefings on the work of the Tribunals and on their
completion strategies. I also wish to congratulate
Ambassador Elbio Rosselli, Permanent Representative
of Uruguay, and his team for their outstanding
work at the helm of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
In order to adjudicate the most serious crimes
committed in Rwanda and the Balkans, the Security
Council established the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The two courts,
guided by the principles of fairness, impartiality and
independence, have upheld respect for the rule of
law, supported capacity-building at the national level,

S/PV.7707

and made contributions to the processes of justice
and reconciliation that have been essential for the
achievement of peace.
We are pleased at the ICTY’s fundamental role
in strengthening the rule of law and in promoting
long-term stability and reconciliation in the Western
Balkans. In addition, its jurisprudence has contributed
to the development of international criminal law in
such areas as individual criminal responsibility and
sexual violence. Similarly, we welcome the crucial
work of the ICTR, which has helped to bring justice to
the victims of the genocide in Rwanda by having the
main perpetrators of these atrocities answer for their
actions.
The substantial contributions of both Tribunals
to the development of international criminal justice,
the assignment of responsibility and the restoration of
the rule of law in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
are beyond a shadow of a doubt. That is also the case
with respect to the Tribunals’ strong commitment
to fighting impunity for all those responsible for the
serious violations of international humanitarian law
that occurred in those two genocides. The International
Mechanism, called to perform the residual functions
of the Tribunals when it was established by resolution
1966 (2010), inherited that commitment. This unique
entity, which was intended to be small and efficient
and with a temporary mission, has also given us many
reasons to be satisfied.
We acknowledge the crucial role played by these
institutions and the work of the authorities who lead
them. We reiterate our support for them as we call
for greater efficiency, performance and streamlining
in their activities. While we are aware of its heavy
workload and significant efforts made to reduce delay,
we nevertheless encourage the ICTY to take the steps
needed to complete its work within the agreed time. We
therefore share Prosecutor Brammertz’s concern about
staff attrition and congratulate him on the steps taken
by his Office to strengthen the capacity of judicial
institutions. I am thinking in particular of the training
of prosecutors for national jurisdictions.
We reaffirm that the International Criminal
Tribunals have played a historic role in the fight
against impunity. We are convinced that there can be
no lasting peace without justice, which is why the case
of the remaining fugitives is of particular concern. We
therefore call on States, particularly those in which the

16-1638711/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

fugitives might be found, to intensify their efforts to
arrest them so that they can be prosecuted. In addition,
the issue of relocating the eight persons who have been
acquitted and the three others who have been released
after serving their sentences and who remain in Arusha
is challenging, and therefore deserves our full attention.
I would like to conclude by saying a few words on
the issue of the enforcement of sentences, which was
raised by Judge Meron. Senegal has recovered control
of eight jail cells refurbished by the ICTR in a facility
that meets international prison standards, and we are
committed to making them fully operational as soon
as possible.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank the President for
organizing today’s important debate.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Judge Meron
and Mr. Brammertz for their recent appointments as the
President and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, respectively. My
delegation is grateful for the comprehensive briefings
by the Presidents of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals as well by
the Prosecutor from both institutions.
Malaysia welcomes the significant progress made
by the International Criminal Tribunals during the
reporting period. In particular, we acknowledge the
closure of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) last December, after the Appeals
Chamber delivered its judgement in the Nyiramasuhuko
et al. (“Butare”) case. We are also encouraged by the
smooth transfer of the ICTR’s functions to the Residual
Mechanism.
The closure of the ICTR after two decades of
unyielding and dedicated efforts by the international
community to ensure justice for the victims of the
genocide in Rwanda constitutes a lasting legacy for
international criminal justice and the global fight
against impunity. We applaud the professionalism and
commitment by all those who were involved in the
successful conclusions and transitions of the ICTR.
With the transfer of the ICTR’s remaining cases and
functions to the Residual Mechanism, we urge Member
States to continue to support the Mechanism, especially
in addressing outstanding challenges, among other
things. Cooperation by the international community is
crucial to tracking the eight remaining fugitives indited
by the ICTR, to enforcing sentences and to relocating
12/31

08/06/2016

those who have served their sentences or been acquitted
by the Tribunal.
Turning to the ICTY, we welcome the delivery of
judgments in the Karadžić and Šešelj cases last March.
In the case Prosecutor v. Goran Hadžić, we take note
of the briefing by the ICTY President and look forward
to reasonable, just and practical conclusions by the
Chamber in view of the inability of the Tribunal to
continue with the proceedings due to the health of the
accused. On the whole, Malaysia is reassured by the
commitment expressed by the President of the ICTY
that the judicial work of the Tribunal remains on track to
be completed by November 2017. We also acknowledge
the intensified efforts by the Tribunal to implement its
completion strategy within the stipulated time frame.
That includes the implementation of double hatting in
one of its approaches to integrate the staff and resources
of the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism.
With regard to the continuing delay by Serbia to
transfer three indictees to the ICTY for contempt
charges, Malaysia urges full and immediate cooperation
with the Tribunal, as obligated under the statute of the
Tribunal. Prolonging the matter, especially against the
backdrop of increasingly revisionist sentiment and the
politicization of the proceedings in the region, would
send the wrong signal to the international community
on its commitment to justice and the rule of law.
On a similar note, we call on the relevant Member
States of the former Yugoslavia to intensify the pace
and effectiveness of war crimes prosecutions where the
national authorities for cases being referred to national
jurisdictions.
Malaysia also takes note of the evaluation report
(S/2016/441) by the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on matters and work pertaining to the ICTY. We urge
the ICTY to seriously consider the recommendations
in the report. However, the exercise should not divert
resources away from the Tribunal’s main mandate to
conclude its remaining proceedings by the end of next
year, particularly at this crucial stage.
As the first war crimes court created by the
United Nations and the first international war tribunal
since the Nuremberg Tribunal and the International
Military Tribunal for the Far East, the ICTY has laid
the foundations for international criminal justice and
changed the landscape of international humanitarian
law. We therefore believe that the Tribunal should
continue to share its experiences and best practices
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

with the international community. In that regard,
Malaysia welcomes the book launched by the Office
of the Deputy Secretary last week focusing on the
prosecutions of conflict-related sexual violence at the
ICTY.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Malaysia’s
full support for the international criminal tribunals
in ensuring accountability for the perpetrators of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Over 20 years
have passed since the atrocities were committed, but
our commitment to justice must not waver. We owe it
to the victims and their loved ones to provide closure,
justice and accountability for the atrocities committed
against them. Their hopes and prayers must never be
left unanswered.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, and Judge Carmel Agius, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would also like to welcome
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would
also like to thank them for all their efforts and for their
comprehensive briefings.
The Security Council, when it established the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the ICTY, wished to underline the importance
of the rule of law, to show that the international
community was serious about countering war crimes
and crimes against humanity, to ensure accountability
for the perpetrators of such crimes and to underline the
importance of fighting impunity at the international
level.
The two Tribunals have done an excellent job
in completing their tasks of tracking the accused,
protecting witnesses and ensuring compensation for
the victims, as well as fair trials. The ICTR concluded
its work at the end of last year, and it is expected that
the ICTY will also conclude its work at the end of next
year. Therefore, the Residual Mechanism, with its two
branches in The Hague and Arusha, would receive
the pending cases from those two Tribunals. In that
context, we would like to underscore our appreciation
and satisfaction with all the efforts undertaken to
ensure a smooth transition.

S/PV.7707

The international community must realize that
accountability is not just a duty to respect the rights
of the victims and hold criminals accountable for their
crimes. Those two elements are extremely important,
but it should also be a preventive mechanism to
ensure that deplorable crimes against humanity are
not repeated. It should be a message of warning to all
those who might believe that human life and dignity
can be taken lightly. Such individuals should know that
they will never be safe from punishment and that such
crimes will not be subject to any statute of limitations
and will not be tolerated.
Despite all that, many horrific crimes continue to
take place throughout the world. Our work is therefore
far from finished. The international community must
address with attention, impartiality and justice all
those horrors without regard for their narrow political
interests, because respect for humanity is above any
other priority. We must send a single unambiguous
message with regard to grave violations of international
humanitarian law that tells perpetrators that their deeds
will not go unpunished and that the rights the victims
will be protected.
Achieving the objectives for which the two Tribunals
were established depends on the Council’s support
and the full cooperation of all Members of the United
Nations, including in tracking the three fugitives from
the ICTR, who have now become the responsibility of
the Residual Mechanism. The international community
should continue to track them until they are brought
to justice. Also, there is the important issue of the
relocation of those who have either been acquitted or
whose sentences have been served. In that context, I
would like to underline that Egypt fully supports the
work of the Residual Mechanism and highlights the
importance of the optimum utilization of financial and
administrative resources to facilitate its work in the
best possible manner.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we
welcome the presence and participation of Judge Carmel
Agius, Judge Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz. We thank them for the valuable briefing
they have provided in compliance with resolutions 1534
(2004) and 1966 (2010).
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism

16-1638713/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

for Criminal Tribunals in their efforts to bring to justice
the perpetrators of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes committed during the conflicts that
affected the territories of the former Yugoslavia and
whose violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights led to many victims.
The work conducted by the tribunals reaffirms the
commitment of the international community to combat
impunity with respect to war crimes and crimes against
humanity in order to ensure that such acts are never
repeated. Such efforts contribute to strengthening the
rule of law at the international level, particularly the
international justice system.
With respect to the process of closing the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia at the
end of 2017, we support the progress made by that body
in the past six months in handling the cases under its
jurisdiction. We therefore encourage the Tribunal to
continue its work in compliance with the timetable set
for completing its mandate.
It is noteworthy that cooperation on the part of
the States is essential in ensuring compliance with the
goals set forth in resolution 1966 (2010).
These judicial organs have played a positive role in
expressing the will of the international community to
ensure justice on behalf of the victims of the heinous
crimes committed during the armed conflict that
affected the territories of the former Yugoslavia by way
of prosecuting those responsible for such regrettable
acts.
This year marks the twenty-third anniversary of
the establishment of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. Its significant contribution to the
rule of law, international justice and the fight against
impunity is important in the regional reconciliation
process. We urge those States to continue efforts to
strengthen the rule of law at the international level with
a focus on an impartial, transparent and independent
judiciary.
In that context, we welcome the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia’s conclusion of
proceedings against 151 of the 161 indictees, including
two first-instance trials and two appeals still pending.
The results achieved clearly demonstrated the efficiency
and transparency of its working methods.
With respect to the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we welcome the
14/31

08/06/2016

judgment against Radovan Karadžić for genocide,
crimes against humanity and violations of the laws
or customs of war, by which he was sentenced to 40
years imprisonment. It is indeed a landmark decision
in the fight against impunity and the application of
justice in accordance with due process. Similarly,
on 31 March, the Tribunal acquitted Vojislav Šešelj,
President of the Serbian Radical Party and former
member of the Assembly of the Republic of Serbia, of
all charges against him. The ICTY Trial Chamber and
the Prosecutor’s Office appealed the decision. In both
cases the appeal procedures fall under the jurisdiction
of the Residual Mechanism to diligently and effectively
decide the issues, while maintaining the principles of
due process and judicial impartiality.
In reaffirming the independence and autonomy
of the international tribunals, we believe that the
politicization of the judicial process compromises the
transparency and objectivity of their decisions. The
prosecution of all of those, without exception, who
are responsible for committing crimes in violation
of human rights and international humanitarian
law is necessary to strengthen the credibility of the
international tribunals.
We share the concerns expressed by the President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
about staffing. We reiterate that the continued
employment of its officers is essential for the Tribunal
to complete its mandate within the set time limit in the
context of the application of justice.
However, in terms of progress in the cases under
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, we note some procedural
challenges related primarily to gaps in critical personnel
in achieving the mandate of that body. We hope that such
difficulties will be overcome in order not to impede the
conclusion of the ongoing trials within the set timeline.
Moreover, we note the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (S/2016/441), which conducted an
evaluation of the methods and work of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in implementing the
completion strategy in accordance with resolution 2256
(2015), with a view to the Tribunal’s implementation
of measures to achieve its objectives that will neither
divert resources nor weaken its functions. All of that
is necessary to facilitate the fulfilment of its mandate
in the smooth transfer of files and contempt cases, and
the Residual Mechanism’s protection of victims and
witnesses.
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Theodor Meron
as President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, and we commend the work of
the Mechanism to date, including the development of a
legal and regulatory framework, procedures and work
practices that conform to the mandate of the Mechanism
and are based on lessons learned and best practices of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
and other tribunals.
Finally, we highlight the contribution of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in strengthening international criminal justice and
support the prompt and efficient completion of its work
in accordance with the agreed timeline and budget to
facilitate closure and complete the transition to the
Residual Mechanism — all in order to promote the rule
of law and end impunity in the fight against genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, thereby
strengthening international peace and security.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank President Agius and
President Meron for their briefings on the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
In the past six months, the ICTY continued to
make progress in its work, delivering judgments in the
Radovan Karadžić and Vojislav Šešelj cases. It also
delivered a final judgment in the case Prosecutor v.
Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović. The Appeals
Chamber delivered the final judgment in the appeal of
the Nyiramasuhuko et al. case (“Butare” case). China
appreciates the above work and hopes that, under
the leadership of President Agius, the Tribunal will
continue to improve efficiency and accelerate its work
with a view to completing its work by the end of 2017.
Pursuant to resolution 2256 (2015), the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) conducted
an evaluation on the methods and work of the ICTY
completion process and provided a number of valuable
recommendations. China thanks OIOS for its work and
believes that, based on its report (S/2016/441) and the
aim of accommodating the specifics of the Tribunal, it
is imperative that the ICTY take measures to improve
its work based on the report’s recommendations. China
hopes that any progress achieved in that regard will be
reflected in the Tribunal’s next report.

S/PV.7707

With respect to the issues that have arisen in the
context of the specific cooperation between the ICTY
and Serbia, it is China’s hope that the two sides will
continue consultations with a view to resolving those
issues.
China has noted the various activities, including
judicial activities, carried out by the Residual
Mechanism in the reporting period and views
positively the measures undertaken by the Mechanism,
including the “one-office” approach and double-hatting
arrangements. It is hoped that the Mechanism will
draw on best practices and lessons learned of other
international tribunals, including the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the ICTY to continue
improving efficiency and reducing costs, so as to live
up to the Council’s expectation for the Mechanism to be
small, temporary and efficient.
The ICTY and the Residual Mechanism
represent an important effort on the part of the
international community in the fight against impunity,
demonstrating its firm determination to support rule
of law at the international level. China will continue
to support the two institutions in the hope that they
will further strengthen and improve their work with a
view to meeting the expectations of the international
community.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity
to thank Uruguay, as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, and the Office of
Legal Affairs for their work.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I, too, thank
the Presidents and Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their briefings and reiterate New Zealand’s
strong support for their work.
As noted by colleagues this morning already,
the past few months have seen several important
developments regarding the completion of the work of the
Tribunals. They include the conviction and sentencing
of Radovan Karadžić and the arrest of International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) fugitive Ladislas
Ntaganzwa in the Democratic Republic of Congo and his
imminent transfer to Rwanda for trial. We hope further
progress can be made in apprehending those ICTR
fugitives who remain at large, and encourage States to
continue their cooperation with the Mechanism in that
regard.

16-1638715/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

The ICTY will be able to achieve its completion
strategy only if all the relevant States comply with their
obligations under resolution 827 (1993). We are aware
that Serbia faces some challenges, but we encourage
the Government to maintain its positive record of
cooperation with the Tribunal.
The Office of Internal Oversight Services report
(S/2016/441) evaluating the implementation of the
ICTY completion strategy between 2010 and 2015
paints a mixed picture of the Tribunal’s performance.
In response, the ICTY questioned the application
of a results-based management approach to judicial
institutions and the impact it could have on judicial
independence and the right to a fair trial.
New Zealand has some sympathy with the ICTY’s
concerns. We accept that the Tribunal has room
for improvement in some aspects, and that some
administrative and other problems could have been
avoided. However, we believe that the central priority
for ICTY should remain the completion of its work
by the end of 2017. At this late stage in the Tribunal’s
life cycle, a pragmatic approach to addressing the
deficiencies identified by the Office is required. It is
more important that lessons learned from the report
are gathered and that they feed into the work of the
Mechanism and future tribunals.
We hear the Tribunal’s call for future reviews to
be given sufficient time and to have a sharper focus on
substantive issues. We also note its view on the need to
take into account the unique nature of the institution,
its judicial mandate and factors outside its control. The
Tribunal’s suggestion that a more productive approach
would be to develop benchmarks for assessing the
efficiency and effectiveness of international judicial
institutions is worthy of consideration.
Also worthy of consideration is its suggestion to
undertake a serious analysis of the factors affecting
judicial efficiency. Agreement on the best approach
will be needed prior to the evaluation of the Mechanism
in two years’ time. The Mechanism’s first review
has been completed. Overall, we believe it should be
commended for its work to date. It is clearly mindful
of the Security Council’s vision for it as a small,
temporary and efficient structure whose functions and
size will diminish over time. We are pleased at the
Mechanism’s efforts to maximize its effectiveness and
efficiency by drawing on best practices and lessons
learned from the ICTR, the ICTY and other tribunals.
16/31

08/06/2016

Efforts to pursue new processes and working methods
and maintain flexibility in staff assignments, including
through the effective use of remote working practices,
deserve acknowledgement.
There are, however, ongoing challenges. The
Council’s resolution 2256 (2015), adopted in December,
encouraged the Mechanism and the Government of
Rwanda to collaborate on matters related to the legacy
of the ICTR, including in respect of access to archives.
We hope there will be further progress on resolving
the archives issue. We also note the ongoing question
of how and where the 14 Rwandans in the safe house
in Arusha should be relocated. We would encourage
the Mechanism to develop a process for risk-based
assessments in that regard. Such a process could be
used for other situations, including in relation to those
finishing their sentences outside of Rwanda.
It is important that the Council maintain its support
for the ICTY through to the end of its mandate and
that it support the Mechanism. Issues such as the need
for an incentive structure must be addressed to avoid
delays due to staff attrition later on. But more broadly,
there is a need to have a serious conversation about how
to practically, sustainably and cost-efficiently ensure
accountability for serious international crimes. Part of
that conversation should be about how the Council can
do better in ensuring practical support to the machinery
for international justice, and thus assist in expediting
that work. In those conversations, we need to face up to
the reality that real justice has real costs. It always has.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have studied the report of the President
Carmel Agius of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) (S/2016/454,
annex), and the report of President Theodor Meron of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals with regard to the state of affairs of the bodies
they head over the past six months.
It is encouraging that the ICTY report contains
no direct information on further lags in judicial
proceedings. Nevertheless, we would like to recall that
resolutions 2193 (2014) and 2256 (2015) called upon the
Tribunal not only to not delay proceedings but also to
take look at accelerating the cases under its jurisdiction.
It is unfortunate that has not happened yet. Furthermore,
the Tribunal is duly resourced, including with staffing
and financial resources, so as to expediently conclude
its work.
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

Against that backdrop, we are worried about the
report’s hinting at possible further hindrances in the
work of the ICTY. We think that the case of Goran
Hadžić could have long since been terminated for
humanitarian reasons, which in this case are irrefutable.
Doing so would optimize the work of the ICTY and
would allow for resources to be reallocated to other
cases. That way, there would be no reason to talk about
the impossibility of accurate forecasting of the dates for
terminating this case.
With regard to the contempt case initiated by
the Tribunal in the framework of the concluded
proceedings against Mr. Šešelj, this type of case is not
part of the Tribunal’s fundamental functions, nor is
it decreed in the ICTY charter approved by Security
Council resolutions. The jurisdiction in that regard
has been instated by the Tribunal through its rules of
procedure. In that regard, the ongoing operations of the
ICTY due to what the report terms contempt cases are
inadmissible by definition. There is a need to find other
solutions.
In implementation of resolution 2256 (2015), the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) audited
the work of the ICTY regarding implementation of the
completion strategy. The conclusions of the inspectors
are dismal. As noted in paragraph 54, the Tribunal
failed to focus its work on a results-based strategy
and to set clear goals for itself regarding time frames.
On the whole, we agree with the recommendations of
the OIOS auditors. The Office identified clear issues,
which we have raised in the Security Council on several
occasions.
In that regard, we were taken aback by the Tribunal’s
negative reaction to the OIOS recommendations and by
its refusal to implement them. We do not agree with the
reference in the ICTY comments to the unique features
of the Tribunal’s mandate. The difficult tasks facing the
Tribunal are no justification for breaking with generally
agreed upon standards of justice, including those
relating to reasonable time frames for legal proceedings.
Paragraph 11 of resolution 2256 (2015) instructs the
Tribunal to report on the implementation of the OIOS
recommendations in its future reports. We urge the
ICTY to study and implement the recommendations of
that oversight body. We would like to see substantive
reporting on the matter in the next ICTY report.
Our delegation will follow closely the proceedings
of the Residual Mechanism to ensure that there are

S/PV.7707

no further mishaps in its activities. At this stage we
think that the report of the Mechanism is not fully
in keeping with the requirements of paragraph 20
of resolution 2256 (2015). In particular, the report
contains no information on the staffing structure of
the Mechanism or any details about the workload and
related expenditures. Forecasts about the length of legal
proceedings are really just estimates, and there is no
information about other residual functions.
It should be recalled that the Mechanism was set
up as a temporary and streamlined body. The period
for its work is not determined by the Mechanism, but
by the Security Council. Extending the operation of
the Mechanism is subject to the Council’s review of
its activities. We believe it would be appropriate to
consider the OIOS conclusions during the next review,
among other things.
Ms. Pedros Carretero (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour once again to have with us the Presidents
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and of the International Residual Mechanism
and the Prosecutor for both bodies. I congratulate Judge
Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz on their respective
appointments. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank the Ambassador of Uruguay and his entire
team for their outstanding work at the helm of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals. I
also thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their detailed briefings on the work of the Tribunal over
the past six months, which have included very notable
progress.
The sentencing of Radovan Karadžić illustrates
that it is possible to bring to justice those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law. As
stated by the Government of Spain in a press release on
that occasion, his sentencing was
“a resolute response to condemnable acts rooted in
violent, exclusionary nationalism”.
It is noteworthy that the three sentences handed down
in the reporting period took place in the time frame
stipulated in the previous report. That is a positive
sign that attests to the credibility of the Tribunal’s
commitment to abide by the December 2017 completion
date. We note that the circumstances are not easy, but
we urge the Tribunal and its personnel not to let up in
their efforts. The Tribunal’s proposals for addressing
the ongoing loss of essential qualified personnel in
this final stage should be duly considered. The support

16-1638717/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

of the United Nations and of the Security Council
continues to be essential in order that the Tribunal can
complete its mandate.
We cannot fail to express our concern about
the decrease in cooperation with the Tribunal by the
States of the former Yugoslavia, as well as about
the insufficient number, pace and effectiveness that
continue to characterize the trials under way at the
national level. That is specifically the case with regard
to cases of mid- and high-level accused. Once again, we
agree with the Prosecutor that more can, and should be,
done. We urge those Governments to take the necessary
measures to that end.
Combating impunity is, and should be, a joint
undertaking. As important as it might be, the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia cannot alone serve the goal of ensuring
justice and accountability for those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law during the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia. As the Tribunal’s
closing date approaches, therefore, it is more important
than ever that national judicial systems take over
in order to continue the effort carried out to date by
the international community as a whole. That is an
inescapable responsibility, both out of respect for the
victims and as a legacy to future generations.
Serbia, which on many ocassions has cooperated
with the Tribunal in its more than two decades of
operation, should continue to do so and carry out the
three arrest and surrender orders issued in January
2015. Respect for the rule of law at the national and
international levels alike demands compliance with the
Tribunal’s decisions, including those with which one
may disagree.
Just a few weeks from concluding its initial
period of operations, the Residual Mechanism has
consolidated itself as small, temporary and efficient
structure, thereby meeting the Council’s mandate. Its
active cooperation with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services is evidence of its determined commitment
to a model of international criminal justice that is
compatible with seeking efficiency while also ensuring
due process guarantees for the accused. We hope that
trend will continue as this new phase of intensive and
important judicial activity gets under way.
We urge the Mechanism not to give up on its efforts
to find the eight persons indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda whose whereabouts
18/31

08/06/2016

remain unknown. During the previous debate here in
the Council (see S/PV.7574) we learned of the arrest of
Mr. Ntaganzwa, whose handover to Rwanda is excellent
news. However, it is not enough. We reiterate our call
to States where fugitives may be found or that may
have information as to their whereabouts to cooperate
without delay in finding, arresting and immediately
handing them over to the Mechanism or to Rwandan
authorities. Every day they remain at large is a genuine
affront to their victims.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Spain’s
firm commitment to international criminal justice and
our resolute support for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and for the Residual
Mechanism. In the face of the impunity that prevails
in the majority of today’s conflicts, their work helps
us to continue to have faith in justice. Their legacy
goes beyond Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. It is a
vindication of the dignity of all victims in all conflicts.
It is a source for hope that, in spite difficulties, justice
is possible.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to warmly
welcome Presidents Theodor Meron and Carmel Agius
and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz. I thank them for
their comprehensive briefings. Let me also express our
support for their professional and dedicated service.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Elbio Rosselli of
Uruguay for his work as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.
When, in early 1990s, the Security Council created
two ad hoc Tribunals to try alleged perpetrators of
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
they found themselves in largely unchartered waters.
The Tribunals faced countless challenges, including
the need to further develop international criminal
jurisprudence, ensure compliance with international
human rights standards to undergird legitimacy and
credibility, address such issues as prosecuting senior
officials and gathering evidence for crimes that
had occurred hundreds, or even thousands, of miles
away, and many others. Yet the achievements of the
Tribunals in the fight against impunity and delivering
justice to victims are remarkable. And we can say with
confidence that they succeeded in accomplishing their
mandates and in paving the way for a major change in
the functioning of the international justice system.
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

We welcome the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda,on 31 December 2015, and the
take over by the Residual Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals of all its files. The International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is
also on its way to concluding its functions. We hail the
tremendous work both institutions have accomplished
and their invaluable contribution to the development of
international criminal law.
We note with satisfaction the ICTY’s significant
progress in completing its work during the reporting
period by delivering a number of judgments, including
the recent conclusion of the trial of Radovan Karadzic.
That decision is clear evidence that those violating
principles of international humanitarian law will be
brought to justice sooner or later.
The number of concluded proceedings by the
ICTY — 151 out of 161 — is a confirmation of the
efficiency of the Tribunal. Taking into account that by
the end of June 2016 only two trials and one appeal case
will remain pending, we would like express our gratitude
to staff members of the Tribunal for their hard work and
dedication. In this context, we are concerned over staff
attrition, as noted by the President of the ICTY in his
report (S/2016/454, annex), and acknowledge the efforts
of the Tribunal to resolve this issue. This problem is
expected to become acute as the Tribunal approaches
the end of its mandate. We therefore encourage the
Tribunal to maintain all measures to minimize the
impact of this challenging situation on the ability to
deliver justice. We support the efforts of the Tribunal to
implement its completion strategy and follow a timeline
to finish its judicial work by the end of 2017.
We recognize the importance of regional and
State cooperation to ensure that those responsible
for crimes are held accountable, and we support the
activities of the Office of the Prosecutor in this regard.
At the same time, we are concerned about the failure
to execute arrest warrants and transfer three indictees
to the Tribunal’s custody, in violation of international
obligations to cooperate with the Tribunal. The issue
of regional cooperation, as well as existing challenges
with respect to national prosecutions of war crimes,
require special attention and monitoring by the Office
of the Prosecutor.
As to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, we note that it has assumed
responsibility for a number of functions of the

S/PV.7707

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
ICTY, including with regard to a range of judicial
activities, the enforcement of sentences, the protection
of victims and witnesses, and the management of
archives. One of the main tasks now is to ensure the
smooth transition of ICTY’s remaining functions. We
support the work of the Mechanism in taking measures to
improve operations and working methods and to ensure
flexibility in staff assignment. The establishment of the
Tribunals was a huge step forward in the fight against
impunity. Their knowledge and expertise should not be
wasted but used in the handling of human rights crimes
cases at the national and international levels. The
Tribunals’ archives should be widely accessible. The
lessons of the Tribunals should also be used to increase
the capacity of national courts.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I thank the
Presidents of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and the Prosecutor
of the ICTY and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for the reports and today’s briefings.
At the outset, let me stress the United Kingdom’s
continued support for the efforts of the ICTY and the
Mechanism. They carry out essential work to tackle
impunity. Faced with so many crises today, it is
absolutely crucial that we speak with one voice when
we say that there can be no impunity for the most
serious international crimes.
As the recent trial of Radovan Karadžić at the
ICTY shows, there is no end date for justice. The
United Kingdom welcomes the completion of a number
of ICTY cases: the Karadžić and Šešelj trials and the
Stanišić and Simatović appeal. We welcome the fact
that these are in line with the lastest timetable set out
by the Tribunal. We are also pleased to hear that the
Mladić case and the Prlić appeal are still on track. We
look forward to the outcome of the Hadžić case and
the remaining ICTY appeal. While we understand
that it may be a challenge to meet the projected time
frame in the Prlić appeal in particular, we hope that the
November 2017 date will be met in all cases.
We understand the challenges of staff attrition. Let
me take this opportunity to emphasize that the work of
the ICTY staff is vital and highly valued by the United
Kingdom. We rely on them to see their roles through
until the end of the mandate. We commend the efforts
of the ICTY leadership to retain staff, which we know

16-1638719/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

will continue. We are also pleased that the transition of
the ICTY to the Mechanism is on schedule.
We note the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) on the ICTY (S/2016/441)
and we look forward to the Trbunal’s reponse in its
next report. It is vital to take a pragmatic approach and
ensure that resources are not diverted from completing
the ICTY’s core task — its case work.
In the aftermath of conflict, any international
tribunal, including the ICTY, can only address the cases
of most serious concern. That does not mean that other
crimes should not be addressed. On the contrary, it is
vital that national justice systems ensure accountability.
In that context, we note the ongoing concerns of the
Office of the Prosecutor with the pace and effectiveness
of national war crimes prosecutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. There are positive developments, such
as the progress in resolving pending Category II cases,
and we continue to believe that these challenges can
be overcome. We urge the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work with the ICTY and other partners
to do so.
We are also concerned that national war crimes
prosecutions in Serbia are at a crucial point, with many
more cases still needing investigating and prosecuting
in Serbia against Serbian nationals, particularly cases
against senior and mid-level accused. Again, there
have been important achievements by the Serbian
War Crimes Prosecutor’s Office. We urge the Serbian
Government to support efforts to ensure accountability,
and in particular to appoint a new Chief War Crimes
Prosecutor as a priority for the incoming Government.
We also urge cooperation between all States of
the region. We are pleased that cooperation with the
Prosecutor is satisfactory in most respects, and we call
on all States to act on those areas where it is not. We
note the recent decision of the High Court in Belgrade
regarding transfer of the three defendants in contempt
proceedings arising from the Šešelj case. Serbia has an
obligation to cooperate with the ICTY, and we hope that
the Serbian authorities will make every effort to ensure
transfer to the ICTY of the individuals concerned.
Turning to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, we are very pleased with its
work over the past six months and, indeed, since its
commencement. The Mechanism is moving into a very
important new phase in its life, dealing with retrials
and appeals from ICTY rulings. We are confident that
20/31

08/06/2016

the Mechanism will take all appropriate measures to
ensure that these cases are handled efficiently and
effectively in order to see to it that decisions are taken
within a reasonable and in respect for due process.
We look forward to receiving further information on
timelines in the next report. We welcome the news that
the recruitment of staff for the Mechanism is proceeding
well and that staff with ICTY and ICTR experience are
being drawn upon. Again, good staff are key to success.
We thank the Prosecutor for the continued efforts to
locate and arrest fugitives, and we welcome the arrest
and handover to Rwanda of Ladislas Ntaganzwa. We
hope that the remaining eight fugitives can similarly be
brought to justice, and urge all States to cooperate to
that end. We also welcome the work being undertaken
by the Mechanism on reviewing the level of support
provided to acquitted and released persons in order
to achieve appropriate efficiencies, and we support
ongoing efforts concerning relocation.
We are pleased with the smooth handover to the
Mechanism of the ICTR’s functions on its closure, and
we thank the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania for its continued strong support and interest
in the Mechanism’s new permanent premises in Arusha.
We are also pleased that the Mechanism has implemented
some of the recommendations from the OIOS audit and
is working on others. The Mechanism has a vital role
to play in the international criminal justice system, and
we have every confidence that it will continue to carry
out its residual functions appropriately.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
would like to begin by welcoming the President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Agius, and to welcome and congratulate
both Judge Meron on his reappointment in March as
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals and Prosecutor Brammertz, who has
assumed the role of Chief Prosecutor of the Mechanism
while continued to serve as Chief Prosecutor of the
ICTY.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and, now, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals have been and are
essential components in advancing peace and justice
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, and in the
development of international law. Most recently, in
March this year, Radovan Karadžić, a person whom
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

Ambassador Power recently described as “a man who
believed he could do what he wanted when he wanted,
consequences to others be damned”, was found guilty
and sentenced to 40 years in prison for genocide,
crimes against humanity and violations of the laws
and customs of war. More specifically, the underlying
crimes attributed to Karadžić included persecution,
extermination, murder, deportation, forcible transfer,
terror and unlawful attacks on civilians, among others.
While legalisms and legal definitions can never
adequately convey the inhumanity what happened,
what was experienced and what was done to human
beings, the pursuit of sober justice and the obedience
to facts inherent in the process is essential if we are
ever to stop these crimes from occurring again. In
the 1995 order confirming the Srebrenica indictment
against Karadžić, Judge Riad wrote that events of
Srebrenica were “truly scenes from hell written on
the darkest pages of human history”. There were, he
wrote “thousands of men executed and buried in mass
graves; hundreds of men buried alive; men and women
mutilated and slaughtered; children killed before their
mother’s eyes; a grandfather forced to eat the liver of
his own grandson”.
The establishment of facts as part of the process
of advancing justice is critical to counter those who
seek to distort facts, revise history or rewrite reality.
That genocide occurred in Srebrenica was firmly
established by both the ICTY and the International
Court of Justice. There is no fact-based debate; this
is our history. These well-established facts render all
the more sad and shameful the Council’s failure to be
able to adopt a simple resolution commemorating the
twentieth anniversary of Srebrenica. The facts are well
established, and, as one speaker said following the veto
last year of a draft resolution recognizing these facts,
denial is the final insult to the victims. Denial is of
course dangerous, but the challenge posed by denial
also highlights one of the most important contributions
of international justice in the process of establishing the
facts and identifying individual responsibility. It is that
it helps us understand what happened, how it happened,
who is responsible — facts that, hopefully, allow us
learn how to prevent such events from happening again.
Although some leaders, including in other contexts
today, understandably fear trials and accountability,
justice and, indeed, peace require our zealous pursuit
of them. The Karadžić conviction and the December
arrest by Congolese authorities of Ladislas Ntaganzwa

S/PV.7707

are an important reminder of the fact that although time
may pass, this imperative will not subside.
It is to that end that we must remain persistent in
our pursuit of the eight remaining fugitives indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
The Mechanism needs to re-energize its efforts to
apprehend these men, and the States Members of our
Organization, especially in the Great Lakes region
of Africa, must proactively contribute to our shared
efforts to hold these men accountable.
The United States of America will continue to
its part, and we reiterate our offer of up to $5 million
in rewards for information leading to the arrest of
Fulgence Kayishema, Charles Sikubwabo, Aloys
Ndimbati, Augustin Bizimana, Charles Ryandikayo,
Phénéas Munyarugarama, Félicien Kabuga and Protais
Mpiranya.
The United States asks that President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz make tracking and apprehending
these remaining fugitives the primary focus of the
Mechanism’s work going forward. It has been too long.
Before concluding, I would like to commend the
ICTY, under the solid leadership of President Agius, on
the progress made in completing its work over the past
reporting period and for ensuring that justice is served
expeditiously while respecting the rights of the accused.
The Tribunal has not completed almost all of its cases,
with only two defendants remaining at the trial stage
and two appeals ongoing. We have confidence that the
ICTY can meet its commitment of completing its work
by the end of 2017.
In this regard, and in the light of President Agius’s
briefing, the United States would like to reiterate
the importance of the full cooperation of all States
concerned with the ICTY, including with respect to the
execution of the arrest warrants issued by the ICTY for
three individuals in a contempt case.
We should be circumspect of leaders who suggest
that justice comes at the expense of reconciliation or
unity. Trials may be inconvenient to those who bear
responsibility for grave crimes, be they Milošević or
Karadžić, Akayesu or Nahimana. But as our experience
here has demonstrated, it is simply not true that
pursuing justice frustrates reconciliation or upsets
unity. It does the opposite. The pursuit of justice is vital
to understanding the events of the dark past, to proving
facts and disproving fictions. That some leaders in other

16-1638721/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

contexts may prefer a course other than accountability
suggests that they are interested in advancing objectives
unrelated to our collective pursuit of sustainable peace.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank Judges
Carmel Agius and Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their comprehensive briefings on the
activities of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the Residual Mechanism. We
commend Uruguay on its steering of the work of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
The need to end impunity and to hold to account
the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity led the Security Council to establish the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) in 1993 and 1994, respectively, with mandates
to prosecute those persons responsible for crimes of
genocide, war crimes and violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and neighbouring States.
We acknowledge the establishment of these two
special international criminal Tribunals as one of the
most relevant initiatives of the United Nations for the
preservation of the rule of international law and the
safeguarding of the principles of peace and justice.
In the two decades of their existence, the ICTY
and the ICTR have played a crucial role in enhancing
the international criminal justice system and providing
tools to national and international justice mechanisms
by ensuring that those responsible for serious crimes
against humanity are brought to justice and held to
account.
The ICTR was established pursuant to resolution
955 (1994) and closed by the end of 2015, following
its verdict on the appeal of the Butare case. It received
outstanding support and international cooperation from
Member States and left an important legacy in manuals
on best practices and lessons learned on the tracking
and arresting of renegades from international justice,
on indictments for sexual and gender-based violence,
and on referrals of international criminal cases to
national jurisdictions.
The ICTR also made a substantial contribution
to national reconciliation, to the restoration of peace
and security, to the fight against impunity and to the
development of international criminal justice, especially
22/31

08/06/2016

by seeking justice for the victims and survivors of the
1994 genocide in Rwanda.
In ending its work, it is expected from the Residual
Mechanism, according to resolution 1966 (2010), that it
track the renegades indicted by the ICTR and contribute
to the arrest of the remaining eight fugitives.
The successive delays in the completion of the
ICTY’s activities have been a source of some tension
in the Security Council, since, in accordance with its
relevant resolutions, the ICTY should have closed its
cases in 2010 or at the latest by the end of 2014. We
took good note of the efforts by the Tribunal to quickly
complete its work and of the judges’ efforts in identifying
means to speed up the pending cases. We note the
Tribunal’s commitment in meeting the deadline for its
closure by the end of 2017. The recent convictions of
war criminals and its efforts in completing the transfer
of duties to the Residual Mechanism, in accordance
with the pertinent Security Council resolution, attests
to such a commitment.
Challenges facing the ICTY in staff-related matters,
which have been delaying trials, and other instances
of attrition are matters of concern. We hope that such
delays will not affect the ongoing trials and that the
Tribunal’s judicial work will be effectively completed
by the end of 2017.
The establishment of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010), was essential in ensuring
that the closure of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) would not permit the remaining
fugitives to escape justice. However, the Mechanism
still faces fundamental challenges, namely, to ensure
that the remaining individuals indicted by the ICTR are
apprehended and that the humanitarian issue related
to the 14 individuals acquitted and released by the
ICTR but unable to return to their countries of origin
is resolved.
In order for the International Residual Mechanism to
continue fulfilling its mandate expeditiously, efficiently
and cost-effectively, States are called upon to cooperate
with the Mechanism and the Government of Rwanda
for the arrest and prosecution of the eight remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR. In that regard, we call
on States to investigate, arrest, prosecute or extradite,
in accordance with their applicable international
obligations, all fugitives accused of genocide who
are residing in their territories. The Mechanism’s
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

ongoing practice of communicating and cooperating
with countries of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
and keeping the authorities updated on its activities
and on the transition of responsibilities, as well as
assistance to national jurisdictions, is worth noting
and encouraging. We acknowledge that the Mechanism
continues to draw upon ICTY and ICTR best practices
and lessons learned in pursuing new ways to improve
its operations, procedures and working methods and
to maintain flexibility in its staff assignments. That is
aimed at maximizing its effectiveness and efficiency.
In conclusion, we would like to point out that the
tenets of international criminal justice, embodied in
the criminal tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, were crucial to the recovery process following
the appalling events that occurred in those territories.
The establishment of those Tribunals, pursuant to
Security Council decisions, was a response to the public
uproar against the atrocities committed in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. They were instrumental in
preserving trust in international law; to ensuring that
those responsible for serious violations of human rights
and international law faced trial and punishment; to
ensuring that judicial mechanisms were put in place as a
warning that such crimes would not be left unpunished;
and to ensuring that justice was delivered to the victims
when egregious crimes against humanity were still
being committed on a disturbing scale.
Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to begin
by thanking President Agius, President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings and their
respective reports (S/2016/453, annex and S/2016/454,
annex).
Japan is committed to the establishment of the rule
of law and attaches great importance to the activities
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I would like to
assure the Presidents and the Prosecutor of Japan’s full
support to the work of their bodies.
With regard to the work of the ICTY, we appreciate
the efforts made by the Tribunal to deliver judgements
on the Karadžić and Šešelj cases in March, as projected,
despite serious staff attrition. We are also pleased to
learn that the judgment on the Stanišić and Simatović
case is likely to meet the envisaged June date. Let
me commend the leadership of the Presidents and the
Prosecutor for those actions, and I call upon them to

S/PV.7707

keep the timeline of the judicial activity as projected,
while respecting due process.
The Tribunal can fulfil its mandate only when
it receives the necessary cooperation from Member
States. We recall that Member States have the obligation
to cooperate fully with the ICTY, and urge the relevant
States to implement their obligations.
Turning to the Mechanism, resolution 1966 (2010)
mandated the Mechanism as a small, temporary and
effective judicial organ to take over the activity and
legacy of the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We are pleased to hear
that the Mechanism has been trying to be as efficient as
possible by implementing various innovative measures,
such as the “one-office” approach in the Office of the
Prosecutor, while ensuring smooth and sound judicial
activities. However, we note with concern that the
construction of the new permanent premises in Arusha
is facing a slight delay. We hope the project will be
completed by the end of this year and expect strong
leadership by the President and the Registrar.
Like the ICTY, Member States have to cooperate
fully with the Mechanism. In that respect, we are
happy to learn that the United Nations and Mali
signed an agreement on enforcement of sentences of
imprisonment. We also welcome the cooperation by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in implementing resolution 2256 (2015) to transfer
Mr. Ladislas Ntaganzwa to the Rwandan authorities.
We look forward to more such examples in the future.
Before concluding, let me reiterate Japan’s support
for the activities of both the ICTY and the Mechanism.
We hope that they will contribute further to the
development of international criminal justice.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I thank Presidents Meron and Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their respective reports (S/2016/453,
annex and S/2016/454, annex) and briefings. France
reiterates its thanks and affirms its support to all staff
of the Tribunals for the work undertaken in order to
successfully complete the judicial proceedings. We are
all aware of the importance of everyone mobilizing. It
is important to uphold the time frame set forth by the
Security Council.
With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia, France takes note that at

16-1638723/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

this stage two cases remain in trial for two indictees
and two in appeal. The Tribunal has therefore handed
down sentences in 151 out of the 161 individuals
brought before the ICTY. France attaches the greatest
importance to the fact that, in the framework of the
completion strategy, the Tribunal continues to serve
justice, fully upholding due process, and it should be
provided with all necessary cooperation. The ICTY
has abided by the rules in the reporting period. France
recalls that, pursuant to resolution 2256 (2015), the
Security Council requested that the Tribunal conclude
its work according to a set time frame, in the light of its
closure, by handing over its activities to the Mechanism.
Over the reporting period and in line with resolution
2256 (2015), the Office of Internal Oversight Services
carried out an assessment of the methods and work of
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
and submitted its report (S/26/441) on 1 June. France
welcomes the Tribunal’s cooperation in that exercise.
The report underscores the high quality work of the
Tribunal and its efforts in the completion strategy,
in particular in the area of management, as well as
necessary improvements made for better efficiency.
We also highlight the interest expressed by the
Tribunal itself regarding the evaluation exercise, stating
that it should be more far-reaching using the necessary
means and in a manner suitable for a judicial institution.
The evaluation approach is totally compatible with the
idea of the independence of the judiciary and even
ensures the sound administration of justice, which is
itself an indispensable mark of the credibility of the
international criminal justice. In that respect, pursuant
to paragraph 11 of resolution 2256 (2015), France
expects the Tribunal “to report on the implementation
of the OIOS recommendations in its next six-monthly
report”. This is particularly the case regarding the
implementation of part of a code of conduct and a
disciplinary mechanism applying to judges, as well as
a centralized information system on staff reductions.
France would like to see this approach applied across
the board and in a professional manner. In particular,
I stress the recommendation of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services that the decisions handed down and
their proceedings be analysed so as to ensure progress
in international criminal justice as a whole and to
identify what merits being replicated and what should
be done differently in the future. Such an evaluation by
practitioners would further enrich the legacy of these
jurisdictions.
24/31

08/06/2016

The ICTY and International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) branches of the Residual Mechanism
have well begun the transition to ensure that the work of
justice continues to run its course. We wish to emphasize
the unique opportunity that the Mechanism affords for
drawing on the experience of the two Tribunals and,
in so doing, combining the best working methods.
We recall the provisional nature of the Mechanism’s
mandate, which requires the adoption of a tailored
management that duly accommodates the diversity
of legal systems and balanced equitable geographical
representation.
This debate is a time for the Council to welcome
the major contribution of the Tribunals in the service
of the fight against impunity, of reconciliation and
of identifying the work that States must now do to
ensure that this work of justice is maintained over
time. The States concerned must henceforth continue
the construction of the rule of law in which the
independence of the judiciary must be fully ensured.
The prosecution of criminals considered mid-level
should remain a national priority and be the subject of
enhanced cooperation and regional assistance.
France maintains its support of the Mechanism,
including the arrest of fugitives targeted by arrest
warrants issued by the Tribunal. Furthermore, I wish
to indicate that the two cases referred to France by the
ICTR are being handled with all the necessary diligence
and rigor, under the supervision and in constant contact
with the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism. In that
regard, I recall that France is the only State, alongside
Rwanda, that has accepted case transfers.
In conclusion, I thank the Ambassador of
Uruguay, Chairman of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, and his entire team, the
representatives of the International Tribunals, the
Office of Legal Affairs and the Office of Internal
Oversight Services for their efforts to implement the
transitions pursuant to resolutions 1966 (2010) and 2193
(2014). More than ever, combating impunity should
be at the core of the Council’s actions, as justice is a
prerequisite of lasting peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): At the outset, let me
congratulate the delegation of France through you, Sir,
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

S/PV.7707

on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June. I also thank Judge Theodor Meron,
Judge Carmel Agius and Chief Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their respective briefings.

On our part, we continue to meet our obligation with
regard to cases referred to Rwanda, including the recent
conviction of Jean Uwinkindi for genocide and crimes
against humanity.

As we reflect on the milestone achieved last year
with the closure of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), it is with satisfaction that we
recognize that the 93 individuals indicted for genocide
by the ICTR were the primary masterminds of that
crime, in addition to the national and local leaders who
were beyond the reach of Rwandan justice, as they were
international fugitives. The Tribunal represents an
immense contribution to the jurisprudence of the crime
of genocide and to post-genocide reconciliation and
healing in Rwanda.

Allow me to return to the issue of the ICTR archives,
which is an important matter to the Government of
Rwanda and its people. The ICTR archives are the
most comprehensive account of the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi. It is our painful history — a piece
of history that Rwandans will never stop demanding
for relocation to Rwanda. The primary beneficiary
should first and foremost be the people concerned as
the sole proprietors of such history. We recognize that
they are United Nations property, but there should
be no ambiguity in our understanding of the matter.
Those archives should be relocated to Rwanda upon the
completion of the Mechanism’s mandate. The presence
of the ICTR archives in Rwanda would continue to
be a reminder to Rwandans of what happened in our
country and to preserve the country’s historical records
of that particularly catastrophic occurrence. It is of the
utmost importance that we preserve them for future
generations and that the archives act as a tribute to
those who suffered.

It is regrettable, however, that eight ICTR indicted
fugitives, as well as other suspects on whom we have
ample and undisputable evidence, remain at large. We
reiterate our call on all Member States, especially those
still harbouring fugitives responsible for genocide, to
honour their moral and legal obligations to the Charter
of the United Nations and the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
There is no legal justification whatsoever for the fact
that those individuals have neither been tried nor
sent to where they can be tried. Our collective efforts
should be focused on ensuring that every suspect
must have his or her day in court at the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, in the
countries where they now are or extradited and tried
in Rwanda’s specialized international crimes chamber
of the High Court. Rwanda will not rest until each one
of them has been tried. We owe that to the millions of
victims and countless survivors. It is our hope that the
Chief Prosecutor’s clear commitment and willingness
to engage fellow prosecutors in national capitals
harbouring those fugitives will lead to eventual arrests,
extraditions and trials.
We remain extremely concerned at the delays
encountered in the investigations and proceedings in the
case against Laurent Bucyibaruta. Equally important
is the trial of Octavian Ngenzi and Tito Barahira in
the Paris Criminal Court. It must be expedited and
conducted in an impartial and independent atmosphere.
In addition, we remain extremely concerned by last
year’s decision of the French prosecution to drop
charges against Father Wenceslas Munyeshyaka, a
decision that contradicts the nature and scale of the
crimes committed in the light of available evidence.

In conclusion, let me also concur with the Chief
Prosecutor on the danger of genocide ideology and
denial. Such a danger, as we witnessed in 1994, is that
the genocide does not occur in a vacuum but is planned
and executed. It starts with an ideology and grows in
phases. That is why, when we have men and women
out there who still engage in genocide ideology, it calls
on all of us to embody the responsibility to educate
young generations and to fight anyattempts to further
dehumanize the survivors. Equally, the fact that we
have men and women out there who still engage in
ethnic division and who use it as their only stepping
stone for political relevance should serve as a call on all
of us to collectively assume responsibility to do what it
takes to uproot this evil through education, cooperation
and legislation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Obradović (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to speak to the Council again. Before
I proceed to address the important topic on the
Council’s agenda today, I would like to welcome our
esteemed guests from The Hague, the Presidents and
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for

16-1638725/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the Mechanism for
International Criminal Tribunals. I thank them for their
semi-annual reports.
Serbia remains firmly committed to cooperating
with the ICTY, while the Serbian domestic judiciary
continues to fight impunity for core international crimes
perpetrated during the armed conflict in the former
Yugoslavia. In the reporting period, my Government
duly executed warrants of arrest against Mr. Jovica
Stanišić and Mr. Franko Simatović, the two indictees
acquitted by the Trial Chamber, whose first-instance
judgment was quashed on appeal on 15 December
2015. These ICTY arrest warrants were the first to
be executed, dating back to the time of the arrest, in
2011, of indictees Ratko Mladić and Goran Hadžić,
who were also arrested by my country. Somehow this
important information did not find its way into the
Prosecutor’s report.
Today, the ICTY completion strategy relies heavily
on the cooperation of the Serbian Government, in
particular in cases of provisional release. In the past
six months, Serbian agencies were called upon to
report to the ICTY, in some cases on a daily basis,
on the compliance with the terms of their provisional
release of indictees Goran Hadžić, Jovica Stanišić and
Mr. Franko Simatović and of convicted individuals
Radivoje Miletić and Drago Nikolić, who passed away
while he was in Serbia. The terms and conditions of
their provisional release were determined by the ICTY
Judicial Chambers and sometimes included surveillance
24 hours a day. Serbia has a perfect record in carrying
out the guarantees its Government provided for the
process of provisional release. In addition, it has fully
complied with its specific duty to report to the Appeals
Chamber on the progress of the medical treatment of
indictee Vojislav Šešelj during his provisional stay
in Serbia.
The ICTY Prosecutor acknowledges in his
report (S/2016/453, annex II) that he has free access
to evidence located in Serbia, such as documents,
archives and witnesses, while the same conditions,
in accordance with the principle of equality of arms,
are maintained for defence counsel. So far, Serbia has
received 2,170 requests for assistance from the Office
of the ICTY Prosecutor and 1,331 requests from various
defence teams; no pending requests for assistance or
disputes in that regard are recorded. These statistics
are a telling illustration of the dedication of my
country to the process of cooperation with the ICTY,
26/31

08/06/2016

and they stack up quite well against the records of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for
instance. The efforts behind the statistics deserve full
international recognition.
As suggested in my statement to the Council
in December 2015 (see S/PV.7574), the Serbian
Government has now adopted a national strategy on
the prosecution of war crimes. The strategy is aimed
at improving the efficiency of domestic war crimes
proceedings and at promoting regional cooperation
in this sensitive area. It reflects my Government’s
commitment to accountability for core international
crimes, regardless of the national, ethnic or religious
status of the perpetrator or the victim. For this and other
reasons, Serbia rightly expects that all other countries
of the former Yugoslavia share the same objectives and
act in accordance with the principles of international
humanitarian law.
In that context, let me recall that, since June 2015, I
have drawn the attention of the Council to the fact that,
in spite of the ICTY and International Court of Justice
findings that murders, inhuman acts and cruel treatment
were perpetrated against the civilians of Serb ethnicity
during and after Operation Storm in 1995, Croatia
has had only one final conviction for the war crime of
murder committed in that operation. The representative
of Croatia never contested my assertion. I also advised
that the Croatian Government attempted to deprive
Serbia of jurisdiction to investigate and prosecute
the crimes perpetrated by Croatian nationals. At the
meeting of the General Assembly (see A/70/PV.31) on
the 2015 annual report of the ICTY (see A/70/226), I
submitted that, in so doing, the Croatian Government
sought to establish impunity for its citizens and, for
some reason, there has been no reaction from the United
Nations. Moreover, the judicial bodies of Croatia and
Kosovo have ceased to cooperate in acceding to Serbia’s
requests for assistance in the meantime.
Notwithstanding this situation, the ICTY
Prosecutor has now confirmed in his written report
that the Croatian Government established impunity for
its citizens. The relevant Croatian agencies have been
instructed by decision of the Croatian Government of
3 June 2015
“not to provide cooperation to foreign judiciaries
in certain war crimes cases in which the indictment
alleges that members of Croatian civilian and
military bodies participated in a joint criminal
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

S/PV.7707

enterprise to commit international crimes or that the
Croatian military participated in widespread and
systematic attacks against civilian populations”.

of individual criminal liability provided by the Serbian
War Crimes Prosecutor. We all should be well advised
to watch developments in this case.

This information is alarming, and Serbia expects the
Security Council to react adequately. Otherwise, our
efforts will be ineffective, and justice will be denied or
remain selective.

Respect for ICTY judgments was also requested
following the acquittal of Kosovo Liberation Army
commanders Ramush Haradinaj and Fatmir Limaj for
crimes committed against Serbs. The Judges noted,
however, that the Trial Chamber gained “a strong
impression that the [Haradinaj] trial was being held
in an atmosphere where witnesses felt unsafe”. A new
light has been shed on the ICTY failure to successfully
prosecute the crimes committed by Kosovo and
Metohija Albanians by the establishment of a new
internationalized judicial mechanism to prosecute
those crimes.

Serbia fully understands and shares the Prosecutor’s
concern about evident regression in regional cooperation
and calls once again on the United Nations to find a way
for strict and continuous international monitoring in
the field. Accountability is a regional issue and national
war-crimes prosecutors must cooperate faithfully
in fighting impunity without political interference.
The Serbian national strategy therefore envisages the
convening of a regional conference in which all open
issues of regional cooperation would be addressed
and resolved.
Serbia also supports the view of the ICTY
Prosecutor that the search for missing persons needs
to be intensified. Notwithstanding that need, however,
mention should also be made in this regard that,
according to the official data of the International
Commission on Missing Persons, more than 70 per
cent of the 40,000 persons who went missing during
the armed conflict in the former Yugoslavia have
been accounted for. This ratio has not been equalled
anywhere in the world, and no small credit for it is due
to the efforts made by the country that I come from.
Admittedly, the Prosecutor’s report before us is
critical of some of Serbia’s recent activities. I shall now
briefly address that criticism.
An impression has been created, particularly in the
region, that Serbia is somehow responsible for the recent
acquittal of Vojislav Šešelj. That is not fair. The Serbian
Government has been continually requested to fully
respect the judgments of the ICTY, especially in the case
of the acquittals of General Gotovina and other Croatian
generals, despite the factual findings that murders and
other serious violations were committed against Serb
civilians in Operation Storm. The Serbian Government
has also been asked not to comment on the judgments
in the cases of Bosnian war commanders Naser Orić
and Rasim Delić, whose superior responsibility for
crimes of murder and torture in prison camps, including
decapitation of Serbian soldiers by mujahideen units,
could not be established. However, Naser Orić is now
being tried by a Bosnian court on the basis of evidence

Serbia has been criticized also for not electing
a new war crimes prosecutor. Indeed, the process
of election did fail, but a new recruitment is under
way. The election will be one of the priorities of the
new Government, expected to be formed soon. In
the meantime, the Serbian war crimes prosecution
continues to be fully operational under the leadership
of the First Deputy Prosecutor and eight indictments for
war crimes against 15 individuals have been confirmed
in Serbia in 2016.
Now, I will say a few words in explanation of the
reported failure by Serbia to execute the warrants of
arrest issued by the ICTY Trial Chamber in the case of
contempt of court against three individuals. The arrest
warrants were issued two months after the provisional
release of the accused Vojislav Šešelj, the leader of an
opposition political party, under the unprecedented
conditions ordered for his stay in Serbia. Government
agencies have been ordered to exercise no control over
his behaviour and political conduct and, immediately
upon his release, Mr. Šešelj began to create difficulties
for the Government, in particular with respect to the
bilateral relations of the country with its neighbours.
The timing of the arrest of his close associates is
indicative of the lack of regard for the political and
social realities in Serbia.
In that context and acting faithfully upon the ICTY
request, my Government made a necessary security
analysis and decided that it could not execute the orders
at the critical moment because of national security
risks. It was of the opinion that there were serious
and justifiable reasons to delay execution, especially
because the investigation in this case lasted many years.

16-1638727/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

In such a case, the domestic law on cooperation with
the ICTY provides for a possibility to raise an objection
to the International Tribunal. On the other hand, the
ICTY Rules of Procedure and Evidence provides for
no reason to establish a moratorium on ministering the
orders of the Tribunal. Therefore, while the Security
Council can defer International Criminal Court
proceedings for a period of 12 months by a resolution,
such a procedural solution does not exist in cases before
the ICTY; consequently, the Trial Chamber dismissed
the arguments presented by Serbia.
Once again, let me point out that Serbia never asked
the Tribunal for a waiver of its international obligations;
it asked only for a postponement of an execution while
the accused, Šešelj, was on provisional release, under
circumstances that endangered the bilateral relations
with countries of the region of former Yugoslavia.
The postponement of the execution would not set an
example; after all, we read in the annals of the Tribunal
that Shefqet Kabashi appeared in the courtroom only in
2011, four years after a warrant of arrest for contempt of
court had been issued against him in 2007. Meanwhile,
the ICTY Presidents did not report to the Security
Council the non-cooperation by the United States.
The Serbian Government did not want to protect
the accused persons from criminal prosecution. As
a compromise solution, a communication was made
with the ICTY President to consider the possibility
of referring the case to the domestic judiciary proprio
motu, in accordance with ICTY Rule 11 bis. In the
view of my Government, such a referral would be fully
in accordance with resolution 1503 (2003) calling on
the ICTY to concentrate on the trial of the most senior
leaders suspected of being most responsible for crimes
within its jurisdiction and to transfer cases involving
those who may not bear that level of responsibility
to competent national jurisdictions. On 5 February,
however, the ICTY President informed the Serbian
Government that contempt matters did not fall within
the scope of cases that may be referred to the domestic
courts of a State pursuant to 11 bis of the Rules. No
particular explanation of such a precedent was provided.
My Government, however, was fully aware of
the need to respect ICTY decisions and orders. For
that reason, it decided to continue with the domestic
case for arrest and transfer of the three accused to the
ICTY and, pursuant to the law on cooperation with
the ICTY, the Ministry of Justice conveyed the case
file to the domestic court for further procedure. Yet,
28/31

08/06/2016

on 18 May, for the first time in the history of Serbia’s
cooperation, the High Court in Belgrade decided that
the legal conditions for the executions of the Tribunal’s
warrants were not fulfilled in this case, because the
law on cooperation stipulates that only the indictment
for core statutory crimes, that is, grave breaches of the
Geneva Conventions of 1949; violations of the laws or
customs of war; genocide and crimes against humanity,
provide a legal ground for the execution of ICTY arrest
warrants, unlike an indictment for contempt of court.
Perhaps some more light would be shed on the
reasoning of the Belgrade High Court if juxtaposed with
the explanation given to the Tribunal by the Embassy
of France in The Hague in its note verbale no. 1108 of
27 December 2011 in which it is said: “France has no
judicial foundation at its disposal that would permit
it to act on the request for the arrest of Ms. Florence
Hartmann and her transfer to the Tribunal.” The
difference, though, is in the consequences: unlike on
13 October 2015 in the case of Serbia, President Meron
did not report to the Security Council the failure of a
Government to cooperate with the ICTY in arresting its
citizen. Is it that the principle of the sovereign equality
of all Member States assumes a different light once
refracted through the prism of the ICTY?
Nevertheless, the decision of the Serbian court in
no way precludes Serbia’s determination to continue to
cooperate with the ICTY in the most active manner so
as to enable it to accomplish its mission. We must not be
discouraged in our efforts to bring about reconciliation
and cooperation and that includes through trying those
responsible for crimes in domestic courts. The victims
will not be forgotten and we must not allow the crimes
to be repeated.
Instead of a conclusion, let me take this opportunity
to commend all hardworking officials and the staff
of the Tribunal and the Residual Mechanism for the
relentless efforts they continue to invest, despite all
the challenges. My personal cooperation with many of
them over the past 15 years was my highest professional
privilege. My thanks are also due to the Security
Council for its continued monitoring of this important
international issue.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Allow me to welcome
the Presidents of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judges
Agius and Meron, as well as the esteemed Prosecutor
Brammertz. We thank them for today’s briefings and
reports and commend their continued efforts to ensure
accountability for international crimes for which they
will continue to have Croatia’s full support.
Croatia welcomes the delivery of judgements in
the appeal cases of Stanišić and Simatović and the
trial case of Radovan Karadžić. Karadžić’s rightful
conviction, including for the genocide in Srebrenica,
must serve future generations as a prime example of the
devastating consequences of a genocidal, expansionist
policy. Bearing in mind the fact that Karadžić himself
participated in four joint criminal enterprises and that
during most of the time under consideration he was
the President of the Republika Srpska, as well as the
Supreme Commander of its armed forces, his sentence
does not entirely match the extreme gravity of the
crimes committed, nor does it match when compared
to some of the sentences given to his subordinates and
co-perpetrators acting under his direct command in
those crimes. Accordingly, we hope that the Appeals
Chamber will carefully reconsider all factual and legal
elements of the crimes attributed to Radovan Karadžić
and appropriately assess his full responsibility.
On many occasions in this Chamber, we have
reiterated the importance of the completion of the
remaining ICTY trials. In that vein, we are deeply
troubled with the developments in the case of Goran
Hadžić. Hadžić is charged with 14 counts of crimes
against humanity and violations of the laws or customs
of war, with the purpose of the permanent forcible
removal of Croatians and other non-Serbs in Croatia
from a large part of Croatia, envisaged to become part
of greater Serbia. Although initially declared fit to
stand trial, with an expected verdict to come this fall,
Hadžić’s trial had been adjourned, and then suspended
in 2015. More than a year ago, he was provisionally
released due to his health. Regardless of the
prosecution’s attempts and motions for the continuation
of the trial, the proceedings are now stayed indefinitely.
And we just learned today that the trial in on the road to
being terminated. It is difficult to understand the Trial
Chambers’ logic in this case after realizing that, during
his provisional release, Hadžić had time enough, and
seemed to be fit enough, to plan for his second marriage,
on which the media repeatedly reported.
Igor Kacić was only 16 years old when, on
20 November 1991, he was taken from the Vukovar

S/PV.7707

hospital and executed, together with 259 other civilians
and prisoners. At that time, that was the largest single
massacre in Europe since the Second World War. Igor
Kacić’s body was exhumed from a mass grave in 1996.
He still had on him a little dolphin that he carved in a
shelter during the three-month siege of his city, as well
as a couple of toy cars. His life is lost forever, but we had
hoped that at least justice would be served. Therefore,
it is with deep regret that we come to realize today
that Goran Hadžić, just like his superior and mentor
Slobodan Milosević, will never be held accountable for
Igor’s stolen youth and the extinguished lives of many
others.
We are deeply disappointed, dismayed and
concerned with the first instance judgment in the
Šešelj case. On this matter, the President of Croatia,
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, wrote to this body
to alert it to the judgment and its consequences. The
judgment, issued by a majority only a week after the
Karadžić decision, seems to totally ignore legal and
factual findings previously established by the ICTY.
We concur with the prosecution’s assessment that the
Trial Chamber erred both in law and in fact, and expect
that the appeal trial will bring long-awaited justice for
Seselj’s victims. At this point, allow me to quote the
dissenting opinion of Judge Lattanzi, who stated that in
reading the judgment she felt
“thrown back in time to a period in human history,
centuries ago, when one said [...] silent enim leges
inter arma”.
Today we cannot allow the law to fall silent in times of
war and its aftermath.
We remain deeply concerned about Serbia’s
continued failure to fully cooperate with the Tribunal
and execute the Tribunal’s arrest warrants for three
Serbian indictees. We call again upon our neighbour
to comply with the Tribunal’s requests without any
further delay, and we remind it that full cooperation
with the ICTY is an international obligation and an
essential political condition — as part of political
criteria for the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process — and legal condition — as part of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement between
Serbia and the European Union — throughout the
accession process of Serbia to the European Union.
Croatia also shares the grave concerns of the
Office of the Prosecutor about the participation of
Tribunal-convicted war criminals in election campaigns

16-1638729/31

S/PV.7707

ICTY & ICTR

during the reporting period, where convicted persons
appeared at campaign events for Serbian political
parties or on public television. As recently as 9 May,
Veselin Sljivancanin, the war criminal convicted for the
Vukovar hospital massacre, was a guest at the official
military parade commemorating Serbian armed forces
and, paradoxically, the liberation of Europe. It is a
gruesome predicament that it was precisely Sljivancanin
who in 1991 pointed out Igor Kacić, the boy with the
little dolphin, separated him from his mother and sent
him to a horrific death together with hundreds of others.
Convicted war criminals have no place on
ceremonial stages or in public life. They belong on
the margins of society and civilization as an example
and eternal reminder of failed policies that led to
unspeakable atrocities. We have to prevent the demons
of the past and their toxic ideology from shaping our
present or our future. Generations to come and history
will be unforgiving of our failure to do so. Croatia
stands ready to cooperate with its neighbours and
assist them in overcoming the remaining obstacles in
facing the past as a precondition for lasting peace and
meaningful reconciliation.
I will repeat what I have stated on previous
occasions in the context of prolonged proceedings by
expressing our hope that in the case of Prlić et al., the
Tribunal will find ways not to prolong this complex
case, keeping in mind the targeted completion strategy.
With their contribution to international criminal
justice, the ICTY and the Mechanism, albeit being
temporal institutions, will undoubtedly leave behind a
permanent legacy. Their work is not over, as thousands
of victims and their loved ones are still waiting for
justice to be served and historical truth to be established.
On our part, we will continue to render our support and
assistance to them in completing their work.
Finally, the fact that I will not comment in any way
on Serbia’s comments today in no way implies that
Croatia agrees with them.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
We also thank the leadership of the ICTY and the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their respective reports and today’s
detailed briefing on the progress of legal proceedings,
completion strategy implementation and the transfer
30/31

08/06/2016

of the Tribunal’s functions to the Mechanism. We also
take note of the report (S/2016/441) of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services and the observations and
recommendations contained therein.
The achievements of the International Criminal
Tribunals have been an invaluable contribution to the
development of international criminal law and justice
in the past two decades. They stood at the forefront of
the fight against impunity, bringing to justice many of
those responsible for serious crimes against humanity
and playing a crucial role in promoting the rule of law at
both the international and national levels. Their legacy
is important for the future of international criminal
justice.
With the Mechanism having taken over all of the
remaining functions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda as of 1 January, and a date
foreseen for the closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslvia (ICTY) now in 2017,
we are mindful that the important work of the ICTY
is yet to be completed. We encourage the Tribunal to
complete its work expeditiously by the targeted date.
We acknowledge the judges’ efforts in identifying
further measures to expedite the pending cases, as
well as overall efforts to ensure the smooth transfer
of functions to the Residual Mechanism in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010).
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains dedicated to the
fight against impunity. Our full and steady cooperation
with the ICTY throughout the years reflects that
dedication and will continue with the Mechanism.
We are pleased to see that the Mechanism is in full
command of its designated operations. We trust that it
will continue to effectively carry out its work. Fighting
impunity at the domestic level is a prerequisite for
achieving national reconciliation and long-term
stability in a country and the region. The completion of
the ICTY mandate does not mean the end of the fight
against impunity in my country. We remain committed
to strengthening the national justice system at all
levels in order to bring to justice persons responsible
for atrocity crimes. Our national war crimes strategy
has improved the consistency of judicial practices
throughout the entire country at all levels, thereby
ensuring the protection and support of victims and
witnesses.
The implementation of a national strategy for
processing war crimes, regardless of the national or
16-16387

08/06/2016

ICTY & ICTR

religious origin of the perpetrators and victims, is of
crucial importance to a complex, multinational State.
During the reporting period, efficiency in war crimes
cases prosecutions at all levels steadily increased
and, as noted in the Prosecutor’s assessments, further
progress has been made by the Prosecutor’s Office
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in resolving outstanding
category 2 cases and in issuing important indictments.
However, as of 1 January there are 335 cases pending
in the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The implementation of the national war crimes
strategy has also played an important role in postconflict reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the support of the European Union in the
implementation of the strategy and the support of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Development Programme,
particularly in connection with witness protection
activities and providing appropriate assistance and
support to victims. In September 2015, the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted a justice
sector reform strategy for the period 2014 to 2018. The
strategy will contribute to the long-term reinforcement
of the rule of law and further consolidate the judicial

S/PV.7707

system, including measures to improve judicial
independence and efficiency.
As noted by the ICTY Prosecutor, regional
cooperation has significantly advanced over the
past decade through the dedicated efforts of judicial
officials, but more political will and support is now
needed to make accountability a regional issue and
advance solutions to current challenges. Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains committed to the promotion of
stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation,
and the best possible continuation of the work of the
Tribunal and preservation of its legacy. In our joint
efforts in delivering justice for numerous victims of our
region lies the true strength of reconciliation.
The successful completion of the Tribunals’
mandates will mark the end of one historic chapter,
changing the landscape of international criminal justice
forever. But our work in fighting impunity does not stop
there; we must reconfirm our strongest commitment
to accountability and the advancement of justice,
and deliver on that commitment without selectivity
or hesitation. That is the best possible tribute to the
groundbreaking achievements of those two institutions.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

16-1638731/31
