THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 29 MARCH 1977

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1996) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . , . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Natiolls addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 2295) .

1

SlPV. 1996

NOTE
Symbols of Unikd Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1996th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 29 March
President: Mr. Andrew YOUNG (United States of America),
I’t~~ent: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1996)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2295)
The meeting was called to order at 11 a!m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Represerr
tntive of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12295)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously
taken by the Council /1988th-1991st
and
1994th meetings/, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bahrain, Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia,
Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Mauritania, Mongolia, Nigeria,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Zaire
and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when they wish to address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr, S, M. Al Saffar (Bahrain), Mr. T. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. R. Alar&
(Cuba), Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid IEgYpt),
Mr. T. B. Sam (Ghana), Mr. M. S. Camara (Guinea), Mr. A.
Marpaung (Indonesia), Mr. F. M. Kasina (Kenya), Mrs. A.
Brooks-Randolph
(Liberia), Mr. H. Rasolondraibe (Madagascar), Mr. M. El Hassen (Mauritania), Mr. T. Puntsagnorov
(Mongolia), Mr. L. 0. Harriman (Nigeria), Mr. M. Fall
(Senegal), Mrs. S. Y. Gbujama (Sierra Leone), Mr. 1. B.

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

Fonseka (Sri Lanka), hfr. M. Al1a.f (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. A. Kodjovi (Togo), Mr. S. A. Salim (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. J. PetriC (Yugoslavia), Mr. Umba di Lutete
(Zaire) and Mr. D. W. Kamana (Zambia) took the places
reserved fbr them at the side of the Council chamber.
‘2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I should like to inform
members of the Council that letters have been received
from the representatives of Burundi, the German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Lesotho, Somalia and Sweden, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the question on the Council’s agenda. Accordingly, I propose, in accordance with the usual practice
and with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, under the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table whenever they wish to address
the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. 2. Banyiyezako
(Burundi), Mr. P. Florin (German Democratic Republic),
h!r. D. 0. Mills (Jamaica), Mr. C. D. Molapo (Lesotho),
Mr. A. H. Hussen (Somalia) and Mr. A. I. Thunborg
(Sweden) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Sweden. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
5. Mr. THUNBORG (Sweden): While thanking the Security Council for giving me the opportunity to speak, I
should also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the important office of President of the
Security Council. You are carrying with you high expectations, being identified in your own country with humanitarian and political principles of the highest importance.
6. When, during the last session of the General Assembly,
Sweden, together with a number of other delegations, took
the initiative to urge the Security Council to take steps with
regard to foreign investments in South Africa, it was the
intention of the Swedish delegation to pursue that initiative
in the Council later that year. However, owing to other
urgent problems, it was not possible for the Council to
meet on the South Africa question Until now. Though no

and supervision of the United Nations in accordance with
its recommendations. In furtherance of the desire for a
peaceful transition to majority rule it is of decisive
importance that the SWAP0 [South Wesf Africa People’s
Organization] liberation movement play its rightful role
as participant in the independence talks. The Ministers
stressed the importance of carrying out the United
Nations decision on a special programme in support of
Namibia’s national identity.

a member of the Council, Sweden haS felt that its
initiative in the General Assembly OII foreign investments in
South Africa would warrant our stating our views in the
Council on he situation in southern Africa and on ways to
reach political solutions to those problems.

longer

7. The question
of South Africa has always been one of
great concern to all political parties in my country. OnIY a
few days ago (199&d meeting/, a distinguished compatriot
of mine, Mr. Olaf palme, former Prime Minister, made a
statement in the Council which demonstrated the unanimous feeling in Sweden about the apartheid policy of the
South African rigime. There is now a very clear and
imminent risk of racial war in southern Africa. That also
goes for Rhodesia, where the minority regime is supported
by the South African Government in defiance of decisions
of the Security Council, and for Namibia, where the
situation is rapidly developing into an explosive one.

“Appreciation and support was expressed for the work
of voluntary organizations in stimulating public opinion
on the situation in southern Africa.”
10. During the thirty-first
session of the General Assembly, the Swedish delegation, together with a number of
other delegations, introduced a draft resolution concerning
the investments in South Africa. In that text, which WEIS
adopted by an overwhelming majority [resolution 3116 K],
the General Assembly urged the Security Council, when
studying the problem of the continued struggle against the
apartheid policies of South Africa, to consider steps to
achieve the cessation of further foreign investments in
South Africa. It would be of great political importance if
the Council could take a decision against new foreign
investment with the concurring votes of major economic
partners of South Africa. Thus a warning would be issued
to the regime at Pretoria that those countries whose
influence was crucial were indeed willing to follow up
general declarations against apartheid with concrete action.

8. The explosive situation, however, exists also in South
Africa itself where the mounting oppression by the white
minority of the black majority is creating tension and
violence to an escalating degree. As early as 1967, the
Swedish Government, as well as the other Nordic Governments, supported the view that the situation in South
Africa itself was a threat to international peace and
security. The tension is now so great that only drastic
change of the South African racist policy, together with a
rethinking regarding the South African policies in Zimbabwe and Namibia, can avert the threat to peace.

11. Now the Security Council has an opportunity
to
consider such actions. The Swedish approach has been to
find ways which could get the full support of major
investor countries. Therefore we have tried to suggest
formulas which will not collide with legal and other
considerations in the Western industrialized countries. At
the same time, however, the steps to be taken should be
followed by careful studies in order to evaluate the effect
of the international efforts.

9. Sweden strictly applies the voluntary arms embargo
against South Africa 2nd has urged the Security Council to
make the embargo mandatory. In Reykjavik, the Foreign
Ministers of the five Nordic States-Denmark,
Finland,
Iceland, Norway and Sweden-declared on 23 March that
the apartheid system constituted the core of the racial
conflict in southern Africa. The Ministers stated that they
would welcome a decision by the Council on a mandatory
arms embargo and on the prevention of new foreign
investments in South Africa. I quote the declaration:

12. The idea of taking some internationally co-ordinated
steps with the aim of achieving the cessation of further
investments has been referred to in several statements
during the debate, especially by African delegations. Some
of the statements have shed much light on its central
elements and given the reasons for such a proposal. These
statements and documentation on the South African
economy make it clear that South Africa during recent
years has launched long-term programmes for the expansion
of different sectors of its economy to create a much higher
degree of self-sufficiency than hitherto, and specifically in
the rapidly expanding military sector and the energy sector.
This economic strategy of South Africa, combined with
other developments concerning the price of gold and oil,
has led to serious balance of payments problems in the
South African economy. South Africa is trying to cope
with the difficulties by heavy borrowing abroad and by
inviting foreign investments into South Africa.

“The South African Government’s brutal repression of
the majority of the people was condemned. An appeal
was made for the expression of solidarity with the
struggle of the African people against the system of
apartheid, which constitutes the very essence of the racial
conflict in southern Africa. A decision by the Security
CounciI on a mandatory arms embargo would be welcomed. lt would be a significant action if the Security
Council, as a first step towards applying economic
Pressure against South Africa, took decisions aimed at
preventing new foreign investments.”
The Ministers ~SO said, regarding Zimbabwe and Namibia:
“The parties to the Zimbabwe conflict must be brought
back to the negotiation table. The Nordic countries
Pledge their full support for the continued efforts to
reach a Peaceful settlement providing for the substitution
of majority rule for the illegal minority rbgime.

13. New inflow of foreign capital in the form of investments and loans is crucial for the expanding programmes of
South Africa. Therefore the cessation of further foreign
investments would have a serious impact on South Africa’s

“South Africa’s continued occupation of Namibia is
iIIegaI. Free elections should be held under the control
2

ambitions to reach a higher degree of economic self-sufficiency and to continue its stunningly rapid military
expansion programme.

debate on southern Africa should be conducted under your
presidency, for southern Africa has become synonymous
with racism and denial of human rights. I am thus confident
that, under your presidency, the Council will adopt
measures that are as effective as the situation in southern
Africa is critical and dangerous. I thank you and through
you the members of the Council for giving me this
opportunity to address the Council on this issue which is of
great importance to all of us.

14. In this context, we must also remember the crucial
role of apartheid in the functioning of the South African
economy and its attraction for foreign investors. The virtual
impossibility for trade unions organizing black workers to
negotiate wages for their members, the police brutality and
oppression directed against any action by black workers,
such as strikes or go-slow actions, these elements add up to
a guarantee for the foreign investor of cheap labour and full
police protection against any labour action.

21. The system of apartheid practised by the white
minority Government of South Africa has long been
recognized by the international community as a crime
against humanity. It is a direct threat to the peace of
southern Africa and to international security. Of all the
evils that Western colonialism brought to the African
continent, none is more insidious than the racism that the
Afrikaner settlers brought to the Cape in the seventeenth
century. Racism has been developed into a dogma by the
Afrikaners.
They have built legal, social and political
institutions based on the belief that the Afrikaner is a
chosen race, a superior breed that enjoys a God-given right
to suppress other peoples. The African in South Africa is
confronted with a whole series of laws that circumscribe his
every activity, laws that deny his very humanity.

15. The investor in South Africa, using for his own benefit
the abhorrent apartheid policies, is taking a grave moral
responsibility upori himself while assisting in the overall
economic efforts of South Africa. Thus, however benevolent the decision of some foreign companies to improve
conditions for black labour in their subsidiaries in South
Africa, we must clearly understand that this can hardly
have any impact on the essence of the problem.
16. Sweden considers that both practical and moral
considerations strongly favour internationally co-ordinated
steps with the aim of achieving a halt to further foreign
investments in South Africa. If we managed to achieve a
general limitation of the flow of investments to South
Africa, its Government might better understand that the
international community is serious in its demands that the
policy ofapartheid must bc abolished.

22. The problems of southern Africa are caused by a
philosophy of arrogance, of racism, of apmtheid. Nothing
demonstrates the logic behind the problems of southern
Africa more clearly than a draft constitution of South
Africa written by Daniel Malan, a former Prime Minister of
South Africa. On the authority of a South African
President, the draft asserted “The State President is further
directly and only responsible to God and is altogether
independent of any vote in Parliament.” Again, it was
Mr. Malan who, speaking of the Afrikaner, said “Ask the
nation to lose itself in some other existing or as yet
non-existent nation, and it will answer ‘By God’s honour,
never’.” More recently, the South African Minister for the
Interior and Information said:

17. The Security Council could take a first step by
recommending that Governments actively discourage all
further investments in South Africa. That would give the
Governments of potential investors a broad framework and
flexibility in the choice of measures to be taken. Fbllow-up
machinery could provide Governments with information
concerning the effects of the steps taken and give indications for further action.

“Many things are negotiable within the apartheid
system, but two things we will fight and die for are the
identity of our Afrikaner nation and our right to be in
Africa. Political decisions affecting these will remain in
our hands exclusively in order that someone else cannot
decide that we-the Afrikaner-are swept away.”

18. The South African question has now been on the
agenda of the (Jnited Nations for many years. We are
unanimous in our view of the apartheid policy as totally
inhuman. South Africa’s policy has a direct bearing on
international peace and security. Nowever, the measures
taken have so far not produced any results. There is now a
challenge to act in a constructive way. Discord in the
Council can only serve the interests of the South African
Government.

From the spokesmen of apartheid we are accustomed to
nothing except the language of conflict, a language born
out of fear.

19. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Lesotho. I welcome him and invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

23. Any discussion on southern Africa must take into
account a basic reality. That reality is that the key to any
solutjon of the problems of southern Africa lies at Pretoria.
The bar to the exercise of fundamental human rights by the
peoples of Zimbabwe, of Namibia and of South Africa itself
is the Government of South Africa. It is Pretoria that
supports the Smith rbgime. If is Pretoria that supports the
Rhodesian economy. It is the South African Government
that supplies a defence umbrella to the white minority of
Smith. It is Pretoria that denies basic rights to the people of
Namjbja. It is the whjtc minority Government of South
Africa that is balkanizing Namibia and South Africa. It is

20. Mr, C. D. MOLAPO (Lesotho): Mr. President, there
are few occasions when history and circumstance conspire
to create a great event. Your chairmanship of this debate js
one such event. Your personal contribution to the civil
rights struggle in your country, your untiring efforts for the
betterment of the human condition and your role jn the
struggle against racial bigotry and for human rights need no
testimony. Therefore it is proper and fitting that this
3

appointed by Pretoria itself. At the sametime, South Africa
is busily destroying the territorial integrity of Namibiaby
extending its bantustan policy to that Territory in clear
violation of international law and numerous Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. The Turnhalle
Conference is no solution to the problem of Namibia.It is a
sure prescription. for a lack of stability and peace in
Namibia. It promisesnothing for the future of Natnibiabut
its certain destruction.

Pretoria that is both the champion and the bastion of white
minority rule in southern Africa. It is the white minority
Government of Pretoria that is the advocate and supporter
of the denial of human dignity to millions of South African
peoples in southern Africa.
24. In principle, my Government supported the Geneva
talks on Rhodesia, We did so in spite of the fact of Smith’s
chicanery and perversity. We did so despite his dishonesty.
We supported the Geneva talks ,in the face of the well
deserved reputation he gained at the’talks aboard the Tiger
of being unreliable. We knew of his tricks at the J’earkss
talks. My Government was well aware of the fact that the
Smith rigime had spurned all efforts towards a peaceful
solution to its rebellion. And yet we supported the talks
becausewe believed that all peaceful meansfor solving the
problem must be exhausted. If was clear to us that Smith’s
participation at the Geneva talks was not a voluntary act.
The talks were occasionedby the liberation struggleof the
people of Zimbabwe.

28. A week ago, the international comtnunity commemorated SharpevilleDay in memory of the 67 Africans
who were brutally massacredby agents of the South
African Government. Since last June, almost 4,000 people
have lost their lives in South Africa at the handsof South
African police. Since the Soweto demonstrations,hundreds
of children have becomerefugeesand others are languishing
in South African gaols.If anything, apartheid hasbecome
more and more brutal. Thousands of Africans are being
dispossessed
of their South African citizenship. Against
their will, they are being dumped into bantustans.To be
25. Once again the Smith regime has rendered a peace black in South Africa today is to live in a twilight of terror,
to be dehumanized, to live in perpetual fear of loss of
initiative abortive, It is a matter of public record that that
regime is responsible for the breakdown of the Geneva liberty and life, to live in endlessdangerof unemploymerlt
talks. In’ the view of my Government, all peaceful avenues and to live in fear of a gaol tenancy. hi short, it is to live
for solving the Rhodesianproblem are almost closed. It is without any rights whatsoever. For even in gaolthere is no
clear to us that the Smith r6gime finds no value in
safety. Since 1963, according to the South African press,
37 detainees held in South African gaols for politica
negotiations except to buy time. The international comreasonshave died, and of these, 16 have lost their lives in
munity thus has a clear duty to help the Zimbabwe
the last 12 months. Asked to explain this strangephenomliberation movements to put an end to the Smith rebellion.
enon of the demiseof the political prisoners,the South
26. It is a seriousindictment of the United Nations system African Minister of Justice, Mr. Jimmy Kruger, expressed
his regrets and, in a remarkableadmission,said“the deaths
that it has permitted 12 years of Smith’s rebellion. Over a
were unavoidable”. He further alleged that all the deatlls
decade of Smith’s suppression entitles the people of
Zimbabwe to freedom now. The people of Zimbabwe
were suicides. In reply to press inquiries into how tile
rightfully expect the Council to take effective measures suicidescould have occurred,Mr. Kruger is reported to have
against the Smith r&me. The path to their liberation no
said, “The facts of each case,in our view, show that there
was all the supervision present that can reasonably be
longer lies through Geneva. That path is now clearly in the
direction of toppling the Smith rigime by all means expected from the police and the prison authorities.” I cnn
possible.
do no better than to list 13 questions‘that a South African
paper has put to Mr. Kruger in connexion with these
27. The Organization of African Unity, in a search for a
deaths:
peaceful solution to the problems of southern Africa,
adopted the Lusaka Manifesto in 1969.1 The peace
(a) Why is there apparently so little supervisionover
initiatives in that manifesto were contemptuously turned
detainees as to allow suicidesto occur with such regudown by the white minority regimes of southern Africa.
larity?
Africa does not believe in war for its own sake. Africa is
prepared to accommodate the white minorities in a
lb) Why is there apparently so little supervisionthat
framework of non-racial societies.We are fully consciousof
detaineesare able to jump to their deaths down stairwnys
the tragic consequencesof a racial war. We have tried all
and out of buildings?
conceivable meansof averting racial confrontation. In 1975
the Organization of African Unity adopted the Dar es
(c) To what extent are. the circumstancessurrounding
Salaam Declaration on Southern Africa. That Declaration
deaths investigated by external, independent authorities
contained proposalsfor solving the problem of Namibia and
rather than by the police and prison officials in whose
for ending South Africa’s illegal occupation of that Terricustody the detaineeswerewhen they died?
tory. Now we know South Africa’s answers to those
proposals. Instead of talking to SWAPO, the authentic and
(d) In view of the growing number of deaths, what
legittiate representative of the people of Namibia, instead precautionary measuresare being instituted to protect tile
of grasping the SWAP0 offer of talks, South Africa is lives of those taken into custody?
attempting to continue its control of Namibia through the
so-called Turnhalle Conference-a conference of persons
(el Does the Minister agree that such precautionary
measuresare especially necessarywhen people are being
1 See Orficial Records of the Geneml Assembly, Twenty-fourth
held incommunicado-to ensurethat justice, if it cannot be
Session,
Annexes, agenda
item 106, documentA/7754.
seento be done, is beingdone?
4

convicted and gaoled for being members of the Communist
Party; yet norie of them seem to have obeyed the orders
requiring their suicide, or to have had the misfortune to die
in the ways that appear to afflict black detainees.

(f) Is the Minister aware of the comments .of Acting
Chief Justice Viljoen in the case of the Minister of Police
versus Maria Nomvula Skosana, which was heard last
September? In the appeal, which concerned the death of a
man who had been in ordinary police custody, the court
said:

(m) Finally, can Mr. Kruger explain why the Government
is SO determined not to appoint a full-scale judicial
commission of inquiry into detainee deaths?

“Where detainees are concerned, no policeman should
allow his diligence to lag for a moment. He is the
custodian of the detainees under his charge who have
been deprived of their freedom of movement and whose
capacity to make their own decisions and carry them out
has not only been restricted but completely neutralized.”

29. Those are certainly grave questions which must be
answered with all seriousness. So far, the South African
Government has dismally failed to answer those questions
fully. My Government, has consistently called for the release
of all political prisoners. That call has never been more
urgent than now, when “accidental deaths” have apparently
replaced judicial process of law.

(g) On 28 October last year Mr. Justice James, in
acquitting four security policemen accused of culpable
homicide arising from the death of detainee Joseph Mdluli,
said accounts before the court had not satisfactorily
explained all Mr. Mdluli’s injuries. The problem of how
Mr. Mdluli met his death was a problem of the greatest
importance and should be solved, said the judge. On
25 January,
Mr. Kruger
told Parliament
that after
Mr. Mdluli’s body had been given to an undertaker, it had
been mutilated and photographs of it taken. That was why
the judge wanted a further investigation, he said. Could
Mr. Kruger explain the apparent disparity between what
Mr. Justice James said and what Mr. Kruger said Mr. Justice
James had said?

30. The Council should bear with me if I have to quote
the South African press again, but it knows that the news
media in South Africa are themselves in danger of being
muzzled. According to a report of 18 March in the South
African press:
“The story of Mr. Tembani Phantsi, who has been
released after 513 days in solitary confinement, must
have shocked even those South Africans whose initial
sense of outrage at the country’s detention laws has been
dulled by time. It should be investigated without delay by
the Minister of Police, Mr. J. Kruger.”

(h) On 25 January, Mr. Kruger said in Parliamentreferring to incisions made on the corpse of detainee
Naboath Ntshuntsha-that
the incisions had been made
without explicit authority, following a practice that had
apparently developed in some mortuaries. But Johannesburg’s State Pathologist, Professor J. J. F. Taljaard, who
had performed the Ntshuntsha post-mortem, said “I have
done many postmortems in my time, both in Johannesburg
and in the Southern Transvaal, and I have never encountered such an incident.” Could Mr. Kruger ,,explain this
anomaly?

According
to reports, Mr. Phantsi was arrested on
16 October 1975, under section 6 of the Terrorism Act,
while a student in Amanzimtoti. Mr. Phantsi, now 21, was
released from prison in East London last Saturday without
being charged. In all that time, he claims, he was not given
the reason for his arrest, though he was interrogated in the
first weeks of his detention about people who had left the
country for military training. He was also questioned about
a banned couple who had left the country. Mr. Phantsi says
he was not interrogated at all from late November 1975
until his sudden release. Even by South African standards,
this is a horrifying story. Why was he ke$ in solitary
confinement for more than 15 months after his interrogators had apparently finished with him? How many more
people arc being heId in similar circumstances?

(i) Of the 37 political detainees known by the press to
have died since 1963, 17 have died, according to the police,
from causes other than suicide. Of those 17, 9 are said to
have died from natural causes, 3 from accidents-2 slipping
in showers and 1 falling downstairs-and
5 for reasons as
yet undisclosed. In view of Mr. Kruger’s assertion that
Communist detainees are under instructions to commit
suicide, does he not view with concern the number of
detainees whose deaths are attributed by the police to other
causes?

3 1. Month in, month out, there are reports of arrests
under the detention laws. There are no announcements, no
explanations. The security police are not obliged to give
any. People simply disappear and then turn up again. For
example, it was also reported this week that a young
woman, held during the unrest in August, was freed last
Wednesday after 210 days of detention, She claims that she
had to beg in the streets for her rail fare home to
Krugersdorp. Mr. Phantsi, too, was allegedly freed without
any money or even a rail warrant. Three other people are
known to have been released last week, one after 240 days
in detention. How can a society, which calls itself civilized,
endure such a situation? I should like to appeal through
this august Council to the Government of South Africa to
let the sons and daughters of Africa in Robben Island and
other gaols go free in the interests of morality and
humanity.

(i) Why has compensation been paid in at least two cases
to the relatives of dead detainees if the State admits no
culpability?
(k) According to press reports, 37 detainees held for
political reasons have died since 1963 and, of them, 16 have
died since March last year. Does Mr. Kruger have a fuller
list, and, if so, who is on that list?
(1) Can Mr. Kruger explain why all the detainee deaths
have been of blacks? During the same period of time,
numbers of whites have been detained and subsequently
S

36, The so-called homelands policy is nothing but an
extension of rrpartheid. Nothing can mask the fact that it
was conceived to perpetuate white domination. The 1913
Land Act dispossessed Africans of their rights to the land of
South Africa. The bantustan policy strips them of their
South African citizenship. The so-called bantustan leaders
are no less than henchmen of the apartheid rbgime. The
bantustans symbolize the biggest treachery that has been
committed against the black people of South Africa. They
are the perpetuation of the white paradise of privilege,
affluence and a fabulously easy-going life.

32. South Africa presents the’ world with unique problems, some of which have no historical ,parallel or precedent. In the words of one white South African clergyman: “No other society has thrown up the situation where
the process of production so completely determines and
shapes the lives of such vast numbers of workers and their
families as has the migratory labour system.”
33. By a combination of historical accident and colonial
design, the independent countries of southern Africa are
confronted with the critical situation of exporting labour to
South Africa. My country supplies 22 per cent of the
mining labour in South Africa. Migrant labourers are at the
bottom of the scale where human rights are concerned in
South Africa. In 1936, a white wage was 11.5 times a black
one. By 1969, it was 20 times the size. The migrant
labourer has no right to participate in labour unions. There
are for him no avenues of negotiation for a better wage.
The investment of his labour has no reward, His stay in
South Africa divorces him from his family and friends. In
the mines, he is housed in compounds. His contract has no
terminal benefits. He is not covered by any insurance
schemes. He is at once the most brutally exploited worker
ever. Once again, I should like to appeal to the international
community to consider, as a matter of extreme urgency, an
international convention on the rights of migrant workers.

37. Despite the repression to which the Africans are
subjected, they have not lost their will or spirit. The events
of Soweto and Langa clearly demonstrated that the black
spirit was indomitable: that nparfheid had not vanquished
the spirit of the vast majority of the people of South
Africa. The strikes by workers at Durban and in the mines
also showed that the struggle for a decent livelihood was
not dead and that Robben Island had not broken the will
for the quest for liberty.
38, The vast majority of the people of South Africa reject
bantustans and know that the white minority is simply
using the so-called homelands to throw around the white
laager a co&n sanituirebehind which they hope to retreat.

34. Last December, the Security Council adopted resolution 402 (1976) in response to the appeal of my Government following the closure of the south-eastern border of
my country. Since the adoption of that resolution, the
Secretary-General has dispatched a Special Mission to my
country to assessour problems. The Mission had cxtensivc
discussions with tis and toured the south-eastern sector of
our border. I should like to place on public record my
Government’s appreciation for the objective manner in
which the Mission conducted its work and express the hope
that its report2 will reflect the very serious situation facing
my country.

39. General Assembly resolution 3 l/6 A on the bantustans
is clear and unequivocal. Its wording is simple and clear. It
calls on all States to give no succour to the bantustans. Yet
there are States which, for purposes of petty cash and for
petty profit, are acting in collusion with the Pretoria
Administration in its territorial disintegration of South
Africa. Reverend Smangaliso Mkhatshwa, an executive
member of the Black People’s Convention, a few days ago
posed this question: “But how often do we have to tell you
Westerners that the deprived majority in this country-the
Indian, the black, the Coloured-identifies all its suffering
with the capitalist system? Where would South Africa be
withcut your investment? ” To those States which have put
profit above morality and which arc putting value on petty
cash above the human rights of the people of South Africa,
I need only observe that the struggle for the liberation of
southern Africa is irreversible and that its victory is not in
doubt.

3.5. Since the events of last October, when Pretoria
granted its bogus independence to the Transkei, my
country has faced serious problems that continue to
threaten our very existence as an independent State., In an
effort to create hardship for our people, the Government of
South Africa has, in violation of outstanding agreements,
lifted what it called “subsidies” on the price of imports into
Lesotho of wheat, maize and flour. This act, coming soon
after the adoption of resolution 402 (1976), was clearly
calculated to exact revenge. It will result in an additional
impact bill of approximately $2.5 million to my country. It
is hitting the very poor of my country. It is an act of bitter
vengeance. However, I should like to inform the Council
that no act on the part of South Africa, however punitive
its conception or bitter its motivation, will induce any
acceptance of bantustans on our part. In their desperation,
the Transkei bantustan leaders are preparing to legislate
capital punishment for opponents of their bogus state. To
them, I need only observe that the murder of any person
simply because he does not recognize the farce of the
Transkei’s independence will be a criminal act-a criminal
act that will one day have to be answered for to the people
of South Africa.

40. For too long, the countries that claim to be the
mainstay of Western civilization, the countries that have
articulated the basic rights of man, have been the main
supporters of the white minority Government of Sollth
Africa, They are the countries that have become indifferent
to the rights of the btack man in South Africa. They have
led the white minority Government into believing that it
Can count on their continuing support. Some have gone SO
far as to equate the liberation struggle with cold-war
slogans. I do hope that they will realize that their long-term
interests will best be served by supporting those on the side
of justice and human rights.
41. Last October in the General Assembly3 1warned that
the establishment of bantustans next to Lesotho was an act
3 Official Records of the General Asse~nbly, Thirty-first Sesskl,
Plenary Meetings, 29th meeting.

2 Issued on 30 March 1977 as document S/12315.
6

that had no purpose except to increase tensions in southern
Africa.
The Transkei has already demonstrated
the
problems which are bound to arise. South Africa is already
Planning further problems for us. Pretoria has made clear its
intention to grant pseudo-independence to, Bophuthatswana
next October. Pretoria has not learnt any lessons from the
decision of the international community not to recognize
its bantustan waifs. The lesson must be rammed home. The
same fate must await the bantustan rkgime of Bophuthatswarm. The international community must refuse to give
credence to a farce. It must refuse to recognize the bogus
independence of all the planned bantustans.

law. Clearly, therefore, all independent African countries
south of the equator are under a direct threat and likely to
be attacked when it suits the purposes of Pretoria.
46. It is the irony of the tragedy of the South African
situation that Pretoria shares with the international community an acute awareness of the explosive nature of
apartheid. In response to the numerous relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, South Africa
has embarked on a series of measures which, in its view, will
avert the impending disaster of conflict. The hallmark of all
those measures is their lack of seriousness and sincerity as
solutions to the problem of apartheid.

42. The establishment of those bantustans on land that
beiongs to the Basotho nation is a most irresponsible act,
On the south-eastern
border of Lesotho, the Transkei
bantustan occupies part of the territory of Lesotho, Oh the
north-western
sector of the Lesotho frontier, the Qwaqwa
bantustan is already being constructed on Lesotho land. On
the western sector, yet another bantustan, Bophuthatswana, has been created. The intention is clear; the signs are
unmistakable.
South Africa is creating bantustans on our
land in all sectors of our common frontiers with South
Africa, in an effort to strangle my country, Two centuries
ago, the founder of the Basotho nation, King Moshoeshoe I,
said in a reference to the unjust and illegal boundary
agreements which were being imposed on Lesotho that, in
his opinion, nothing had contributed more to racial
disharmony
in past years than a single factor-Warden’s
line. He considered it unfair, entirely impracticable and an
affront to the Basotho.

47. South Africa has come up with promises of abolition
of petty apartheid. The very phrase “petty apartheid” is,
however, an indication of a grander scheme to entrench
apartheid and preserve white domination and privilege.
South Africa has come up with the concept of bantustans.
Bantustans are, however, nothing less than the reintroduction of colonialism and the creation of large reservoirs
of cheap black labour. South Africa has proposed d6tente
with independent Africa and yet Pretoria refuses to build
bridges of communication to Robben Island. It refuses to
talk to the authentic leaders of the majority of the people
of South Africa. South Africa has opted for .dialogue. To
Pretoria, dialogue is no more than an explanation of the
basis of white rule.
48. There are only two options open to the white
minority Government of South Africa, The first option
leads to war and bloodshed. That option is the road that
will inevitably have to be followed if the champions of
apartheid have their way; it is the path that will have to be
chosen if those who cling to power and white domination
and privilege continue their strangIehold on South Africa.
Already that group has chosen the path of war and racial
confrontation. It is that group which wants South Africa to
pay the price of racial conflict for the sake of outdated
notions of racial superiority. What, then, is in store for
South Africa if the racists carry the day? Internal
insurrection
and armed struggle, the buildup of revolutionary forces both inside South Africa and on its borders.
What is in store for South Africa is the ghastly prospect of
bloodshed on a scale not seen before in Africa. What this
choice portends is the beginning of the end of the promise
of racial harmony in South Africa and the end of the future
of the white man on the African subcontinent. South
Africa will end up in ruins. But at least it will be a new
South Africa, one in which the evil of apartheid will have
been finally exorcised. But the price will be high.

43. The persistent refusal by South Africa to deal in a
spirit of neighbourliness with the question of our lands, is
bound to sour the relations between the people of Lesotho
and South Africa for the foreseeable future, for no
generation of Basotho is going to forget my country’s just
claims. What, after all, is Pretoria afraid of? Is it the risk of
arbitration?
Is its case so patently weak that it cannot
stand up to judicial scrutiny? Why has South Africa
rcncgcd on its original proposals for a joint boundary
commission to settle the question of those lands? We for
our part are prepared to abide by any decision based on
law. We are prepared to assist in shortening the agenda of
southern African problems. We are prepared to avoid
confrontation
and to seek peaceful solutions to our
problems. But we are not prepared to become orphans of
colonialism and unequal treaties and victims of apartheid.
44. This debate is not a gratuitous discussion of the
internal affairs of South Africa. It is a debate on the issues
of war and peace. The massive intervention by South Africa
in the Republic of Angola in 1975 demonstrated beyond
any shadow of doubt the aggressive nature of apartheid and
white minority rule. This Council is well aware of the
numerous acts of aggression committed against the Republics of Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique. Indeed, the
white minority
regimes in southern Africa derive their
strength from apartheid.

49. The second option leads to peace in southern Africa
and away from war, That option requires Pretoria to take a
series of steps now before it is too late. Pretoria must
abolish apartheid and all the evils ,that go with it. It must
recognize the common humanity of man. It must restore to
the majority of the people of South Africa their human
dignity. Pretoria must agree to imprement majority rule in
South Africa. It must create conditions of equitable sharing
of the fruits of the resources of South Africa. There is a
readiness on the part of the African majority to follow this
option. Lately, a few white voices have also indi’cated their
support. Will the majority of the whites forfeit this chance

45. Only last year, the Minister for Defence of South
Africa made a startling claim that, for purposes of defence,
the boundaries of South Africa extended to the equator.
That claim has now been formulated into South African
7

to save South Africa from bloodshed or will they follow the
first option of the hardcore racists? The choice must be
made by the whites of South Africa. The options are clear,
the time is limited; the dangers in the South African
situation are too great and frightening.

was dangerous 14 years ago and it is much more explosive
today. If we think only of the political aspect of current
events in southern Africa, we cannot fail to note that South
Africa is at the centre of a web of violence and unrest that
covers the whole area.

50. The Council must heed the call for assistance from the
majority of the people of South Africa. Their agony lies on
all our consciences and their suffering indicts all of us.
Their condition contains the seeds of disaster. The world
cannot afford another racial holocaust.

58. Inside South Africa, we have begun to see the most
pessimistic predictions of racial conflict becoming reality.
The United Nations, which has a special responsibility for
the oppressed people of South Africa, cannot and should
not be indifferent
to the rising tide of violence and
bloodshed in that country. Soweto and its aftermath
indicate that the frustrations of the non-white people can
no longer be contained. The continuing pattern of brutal
retaliation against legitimate protest-even to the extent of
killing hundreds of schoolchildren and other unarmed and
defenceless people-is evidence of the dismal failure of the
approaches that have been tried by the United Nations to
combat apartheid
since the time of the Sharpeville
massacre.

51. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Somalia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
52. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): Sir, my delegation wishes to
thank you and the members of the Security Council for
affording us this opportunity to take part in the debate on
the question of the racist and illegal policies of the white
minority regime in South Africa.

59. Another aspect of the deteriorating situation in
southern Africa is the massive arms buildup in South
Africa, which is a grim reminder of the failure of tile
non-mandatory arms embargo. The intensive militarization
of South Africa is a factor which adds immeasurably to the
tensions and insecurity of the southern African region. It
indicates clearly that the Vorster rCgime intends to uphold
and defend its racist policies and, if possible, extend its evil
influence beyond the borders of South Africa proper.

53. I shall first of all join with numerous other colleagues
in wishing you every success in your new post as Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations, and in welcoming your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council for the current
month. You have shown, by both word and deed, a keen
and sympathetic interest in African affairs. I am confident
that, within the limitations in which you can act, you will
try your utmost to fulfil the promise of a new approach
and a new concern for those questions which have for so
long threatened the peace and security of the African
continent and, indeed, of the world at large.

60. Those who have taken the lead in arming South
Africa, or who continue to condone that abrogation of tile
responsibilities of United Nations membership, are clearIy
on the side of injustice and tyranny. The open-ended
supply of arms to the Vorster r&me, including patents for
the manufacture of sophisticated weapons, has without
doubt increased the capability of the South African
Government
for oppression internally and aggression
externally.

54. Allow me also to express my delegation’s heartfelt
sympathy and solidarity with the Governments and peoples
of Romania and Iran with regard to the recent tragic
natural calamities which have caused great losses in both
human lives and property.

61. Vorstcr’s support of the illegal Ian Smith rCgime i11
so-called Southern Rhodesia undermines the legitimate
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for self-determinatiotl
and true national independence, engenders acts of aggression against Zambia and Mozambique, and flouts the
authority of the world Organization.

55. The question uppermost in the minds of many of us
here is whether or not the Security Council will continue
shadow-boxing
on the question of South Africa as it has
done for the past 17 years.
56. In 1963, the Council acknowledged that .the situation
in South Africa was seriously disturbing international peace
and security, and yet it stopped short of exercising fully its
’ responsibility,
as spelled out in Article 1 of the Charter,
namely, to take effective measures for the prevention and
removal of threats to the peace. The non-mandatory arms
embargo it imposed at that time has of course been
scandalously flouted over the years, and the Council has
consigned to oblivion its own expert committee’s finding
that economic sanctions would be feasible if scrupulously
observed by the small group of States constituting South
Africa’s main trading partners.

62. South Africa’s open and large-scale armed aggression
against Angola is a matter of record. The Council, which
recently had before it the complaints of Lesotho and
Botswana, does not need to be reminded that those two
countries have been added to the list of front-line States
which are under economic and other pressures because of
their opposition to the minority regimes and because of
their determination to support international efforts to end
the unjust situation in Zimbabwe and to refuse to recognize
the so-called independence of the Transkei.

57. In more recent times, the triple vetoes exercised by
permanent members of the Council to block resolutions
calling for a mandatory, arms embargo have been particularly disappointing in view of the steadily deteriorating
situation in southern Africa. The situation in that region

63. The deep concern of the international community
over such problems is even more strongly felt in the case of
Namibia, because of the United Nations special responsibility for that Territory. South Africa’s intransigence on the
question of Namibia alone provides sufficient grounds for
8

the Security Council to apply enforcement measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter. South Africa’s continued illegal
occupation of the Territory constitutes an act of aggression.
If this were not sufficient evidence of its status as an
international law-breaker,
the war being waged by the
minority r6gime against the liberation forces of Namibia,
and the use of that Territory as a springboard for attacks on
neighbouring African States, are even more tangible evidence of the threat to the peace of the region posed by
Pretoria’s aggressive policies.

refugees from the so-called independent Transkei are being
decimated by malnutrition and disease, according to a
recent press report; and that is not an isolated incident. It
has happened in the past and will no doubt happen again as
the South African rkgime implements its iniquitous bantustan plan which denies the indigenous people their
humanity and makes them aliens in their own land, deprives
them of their heritage and just share in the rich and
abundant resources of their own country, and entraps them
in enclaves-bantustans-where
they can continue to supply
the privileged white minority with an abundant source of
cheap migrant labour. In short, it is real serfdom.

64. No aspect of the southern African situation reflects
more clearly the failure of the Security Council to act with
credibility than the Namibian question. It is perhaps the
only southern African problem on which tliere is unanimity, in principle, on the issues and their implications.
And yet one ultimatum after another has been handed to
the Pretoria rBgime in this context. In each case the
predictable non-compliance of the Vorster r@gime has been
met with further extensions of time, further expressions of
sympathy for the people of Namibia and further inaction
on the part of the Council.

68. The international community
is fully aware that,
without external assistance, the regime at Pretoria would
not have survived for the years it has. It has survived
because of the substantial economic, military and technological assistance that it continues to receive from certain
countries of the Western world and, in recent years, from
the racist r&ime at Tel Aviv. The United Nations is well
aware of that co-operation.
Many reports have been
published by the Special Committee against Apartheid and
by the Commission on Human Rights indicating the extent
and nature of that unholy collaboration. Last year the
General Assembly discussed the sinister collaboration
between Tel Aviv, Salisbury and Pretoria-collaboration
which has been carried out in complete disregard of United
Nations resolutions and to the peril of the African
population of South Africa and Zimbabwe on the one hand
and the Palestinian people and other Arabs in the occupied
Arab territories on the other.

65. I turn now to yet another grave political consideration
that calls for decisive action by the Security Council. The
bloodshed, violence and tension that are now rife in
southern Africa should provide the Council with a sense of
urgency. The Council would be acting well within its
mandate to prevent threats to the peace before they occur,
if it took measures which would both support the just
aspirations of the people of the area and remove a
dangerous source of international conflict. Certainly, if the
Rhodesian situation could be judged a threat to international peace and security, it is difficult to see how South
Africa, which has always been at the root of that burning
question, can continue with impunity to impose its illegal
and inhuman policies on millions of people and defy the
authority of the United Nations.
66. The basis of the political turmoil in southern Africa is,
of course, the denial of the fundamental human rights of
the non-white majorities by the white minorities of South
Africa and Zimbabwe. At the time of Sharpeville and in the
years immediately following that event, the aparrkeid plan
for the separation of the races in South Africa had only just
begun to be implemented. But even then the membership
of the United Nations was able to discern that the scope
and intensity of apartheid’s racist philosophy was so
extraordinary that its existence was rightly a matter for
international concern and international action.

69. My delegation has not been surprised by this recent
development because all three regimes share common
features in that they not only support but also practise
colonialism and racism in the areas under their despotic
rule, That racist axis is directed towards the exploitation of
the peoples which have the misfortune of falling under their
domination and is aimed at maintaining in perpetuity racial
and political supremacy, no matter what tha cost. A few
weeks ago, the first Afro-Arab Summit Conference Meeting,
held at Cairo, discussed the threat posed by those three
r6gimes for Africa and the Arab world. It was unanimously
agreed that the most effective way of bringing pressure on
those three evil rCgimes was by political and economic
isolation. To this effect, the Conference affirmed the
necessity of continuing to impose a total boycott-political,
diplomatic, cultural, sporting, economic and, in particular,
an oil embargo-against
those regimes [S/12298, III~IEEX,
para. 81.

67. During the years since Sharpeville, we have all become
aware of the effects of the full implementation of apartheid
on the lives of the non-white people of South Africa and
Namibia. We know that those people have been stripped of
all political rights and all the rights of citizenship, a
discriminatory system of education and employment aims
at keeping them in subjection, and hundreds of thousands
are being callously uprooted and dumped-as though they
were garbage-in barren areas where they are often left
without basic services, employment opportunities or hope.
In many cases the uprooting caused by the separation of
the races has been accompanied by great loss of life,
particularly among children. At the present time, 30,000

70. The United Nations campaign to eliminate apartheid-a crime against humanity-and
to remove a real and
present threat to peace and security, not only in Africa but
also in the world at large, has obviously failed. The reason
for this failure is no secret. South Africa’s trading partners,
after Sharpeville, contented themselves with expressions of
abhorrence for apartheid even while they were reaping the
economic benefits of their burgeoning trade with and
investments in South Africa. To cover up their unwillingness to carry out so unprofitable a course of action as
economic sanctions, they declared that the measures which
they alone could have made effective were impractical. The
economic, financial and moral support of its trading
9

partners enabled South Africa to entrench
policies and defy the United Nations.

impractical or unattainable. These measures constitute the
minimum that is consonant with the responsibility of the
Council for removing and preventing threats to peace and
security. Anything less would be an abdication of responsibility and a severe disappointment to the majority of
Member States of the world Organization. Mr. Olof Palme
of Sweden, in his statement to the Council on 25 March,
stated:

its aparlheid

71. Details of the continuing flow of investments into
South Africa and of the results of the arms trade have
already been eloquen-tly and cogently described by the
representative of Mauritius [1988th meeting] and other
speakers who have preceded me. I shall simply confine
myself to saying that those who condone those investments
and profit from the trade in arms which are being used
against the freedom fighters of Africa have clearly chosen
the side of tyranny and injustice.

“The Security Council should be the expression of a
united political will. Therefore the oppressed peoples
look towards the Council with hope and expectation.

72. When the question arises of legitimizing and supporting the liberation struggle of the populations which
have tried every avenue of peaceful change without success,
some of those trading partners of South Africa show their
true colors. They are the first to insist that the policies of
friendly persuasion and of gradual social change through
economic prosperity must be continued, although they
know that those policies have failed to have any significant
effect on apartheid and indeed have fed its monstrous
growth. Those States, which have great power to influence
the nature and the outcome of racial confrontation
in
southern Africa, must recognize that they are witnessing
the development of an inevitable process-a process experienced in the past by many peoples-for
example, the
people of the United States. Americans once proclaimed to
the world that whenever any form of government became
destructive of the inalienable rights of the people to life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness, it was the right of the
people to alter or abolish that government. These sentiments were expressed to justify the first colonial rebellion,
where the grievance ‘was a tax on tea. 1 hope I shall be
forgiven for further paraphrasing the American Declaration
of Independence when I observe that, if one considers the
long train of abuses and usurpations designed to reduce the
non-white people of southern Africa to submission under
absolute despotism, it must be concluded that, like those
early Americans, they too have the right and duty to
provide for their future security.

“It is sometimes said that there is no higher moral
purpose than to preserve peace. Rightly so. But as long as
there is apartheid and racism there can be no peace.”
[I 992nd meeting, para. 9 7.1
My delegation fully subscribes to that viewpoint.
74. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic, whom I invite
to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
75. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, it is an honour for
me to welcome you, a well-known political figure of your
country, to the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of March. I greet in your person the representative
of a State with which the German Democratic Republic, on
the basis of the principles of peaceful coexistence enshrined
by the representatives of our States in the Final Act of the
Helsinki Conference, strives to develop many-sided relations
to our mutual advantage. I should like to express the hope
and the confidence that the discussion of the questions on
the agenda of the Council this month will bc conducted
successfully by you on the basis of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
76. I wish to thank the members of the Council on behalf
of the delegation of the German Democratic Republic, a
member of the Special Committee against Apartheid, for
this opportunity
to take part in the discussion on the
question of South Africa, in accordance with the request of
the African Group.

73. Of course, the members of the Security Council and
the countries with the greatest economic and military
involvement in South Africa are not being asked here to
promote revolution. They are being asked to take peaceful
but firm and effective measures now, so that further
violence and bloodshed of incalculable proportions can be
averted. This is the wish of the overwhelming majority of
Member States which have been frustrated in the past by
the failure of the Council to take such minimal action as to
support the isolation of the Vorster regime in the ways long
recommended by the General Assembly. Those ways
require action under Chapter VII of the Charter, namely, to
make the arms embargo mandatory, to impose an embargo
on the supply of petroleum and other strategic raw
materials to South Africa and to put the Council’s weight
behind measures to stop the flow of investment into South
Africa. As a recent study of the Special Committee against
Apartheid”
has shown, the South African economy is
extremely vulnerable at the present time to such actions,
and these proposals should not be brushed off as being

77. The situation in southern Africa is known
to all. The
representatives of the African peoples have described in
detail and analysed here in the Security Council the
situation in that par-t of the world. World public opinion
has every reason to be alarmed. The racist regimes in
southern Africa continue to perpetrate shameful crimes in
practising the policy of apartheid. It is not simply a
question of the violation of the human rights of individuals;
we are talking about crimes against humanity of a kind for
which, in their time, the German Fascists were sentenced to
death at Nuremberg. The racist regimes of Pretoria and
Salisbury are in effect waging a race war against millions of
people and taking a toll of many victims, They do not even
stop at the murder of women and children. In allowing
those militarists to continue their devilry, WC are witnesses
of even more terrible crimes. It is not a question of whether

4 A/AC.lU/L.456.

10

or not there will be racial war but of how to avert an even
greater disaster.

wage a liberation struggle by all means, including the use of
arms, against the armed champions of the terrorist rkgime.
Whoever wishes to stop a bloodbath there must do
everything to speed up the victory of the oppressed
fighters. It is therefore necessary to give every possible
assistance and support to the national liberation movements, and the racist rCgime should be placed in isolation in
the most comprehensive meaning of the word:

78. It is well known too that South Africa has perpetrated
aggression against neighbouring States in which people of
different races have equal rights. There is justification for
believing that South Africa is in effect in a state of war with
the United Nations, because the Government of that State
continues its occupation of Namibia in defiance of the will
of our Organization and in violation of international law,
and has forced its inhumane rCgime on the population of
that part of the world.

83. The Charter of the United Nations provides for all
necessary measures to be taken against a Member of the
Organization which violates its principles as flagrantly as
does South Africa.

79. The racist rdgime of South Africa is daily increasing its
armaments. Its arms expenditure has risen dramatically in
recent years, thanks to the financial assistance from
imperialist circles and from the international institutions
under their influence. It is no secret that it was not without
the assistance of certain NATO circles and their monopolies
that the establishment in South Africa of the largest
military and industrial complex on the African continent
was effected. According to statistical data, for each white in
South Africa there are more than two firearms. Furthermore, the racist rBgime has heavy and super-heavy arms the
number of which they intend to increase in the future. It is
not difficult to guess against whom those weapons are
aimed. They are aimed against the citizens of their own
country who will never reconcile themselves to oppression
and exploitation,
and against South Africa’s peaceful
neighbours who concentrate their efforts on creating for
their peoples a life worthy of human beings.

84. In his statement on the occasion of the International
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the
President of the General Assembly stated:
“Year after year resolutions are adopted by the United
Nations and associated organizations calling for concerted
action against the regimes that practise racial discrimination and apartheid. The world is entitled to ask why
these resolutions have not been implemented. The answer
is easy to find. There are still in this world too many
nations which proclaim their opposition to apartheid and
racial discrimination and unctuously denounced all acts
of racial discrimination but those very nations contrive to
give moral and financial support, either surreptitiously or
with open and contemptuous disdain for world public
opinion, to the very r&gimes whose policies and practices
they pretend to condemn.“s. 6

80. The very existence of free Angola, where the people
govern, is seen by the Pretoria racists as a threat to their
rigime. Therefore they try by force to direct in their own
way the development of that former Portuguese colony.
They have not succeeded in that, and now they are arming
for a big war.

It is well known which are the States whose Governments
act in that manner. They are named in resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly at its thirty-first session. They
have also been named during the present discussion in the
Security Council. And they have been named by those who
are sufficiently familiar with this question. Of course, those
Governments feel somewhat embarrassed when reference is
made to their conduct, and they therefore try verbally to
criticize the policy of npartheid or to atone by making
financial contributions to one or another assistance fund, or
else to refute the accusations in one way or another.

81. The apartheid regime in South Africa is a threat to
peace and security. The dangerous exacerbation of the
situation in that region is becoming unavoidable unless
serious steps are taken to root out that danger. The
situation is serious but not hopeless. It is different from
that which faced us when the United Nations first dealt
with the crimes of apartheid in South Africa. The 60.year
old Great Socialist October Revolution, which showed all
peoples the example of a successful liberation struggle,
eliminated, with the exception of a few pockets, the old
imperialist colonial system, and we are witnesses to the
successful activities of the powerful liberation movements.

85, One fact seems to me very illustrative of what I have
been talking about. A few weeks ago, at Nairobi, a
conference was held of representatives of a so-called
development service of a certain Western country. The
participants in the conference were persons who worked in
various African countries and were all well aware of the
official policy of their Government towards Africa. In the
resolution adopted by the conference, the participants
state, among other things, that it is extremely difficult to
defend the policy of their Government so long as that
Government “not only tolerates but even supports rCgimes
that economically exploit the indigenous population and
deprive that population of all its basic human rights”. The
participants in the conrerence therefore demanded a review
of their Government’s policy with regard to South Africa.
In particular, they demanded the rescinding of cultural
agreements with South Africa which, they said, were of’

82. The oppressed and exploited peoples of South Africa
are rising up to fight. They would be happy if it were
possible peacefully to bring about thoroughgoing changes in
the situation. The leaders of the liberation movements have
tried on many occasions to achieve a peaceful settlement of
the conflict, but it was illusory to try verbally to convince
Vorster and his accomplices of the need to put a halt to the
policy of apartheid Only a few weeks ago, in Time
magazine, Vorster stated that he was not considering
granting political rights to the Coloured population of
South Africa, Therefore the freedom fighters are forced to
have recourse to arms. The oppressed people are entitled to

5 Quoted in English by the speaker.
6 See A/AC.1 15lL.462.
11

90. In resolutions of the thirty”first session of the General
Assembly, a number of specific requests are addressed to
the Security Council. We unequivocally support them. First
and foremost, we must decide on a complete embargo on
arms deliveries to South Africa so that there may be no
possibility for this inhuman system to become stronger. It
is important also to cease all co-operation with that regime
in regard to nuclear energy.

benefit only to white South Africans and, contrary to
international law, were being applied to Namibia. They
demanded also the closing of the Consulate in Namibia, the
cessation of all co-operation
with South Africa, the
implementation of a complete economic boycott of South
Africa and the cessation of all visits to that country by
Ministers or military personnel. The details concerning that
conference can be found in the issue of the Frankfurter
Rundschau dated 12 March 1977.

91. The German Democratic Republic, like many other
States, has no relations with South Africa, just as it has no
relations with the illegal racist rkgime at Salisbury. Tile
German Democratic Republic believes, generally speaking,
that all political, military and economic relations with the
racist rbgime must be severed.

86. Indeed. what we require is not words; we require the
will to act in regard to the apartheid r6gime in South Africa
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions. It is useless to start looking for violations of human
rights where they do not exist. It is useless to try to divert
the attention of world public opinion from the crimes of
the racist regime and those who support it-for,
unfortunately, support is till being given to that rCgime. What is
necessary is that there be respect for the international
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime
of Apartheid
[General
Assembly
resolution
3068 (XXVI1I)/
and that action in accordance with it be
taken. The German Democratic Repubiic was one of the
first States to sign and ratify the foregoing Convention.
Subsequently,
through the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic, it took the necessary initiatives at the
thirty-first session of the General Assembly.

92. My delegation supports all the just demands of the
African States and the black freedom fighters in South
Africa that are designed to ensure that the people of that
State will be allowed to exercise their right to selfdetermination. We regard as of great importance unity of
action between the African States and the liberation
movements in regard to the total implementation of the
resolutions on South Africa and Namibia adopted by the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
93. As regards the Eastern European Socialist States and
peoples, in their joint statement made in November 1976
[S/12255, annex I], their representatives at the highest
possible level reaffirmed their willingness to give support
and assistance in the future to the peoples of Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa in their selfless struggle against
the racist rkgimes, against apartheid and the neo-colonial
plots and in support of the implementation of United
Nations resolutions with respect to the elimination of
colonialism and racism. The General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany
and Chairman of the Council of State of the German
Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, stated in his message
to the Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid, on the occasion of the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination:

87. It is for the United Nations to give special attention to
the many flagrant violations of human rights and the
threats to the peace that exist in South Africa. It is for the
United Nations to take all the necessary measures to
prevent the prolongation of the situation. Let us not be
deluded by the manoeuvres used by Pretoria and its foreign
protectors to influence international public opinion.
88. The foreign monopolies which obtain profits by
exploiting the black workers do not wish to give up, and
will never voluntarily
give up, the possibilities that the
apartheid rdgime offers them, In South Africa there are
more than 500 branches of British monopolies, more than
400 branches of monopolies of the Federal Republic of
Germany and more than 350 branches of United States
monopolies.

“I assure you that the German Democratic Republic,
just like the other socialist States, will also in future make
an active contribution towards putting an end to racial
discrimination which has brought so much suffering to
mankind. The German Democratic Republic will always
be a reliable ally of peoples fighting for national and
social liberation.“7

89. The Governments of the capitalist States have said
that they are not able to curtail the activities of their
monopolies in South Africa. That is only an excuse. We
have often seen the Governments of those States taking
economic sanctions as a means of exerting pressure on the
progressive States. And even today they are practising
economic discrimination against such States.

lke meeting roseat 12.55 p.m.
7 Ibid.

12

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

or

from
bookstores
and distributors
write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vent@ dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
nupres de votre libraire
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Cen+ve.

Litho

in United

Nations,

ICAK.

IIOJLYYPZITL

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3flAHHfI

OPl-AHH

PUBLICACIONES

3A4HH

DE

LAS

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

Ol3%E&NHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAII,HH

UNIDAS

Las public&ones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&in
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirfjase

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S.

1.00

(or equivalent

currencies)

y casas distria: Naciones

77-7OOOl-March

1978-2,200
