76

General A11embly-Twenty-third Sea1ion

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1202 (XII) of 13 December 1957, 1851 (XVII) of 19 December 1962, 1987
(XVIII) of 17 December 1963, 2116 (XX) of 21 December 1965, 2239 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and
2361 (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
1. Takes note af the report of the Committee on
Conferences ;28
2. Approves the calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for 1969 contained in annex III of the report of the Committee on Conferences;
3. Approves further the 'recommendations regarding
the pattern of recurrent conferences and meetings contained in paragraph 24 of the report of the Committee
on Conferences and in this connexion requests the
United Nations bodies, committees and commissions
concerned to review their meetings programmes and to
report to their parent organs so as to enable them to
make their decisions available to the Committee on·
Conferences in time for the latter to present its relevant conclusions to the General Assembly at its twentyfourth session ;
4. Decides that no meetings not covered by the
calendar for 1969 shall be convened, except for an
emergency meeting ;
5. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 2239 (XXI),
ali proposals for new conferences and meetings made
during the regular session of the Assembly will be
subject to the recommendation of the Committee on
Conferences and to final approval by the Assembly
and that proposals made outside the regular session
for changes in the appruved calendar will also be subject to the recommendations of the Committee on Conferences;
6. Reaffirms, for application in 1969, the general
principie that in drawing up the schedule of conferences
and meetings for future years U nited N ations bodies
shall plan to meet at their respective established headquarters, with the following exceptions:
(a) The Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme may, in accordance with its
rules of procedure, hold one of its sessions at the
United Nations Office at Geneva;
(b) The sessions of the International Law Commission shall be held at Geneva ;
(e) The sessions of the United Nations Commission
011 International Trade Law may be held, subject to the
provision in paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, alternately
at Headquarters in New York and at Geneva;
(d) The United Nations Scientific Committee on
the Effects of Atomic Radiation, as well as the Scientific
and Technical Suh-Committee and the Legal SubCommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, may meet at Geneva if the exigencies of
their work so require ;
(e) The regular summer session of the Economic
and Social Council may be held at Geneva provided that
the closing date falls at least six weeks before the
opening of the regular session of the General Assembly;
(f) One Headquarters-based functional commission
of the Economic and Social Council, to be determined

by the Council, may meet at Geneva during the period
from January to April;
(g) Sessions of not more than three other Headquarters-based functional commissions or committees of
the Economic and Social Council may, by decision of
the Council taken after consultation with the SecretaryGeneral, be held at Geneva during the period from
September to December without overlap;
(h) In addition, a session of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs may, in exceptional circumstances and
by decision oí the Economic and Social Council taken
after consultation with the Secretary-General, be held
at Headquarters in N ew York; in that event, one other
functional commission or committee may meet at
Geneva in its place ;
( i) The regular sessions of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, the Economic Commission for Latín America and the Economic Commission for Africa, as well as meetings of their subsidiary
bodies, may be held away from their headquarters when
the commission concerned so decides, subject, in the
case of regular sessions of the commissions, to the
approval of the Economic and Social Council and of the
General Assembly;
7. Confirms that bodies not mentioned in paragraph 6
above may hold sessions away from their established
headquarters when a Government issuing an invitation
for a session to be held within its territory has agreed
to defray, after consultation with the Secretary-General
as to their nature and possible extent, the actual additional costs directly or indirectly involved;
8. Decides that, as a general rule, not more than one
major special conference shall be scheduled in any one
year;
9. Urges ali organs and subsidiary bodies of the
United Nations, to plan their future conferences and
meetings in accordance with the following recommendations of the Ad H oc Committee of Experts to Examine
the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies:
" ( i) Priorities should be established for fixing the
areas and programmes of meetings and conf erences on a long-term basis;
"(ii) The availability of human and physical resources necessary for servicing conferences
should be determined and taken into account;
" ( iii) The financia! ability of the organizations and of
member States to meet the requirements ne<;essary to hold conferences should be determined
and taken into account ;
"(iv) An adequate interval of time should be allowed
between conferences of the same body or of
similar nature ;"29
10. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1379 (XLV) of 2 August 1968 and, in particular,
paragraph 2 of that resolution, in which the Council
requested those of its subsidiary organs which had not
yet done so to consider at their next sessions dispensing
with summary records for their meetings and for those
of their own subsidiary hodies in the future and in this
connexion called to their attention the decision taken
by the Commission on N arcotic Drugs to replace summary records by shorter minutes, while reserving the
right to ask for a summary record in respect of any
discussion which required exceptional treatment;

28 !bid., Twenry-third Sessio11, agenda item 75, documents
A/7361 and Add.1.

20 !bid .. Twcnty-first Scssio11, Am1exes, agenda item 80, document A/6343. para. 104 (k).

2478 (XXIII). Pattern of conferences

77

Resolutiona adopted on the reporta of the Fifth Committee

11. Requests ali organs other than those listed in
paragraph 35 of the report of the Committee on Conferences to consider, in response to General Assembly
resolution 2292 (XXII) of 8 December 1967, dispensing with summary records for their meetings and to
report to their parent organs as appropriate, so as to
enable them to make their decisions available to the
Committee on Conferences in time for the latter to
present its relevant conclusions to the Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session ;
12. Requests the Committee on Conferences to submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session, bearing in mind particularly the results of the
reviews envisaged in paragraph 3 above, recommendations relating to the pattern of conferences for the
years 1970, 1971 and 1972.
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.
2479 (XXIII). lnclusion of Russian among the
working languages of the General Assembly
(amendment to rule 51 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly) and question of including Russian and Spanish
among the working languages of the
Security Council

Tlu: General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2359 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967 on the use of the working languages,
which pointed out that the use of severa! languages
by the United Nations could constitute not a hindrance
but rather an enrichment and a means of attaining the
objectives of the Charter of the United N ations,
Having examined the relevant part of the report submitted by the Secretary-General, 30
1. Decides to include Russian among the working
languages of the General Assembly and to amend
accordingly rule 51 of the rules of procedure of the
Assembly;
2. Considers it desirable to include Russian and
Spanish among the working languages of the Security
Council;
3. Requesls the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the President of the Security
Council.
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.
2480 (XXIII). Composition of the Secretariat
A

Thc General Assembiy,
Recalling its resolution 2359 A (XXII) of 19 December 1967,
Reafjinning the need for an equitable distribution of
the staff of the Secretariat among Member States as
between regions, and within each region, in particular
at the leve! of senior posts,
Reiterating its invitation to the Secretary-General to
give preference to candidates from inadequately represented countries, keeping in mind paragrapli 73 of the
report of the Committee 011 the Reorganization of the
Secretariat,31
30 !bid .. Twenty-third Scssion, A,mexcs, agenda item 81, document A/7334.
31 /bid., addendum to agenda item 74 (A/7359), annex.

l. N ates with appreciation the information in
table 10, based on weighted geographical distribution,
contained in the report of the Secretary-General ;32
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
include in his future reports a table based on weighted
geographical distribution ;
3. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to achieve a better geographical
distribution of the staff oí the Secretariat at ali levels;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session
on the progress achieved in the implementation of the
present resolution.
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2241 B (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and 2359 B (XXII) of 19 December 1967
relating to the use of the working languages and to the
establishment of a language bonus, and in particular
paragraph 3 (a) of resolution 2359 B (XXII) concerning the need to ensure a linguistic balance within the
Secretariat,
H aving consídered the relevant part of the report
submitted by the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2359 B (XXIl), 33
Having noted with satisfaction the measures recommended by the Secretary-General in bis report with a
view to bringing about a broad expansion of the language training programme already conducted by the
Secretariat and ensuring its effectiveness by incentives
in the matter of the promrition of staff in the Professional category subject to geographical distribution, 34
l. Requests the Secretary-General, with a view to
ensuring a linguistic balance, to take the following steps:
(a) From 1 January 1970 the acceptable mínimum
requirement at the moment of recruitment ·.vill be:
(i) Ability to use one of the working languages of
the Secretariat, or
(ii) Ability to use one of the working languages of a
United Nations organ in the case of staff members recruitecl for one of the sections of the
Secretariat working for that organ, it heing
understood that such staff members will not be
appointed on a permanent basis, or that their
fixed-term engagement will not be extended beyond two years, until they are ahle to work in
one of the working languages oí the Serretariat;
(b) From 1 January 1972:
(i) All promotions from one grade to anothcr, from
P-1 to D-2 inclusive, for staff suhject to geographical distribution will be con<litiona 1 upon
aclequate and confirmed knowleclge oí a second
Ianguage; nevertheless, the Secretary-( ;eneral
may authorize the promotion of the staff memhers specified above who do not fu!fil that cnn,li-tion if he deems it necessary for' the propn f:mctioning of the Secretariat: the Secretan;-General
shall indicate what action has heen taken in t!1is
respect in his annua! report to tl1e General
:\ssembly on personnel questions;
32 /bid., agenda ítem 81, document
33 Jl,id.,

document A/7334.
34 /bid., paras. 52-60 and 88-95.

A/7334, a,rnr·". l Il.
