s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/RES/868 (1993)
29 September 1993

RESOLUTION 868 (1993)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3283rd meeting,
on 29 September 1993
The Security Council,
Recalling the statement made by the President of the Council, on behalf of
the Council, on 31 March 1993 (S/25493) in connection with the Council's
consideration of the item entitled "An agenda for peace: preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking and peace-keeping",
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 27 August 1993 on
the security of United Nations operations (S/26358),
Recalling the provisions of the Charter concerning privileges and
immunities, and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations, as applicable to United Nations operations and persons engaged in such
operations,
Expressing grave concern at the increasing number of attacks and use of
force against persons engaged in United Nations operations and resolutely
condemning all such actions,
Welcoming the initiatives being taken in the General Assembly to consider
the elaboration of new instruments relating to the security and safety of United
Nations forces and personnel, and noting the Secretary-General's proposals in
this regard,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of 27 August 1993 on the
security of United Nations operations (S/26358);
2.
Encourages the Secretary-General to take forward those measures
proposed in his report falling within his responsibilities with a view, in
particular, to ensuring that security matters are an integral part of the
planning for an operation and that any such precautions extend to all persons
engaged in the operation;
3.
Urges States and parties to a conflict to cooperate closely with the
United Nations to ensure the security and safety of United Nations forces and
personnel;

93-52662 (E)

290993

I . ..

S/RES/868 (1993)

Page 2

4.
Confirms that attacks and use of force against persons engaged in a
United Nations operation autho.rized by the Security Council will be considered
interference with the exercise of the responsibilities of the Council and may
require the Council to consider measures it deems appropriate;

s. Confirms also that if, in the Council's view, the host country is
unable or unwilling to meet its obligations with regard to the safety and
security of a United Nations operation and personnel engaged in the operation,
the Council will consider what steps should be taken appropriate to the
situation;
6.
Determines that, when considering the establishment of future United
Nations operations authorized by the Council, the Security Council will require
inter alia:
(a) That the host country take all appropriate steps to ensure the
security and safety of the operation and personnel engaged in the operation;
(b) That the security and safety arrangements undertaken by the host
country extend to.all persons engaged in the operation;
(c) That an agreement on the status of the operation, and all personnel
engaged in the operation in the host country be negotiated expeditiously and
should come into force as near as possible to the outset of the operation;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General when recommending the establishment or
renewal of a United Nations operation by the Security Council to take into
account the provisions of the present resolution;
8.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
