16

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

(XXIV) of 20 November 1969 on co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity,
Noting with satisfaction the increased co-operation
between the Organization of African Unity and the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, especially
in their efforts to solve the grave situation in southern
Africa,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the Secretary-General on co-operation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity;47
2. Invites the Security Council to consider the
request of the Organization of African Unity concerning the holding of meetings of the Council in an African
capital;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to intensify co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system,
particularly the United Nations Development Programme, to continue their co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session the question of co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December I 97 I.

2864 (XXVI). Report of the Security Council
The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly covering the period from
16 June 1970 to 15 June 1971~8
2. Requests the Secretary-General to present in
his report to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session, due consideration having been given to the
views of interested Governments, suggestions concerning
ways and means of enhancing the effectiveness of the
Security Council in accordance with the principles and
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 197 I.
2878 (XXVI). Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Recalllng the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
. Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
unplementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
47 A/8386.
48 0-tficial Records

of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/8402).

Deeply concerned that eleven years after the adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still under
colonial domination and that millions of dependent
peoples live under conditions of ruthless and undisguised colonialist and racialist repression,
Deeply deploring the continued refusal of the
colonial Powers, especially Portugal and South Africa,
to implement the Declaration and other relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to
the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia
and Southern Rhodesia,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, continue to
co-operate with the Governments of Portugal and
South Africa and with the illegal racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia,
Deeply disturbed at the intransigent attitude of
certain administering Powers which, despite the repeated appeals addressed to them by the General Assembly and the Special Committee, refuse to co-operate
with the Special Committee in the discharge of the
mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly,
Reiterating its view that racial discrimination in
dependent Territories can be eradicated fully and with
the greatest speed by the faithful and complete implementation of the Declaration,
Noting with satisfaction that the Organization of
African Unity has decided to convene an international
conference against colonialism and apartheid, to be
held at Oslo in May and June 1972,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2621
(XXV) and all other resolutions on decolonization,
and calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with those resolutions, to take all the necessary
steps to enable the dependent peoples of the Territories
concerned to exercise fully and without further delay
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
2. Approves the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work
during 1971,49 including the programme of work
envisaged for 1972;
3. Urges all States, in particular the administering
~owers,_ ~d the spec~alized a$encies and other organizat10ns w1thm the Umted Nations system to give effect
to the relevant provisions of the programme of action
contained in General Assembly resolution 2621
(XXV) and to the recommendations contained in the
report of the Special Committee for the speedy implementation of the Declaration and the relevant United
Nations resolutions;
4. Reaffirms that the continuation of colonialism
in all its forms and manifestations-including racism
apartheid and activities of foreign economic and othe;
inte~ests which ~xploit colonial peoples, as well as the
wagmg of colomal wars to suppress national liberation
movements in southern Africa-is incompatible with
the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the Declaration on
49 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/Rev.1) and Supplement No. 23A (A/8423/Rev.1/ Add.I).

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and poses a threat to international peace
and security;
5. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of
the struggle of the colonial peoples and peoples under
alien domination to exercise their right to self-determination and independence by all the necessary means
at their disposal, and notes with satisfaction the
progress made in the colonial Territories by the national
liberation movements, both through their struggle and
through reconstruction programmes;
6. Condemns the policies, pursued by certain
colonial Powers in the Territories under their domination, of imposing non-representative regimes and constitutions, strengthening the position of foreign economic
and other interests, misleading world public opinion
and encouraging the systematic influx of foreign immigrants while evicting, displacing and transferring the
indigenous inhabitants to other areas, and calls upon
those Powers to desist forthwith from such policies;
7. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
to provide, in consultation, as appropriate, with the
Organization of African Unity, moral and material
assistance to all peoples struggling for their freedom
and independence in the colonial Territories and, in
particular, to the national liberation movements of the
Territories in southern Africa, and in that connexion
draws the attention of all States to the Assistance
Fund for the Struggle against Colonialism and
Apartheid of the Organization of African Unity; 50
8. Requests all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, to withhold
or continue to withhold assistance of any kind from
the Governments of Portugal and South Africa and
from the illegal racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia until they renounce their policy of colonial
domination and racial discrimination;
9. Requests the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditionally their military bases and
installations from colonial Territories and to refrain
from establishing new ones;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to seek suitable means for the immediate and full
implementation of General Assembly resolutions 1514
(XV) and 2621 (XXV) in all Territories which have
not yet attained independence and, in particular, to
formulate specific proposals for the elimination of the
remaining manifestations of colonialism and report
thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session;
11. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security Council in considering appropriate measures under the
Charter with regard to developments in colonial Territories which are likely to threaten international peace
and security, and recommends that the Council take
such suggestions fully into consideration;
12. Requests the Special Committee to undertake
a special study on the compliance of Member States
with the Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on decolonization, particularly those relating to
the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia
and Southern Rhodesia, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;
50 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/Rev.1), chap. V,
annex, appendix V.

17

13. Requests the Special Committee to intensify
its consideration of the small Territories and to recommend to the General Assembly the most appropriate
methods and also the steps to be taken to enable the
populations of those Territories to exercise fully and
without further delay their right to self-determination
and independence;
14. Endorses the proposal of the Special Committee to take steps, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity, to enable representatives of
national liberation movements in the colonial Territories in southern Africa to participate, whenever
necessary and in an appropriate capacity, in its deliberations relating to those Territories;
15. Requests the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Special Committee in the discharge of its
mandate and, in particular, to participate in the work
of the Committee relating to the Territories under
their administration;
16. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the Special Committee by permitting
the access of visiting groups to the colonial Territories
in order to secure first-hand information concerning
the Territories and to ascertain the wishes and aspirations of the inhabitants of those Territories under their
administration;
17. Requests the Special Committee to assist the
Economic and Social Council in the study envisaged
in Council resolution 1651 (LI) of 29 October 1971,
bearing in mind the need to enlist the support of
non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Council in the achievement of the objectives
of the Declaration and in the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the facilities and personnel
necessary for the implementation of the present resolution as well as the various resolutions on decolonization adopted by the General Assembly and the Special
Committee.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2879 (XXVI). Dissemination of information on
decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the question of publicity for the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization,~ 1
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Conscious of the urgent need to intensify widespread
and continuous dissemination of information on the
work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, on the situation in the colonial Territories and
on the continuing struggle for liberation being waged
51 /bid., chap. I, paras. 86-101, and chap. V.
