S/2010/660

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 December 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 14 December 2010 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to my sixth report on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa, covering the period from 1 July to 31 December 2010 (S/2010/614).
In my report, I recommend that the mandate of the Office be further renewed for a
period of three years, from 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2013.
I submit herewith, to the members of the Security Council, the draft mandate
of the Office, elaborating its core functions, which are to be implemented in close
collaboration with the Economic Community of West African States, the Mano
River Union, and other regional and subregional partners (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-70723 (E) 281210

*1070723*

S/2010/660

Annex
Draft mandate of the United Nations Office for West Africa
The following objectives are to be implemented in close collaboration with the
Economic Community of West African States, the Mano River Union and other
regional and subregional partners:
Objective 1
Monitor political developments in West Africa, carry out good offices roles and
special assignment on behalf of the Secretary-General and enhance subregional
capacities for conflict prevention and mediation in countries of the subregion.
Function 1.1
Monitor and analyse the situation in West Africa, in particular emerging threats to
peace, and provide the Secretary-General, the Security Council, regional and
subregional organizations and national Governments with early warning and
recommendations for preventive action.
Function 1.2
Perform good offices roles in countries of the subregion to prevent conflict and to
consolidate peacebuilding efforts and political stability.
Function 1.3
Enhance subregional capacities for conflict prevention, conflict management,
mediation, and good offices, including providing support to existing subregional
mechanisms, in particular the Conflict Prevention Framework, of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Community’s Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security.
Function 1.4
Facilitate the implementation of the International Court of Justice ruling of
10 October 2002 on the land and maritime boundary dispute between Cameroon and
Nigeria.
Objective 2
Enhance subregional capacities to address cross-border and cross-cutting
threats to peace and security, in particular, election-related instability and
challenges related to security sector reform, transnational organized crime,
illicit trafficking and terrorism.
Function 2.1
Raise awareness and promote integrated subregional and cross-border responses to
potential problems and emerging threats to peace, human security and stability in
the subregion.

2

10-70723

S/2010/660

Function 2.2
Support the development of networks of practitioners and subregional frameworks
and mechanisms to address challenges related to security sector reform,
transnational organized crime, illicit trafficking and terrorism.
Function 2.3
Facilitate systematic and regular linkages in the work of the United Nations within
the subregion to promote a coherent and synergetic United Nations approach to
addressing the causes of instability and conflict in West Africa.
Objective 3
Promote good governance and respect for the rule of law, human rights and the
mainstreaming of gender in conflict prevention and conflict management
initiatives in West Africa.
Function 3.1
Facilitate the exchange of information and the sharing of best practices among
national Governments, regional organizations, civil society and other entities for the
promotion of good governance, respect for the rule of law and the improvement of
electoral processes.
Function 3.2
Provide support for the enactment of resolutions and frameworks of action
pertaining to the respect for human rights, and the mainstreaming of gender in
conflict prevention and conflict management initiatives in West Africa.

10-70723

3
