tJNITED NATIONS / NA'nONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFfiCIAL RECORDS
, FOURTH YEAR

436th, 4J,7th and 438th MEET.1NGS: 10,11 and 15 AUGUST 1949

436emc.1 43nme et 438eme SEANCES: 10.1 11 et 15 AOUT 1949

CONSEILDE SECURITE
PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS, NEW YORK

18 :p.)

No 3·8
•

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

FoUr hundred and. thirty-sixth meeting

Quatre cent trente-sixieme se~ce

PaglJ

1. Official communi~ue •••.••...••..••..

1

Four htmdredand thirty-seventh meeting
1. Provisional agenda ••..••••....•.••••
2. Adoption of the agenda
3. The Palestine question
,.........

Pages

1. Communique officie1

Quatre ceV.t trente-septieme' s~.ance

2
2
2

1. Ordre du jour provisoire •...••...•...
2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour •..•.. ,....
3. La question palestinienne '. • • •• •• • . • • • •

Four hundred and thirty-eighth meeting

Quatre .cent trente-huitieme seance

1. Official communique ••••••• . '~..... .••

14

1

1. Communique officiel

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings of the
Security Council are published in 'movilhly supplements to the Official Records.
All United Nations doc'uments are designated by symbols, i.e., capital letters
combined with figures..M ention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Les docum~t§.p~rtitl~Bts<iui.ne sC'.ht pas reproduits in extenso- tl~U1s le texte
des seances du Conseil de securlfe-s'ont l,Oublies dans des supplements me.usuels <lUX
Proces-verbaux officiels.
.
Lesdocuments des Nations t}nies portent tous une cote, qui se com-pose de
·Zettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte ,signifie
qu'il s'agit d'U'lt document des Nations Unies.

2
2
2

14

...........

--

NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECOliDS

PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 38 QUATmEME ANNEE

No 38

FOUR HlJNDRED AND THIRTY-SIXTH
MEETING

QUATRE CENT TRENTE-SIXIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake S1tccess, New York,
on Wednesday, 10 August, 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mercredi 10 amtt 1949, alS heures.

PresMent: Mr. S. TSARAPKIN
(Union of. Soviet Socialist Republics).

President: M. S. TSARAPKINE
(Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France,
N orvege,
Republique
socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'IrIande du N ord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Official communique

1. Communique officiel

In accordance wit.'1." rule 55 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, the
following communique was issued by the Security
Council through the Secretary-General and is
circulated in place of a verbatim record:

Conformement a l'Article 55 de son reg1ement
interieur provisoire, le Conseil de securite a fait
publier par les soins du Secretaire general le
communique suivant, qui tiendra lieu de compte
rendu stenographique:

"Le Conseil de securite a tenu aujourd'hui une
"The Security Council held at closed meeting
today and considered its draft report to the seance privee, au caurs de laqtielle il a procede a
General Assembly, covering the period from l'examen du projet de rapport a l'Assemblee ge16 )uly 1948 to 15 July 1949. The Council nerale re1atif a la periode s'etendant du 16 juillet
deCIded to request the delegations to submit their .1948 au 15 juillet 1949. Le Conseil a decide d'incorrections to the Secretariat and to hold an- viter les delegations a soumettre leurs corrections
other meeting for the purpose of approving the au Secretariat et de tenir ul1.e nouvelle seance le
final draft of the report at 3 p.m. on Monday, hindi 15 aout 1949, a 15 heures, en vue d'ap15 August 1949."
prouver le texte definitif du projet de rapport."

•

7

FOUR HUNDRED AND THffiTYSEVENTH MEETING

QUATRE CENT TRENTE-SEPTIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Thursday, 11 August 1949, at 10.30 a.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le jeudi, l1ao,itt 1949, a 10 h. 30.

President: Mr. S. TSARAPKIN
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

President: M. S. TSARAPKINE
(Union des Republiques socialistes .sovietiques).

Present: The represe.'1tatives of the following
countries:·· Argentina, Canada, .China, Cuba,
~gypt, France, NorwayJ... Ukrainian Soviet Social1st Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada,Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France.
N orvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques .socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du N ord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (SjAgenda 437)

1. Ordre dn jour provisoire
(S/Agenda 437)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Palestine question:
(a) Letter dated 21 July 1949 from 'the
United Nations Acting Mediator on
Palestine addressed to the SecretaryGeneral transmitting a report 011 the
pr~se~tsta1;,us ,of the armistice negoti2.tion~an~th:etruce in Palestine (S/1357).

2. La question de Palestine:
a) Lettre, en date du 21 juillet 1949, adressee
au Secretaire general par le Mediateur par
interim des Nations Unies pour la Paiestine et transmettant un rapport sur I'etat
actueldes negociations d'armistice et de la
treve en Palestine (S/1357).

'2.' Adtrption of the agenda

2. ,Adoption de l'ordre dn jour

The agenda 'Was adopted.

L' ordre dzt jmer est adopte.

3. The Pa" ~stine que~tion (continued)

3. La question .palestinienne (suite)

At the invitation of the ~reside~t, Mr. Bunche,
United Nations Acting Mediator on Palestine;
Mr. Eban., rtiop:-esen.tative of Israel, and 111r.
Rafik Asha, representative of Syria, too.k their
places at the Council table.

Sztr l'invitatio1l du President" M. B'/.f'tJ,che, Mediatezw par interim des Nations Unies pour la
Palestine; IyI. Eban, representant d'Israel, et
M. Rafik Asha, representant de la Sy;'ie, prennentplace cl la table du Conseil.·

Mr. CHAUVEL (France) (translated from
French) ~ First of all I should like to revert
briefly LO the question of supplying a'rms to
various ..:ountries in the Near East.
I did not fail to report to my Government the
comments and statements made on that subject
. . bjT various delegations in the Security Council.
My report did not remain unanswered. As. I
implied the other day [434th meeting], the intentions of the French Government are in no
way different from the intentions expressed here
by the representatives of the United States and
the United Kingdom on behalf of their respective'Governments.
.
France is 'Committed to renew and maintain
certain supplies. Offensive weapons are not, however, included. The newspapers reported yesterday that the French Minister in Damascus had
presented to the President of the Republic of
Syria a fowling-piece which belonged to Napoleon
and, unless I am mistaken, a" sword of the same
period. That does not seem likely to disturb
anyone at all. .
I should also like, on behalf of the French
delegatio~, to clarify somewhat the intentions
behind certain paragraphs of the draft resolution [S/1367] submitted jointly by the delegations of Canada and France. The. amendments
rS/1368] which the President himself submitted
to' the Council on behalf of the delegation of
the Soviet Union seemed to me to reflect anxieties
to which I finG it easy to reply on the basis of 'the
Canadian-French text as it stands at present.

M. CHAUVEL (Fra'lce): ]e voudrais tout
d'abord revenir rapidement sur la question des
foumitures d'armes aux divers pays du, ProcheOrient.
.
]e n'avais pas manque de rendre compte a mon
Gouvernement des observations formulees et des
declarations faites au Conseil par diverses delegations sur ce sujet. Ces indications n(:sont pas
restees sans reponse. Comme je l'avais donne it
entendre I'autre jour [434eme Sea'I'tCe], les d!spositions' du Gouvernement franc;ais ne sont pas
differentes de ceIIes qU'ont exposees id, au nom
de leurs Gouvemements respcctifs, les representants des Etats-Unis et du Royaume-UnL .
La France s'cst engagee au renouvellement et it
l' entretien de certain:; stocks. Ce ne sont pas la
des armements offensifs.. Les journaux annonc;aient hier que le Ministre de France a Damas
avait remis au President de la RepuUique
syrienne un fusil de chasseayant appartenu a
Napoleon et, sauf erretiit, un sabre contemporain
de ce fusil meme; cela ne me parait pas de
nature a inquieter ,qui que ce soit.
]e souhaiterais aussi douner, au nom de la delegation franc;aise, quelqul;:s ecIaircissements sur les
intentions auxqueIIes repondent certains para;.
graphes du projet de re~olution [S/1367] presente conjointement par les, delegations du
Canada et de la France, Les amendements
[$/1368J "dont le President .lui.,-r.neme a saisi le
Conseil, au nom de la delegation de I'Union
sovietique, m'ont paru traduire des preoccupations
auxquelles, dans I'etat actueI du texte presente
par le Canada et la France, it me parait facile de
repondre.
.
Ce texte, je tiens a le preciser, ne tend pas a
creer le droit. Il se borne a constater .et le droit
et le fait, tels qu'iJs resultent des resolutions de
l'Assemblee et du Conseil,d'une part, de la. conclusion des conventio~s d'arnlistice [S/1264,
S/1296/Rev.1, S/1302/Rev.1, S/1353J et des
stipulations decesconventions d'autre. part.

I should like to specify that that text does not
aim at layi..ng down the law. It merely notes what
is legally and actually the case as a, result of the
resolutions of the Assembly and the Council on
the one hand, .and the 'conclusion of armistice
agreements [S/1264, S/1296, S/1302/Rev.1,
S./1353J and the provisions of those agreements
on the other.
. The first amendment of the USSR delegation
is to delete from the second paragraph of the
Canadian draft resolution [S/1365], which
appears unchanged in the Canadian-French draft,

Le premier amendement de la delegation' de
l'Union sovietique tend a supprimer, au deuxieme
paragraphe du projet de resolution dtl Canada
[S/1365], repris sansmc:>dification dans le projet
~---

c1

p--.----------=:s:----------..-------any reference to the Conciliation Commission and
to resolution 194 (Ill) of the General Assembly
of 11 December 1948.

du Canada et de la France, toute mention de la
Commission de conciliatiou et de la resolution
[194 (Ill)] de l'Assemblee generale en date du
11 decembre 1948.

As to the legal situation, it is quite clear that,
even H the Council so desired, it would not have
the power to do as it pleased with a resolution
o£ the General Assembly. That resQlution set
up the. C~nciliation Commission and clearly
defined its functions. It requests the Commission
at the earliest possible date to establish contact
between the parties themselves and between the
parties and the Commission. It furtp.er calls
upon Governments and authorities concerned to
"seek agreement by negotiations either conducted
with the Cor.ciliation Commission or directly".
That is precisely what is said in the paragraph
of ,the Canadia..'1-Frenc...1t. draft which repeats
verbatim the language of the General Assembly
resolution.

Quant au droit, il est bien clair que ie Conseil,
le vouh'1t-iI, n'aurait pas
pouvoir de disposer
d'une resolution de l'Assemblee generale. Cette
resolution a cree la Coinmissior de conciliation.
Elle a defini tres clairement son role. EIle invite
la Commission a etablir aussitot que possiblf~ des
relations entre les parties elles-memes, et entre
ces parties et la Commission. Elle invite par
ailleurs les gouvemements etautodtes interesses a
"rechercher un accord par voie de· negociations
soit directes, soit avec la Commission de conciliation". C'est exactement ce que dit le paragraphe
du projet presente par le Canada et la France
qui reprend mot a mot les.termes de la resolution
de l'AssenlbIee.
.

The delegation of the Soviet Union shows that
it is anxious' to see the parti~s reach direct agreement among themselves. I believe that everyone
shares that desire. The General Assembly resolution and the Canadian-French d'raft explicitly
express that desire. Negotiations with the Commission are mentioned only in the second instance
and would not be resorted to unless directnegotiations yielded no results. In a sense the C· . •
mission is an instrument which is placed a~ '-'le
disposal of the parties. If we judge from the
precedent of the armistices, that instrument is
not 'useless. The services of the Acting Mediator
would not be so greatly valuedif his intervention
had been superfluous or if his work had been
simple. If, in questions relating to a peace settlement rather than to the Armistice Agreements,
the parties decided to do without a mediator, the
Commission would undoubtedly be the first to
express satisfaction.

La delegation de l'Union sovietique marque le
soud de voir les parties s'entendre directement
entre eUes. Tout le monde, je pense, est bien de
cet avis. La resolution de l' AssembIee generate et
le projet du Canada et de la France l'indiquent
expressement. Les negociations avc..c la Commission lie sont mentionnees, qu'en second lieu. et it
n'y serait fait recours que si les negotiations directes etaient infructueuses. La Commission consti:ue, en quelque sorte, un moyen wis a la disposi~
tion des parties. Si 1'on en juge par le precedent
des armistices, ce moyen n'est pas inutile. Les
services du Mediateur par interim seraient moins
hautement apprecies si son intervention avait ete
superfiue ou si sa tache avait ete facile. Au cas
OU, s'agissant non plus d'armistice mais de paix,
les parties decideraient de se passer de mediateur,
la Commission serait sans doute la premiere as'en feliciter.

The second amMdment and the subsequent
amendmc:nts relate to the elimination of the truce
machinery and of the function of the Mediator.
I think that the comments exchanged here during
the two previous [434th and 435th] meetings and
the text itself of the present draft are such as
to give reassurance on that point.

Le sl~cond amendement et les suivants portent
sur Ill. suppression de l'appareil de treve et du
poste de mediateur. Je pense que les observations
echangees ici au caurs des deux precedentes
seances [434enze et 435eme] et le texte meme du
projet at:tael, sont de nature a donner sur ce
point des apaisements.

'e

I1 est precise en effet, au troisieme paragi"aphe,
As a matter of fact, the third paragraph specifies .that the Armistice Agreements supersede the ,qui les conventions d'armistice se substituent a
truce and that the truce is obsolete. That state- la treve et que celle-ci est caduque. Cette stipulament meets the wish expres$ed by Mr. Bunche tion repond au soud manifeste par M.Bunche
[433rdmeeting] in his oral comments on his [433 eme seance], dans le commentaire verbal
report [Sj1357] that there should be a Council qu'il a donne de son rapport [S/1357], de voir
decision taking note of. that obsoleteness.
. une decision dtl. Conseil constater cette caducite.
.1 believe that' a question of terminology arises
WIth regard· to the Mediator. In the administrative .meaning of the term, there is no post of
¥edIator. There have been missions, and partIcularly a mediation mission assigned to Count
Folke Bernadotte. That work was carried on ad
inte1'im by Mr. Bunche. The seventh paragraph
of the draft resolution takes note of the fact that
that. mission has beeriacc01nplished and relieves
~he Acting Mediator of his responsibilities. That
IS precisely the aim of the USSR amendment
.'
although it is expressed differently. ~__

En ce qui conceme le. Mediateur, il se pose, je
pense, une question de tenninologie. I1 n'y a pas,
au sens administratif du tenne, un poste de mediateur. I1 y a eu des miss~ons, et notamment une
mission de mediation confiee aucomte Folke
Bernadotte et dont M. Bunche a assure l'interim.
Le septieme paragraphe du projet de resolution
constate que .ces missions sont accomplies et que
le' Mediateur par interim est degage deses responsabilites. C'est" precisement acela que vise
l'amendement de I'URSS, bien qu'll soit redige
en d'autres tennes.
.

.1 have listened to the "Comments ofthe delegatIon Q~ .the Soviet Union with regard to truce
supervIsIon personnel [435thmeeting] with par-

En ce qui conceme le personnel de sur~
veillance de la. treve j'ai ecoute les observations de la delegation de l'URSS-c-I435Mne

t.7__.. . . . . .~

q

....-------------;r--"'

seance] avec d'atltant plus d'attention qu'elles
rejoignent celles que j'avais presentees moi-meme
a\tparavant.
Depuis lors, le Mediateur par ir.tterim nous a
Since then, the Acting Mediator has told us
[433rd meeting] that th~ disbandment of that cl:', [433 eme seance] que la liquidation de ce perstaff was in progress and had already been sonnel etait en cours et, deja, dans une tres large
accomplished to a very great extent. He poiI'..l:ed mesure realisee. I1 nous a fait observer toutefois
out, however, that the- Armistice Agreements que les conventions d'armistice confiaient au
assigned important functions to the "Chief of "chef d'etat-major de I'Organisme d~s Nations
Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve",
Organization" specifically and tlmt the existence expressement denomme, un role eminent, et que
of other duties implied that other agents were d'autres taches supposaient le concours d'autres
co-operating. That is a fact. For confirmation, agents. Cela est un fait. Il suffit, pour le constater,
reference to the text of the. four Agreements is de se reporter au texte des quatre conventions.
adequate. Since the (:hairmanship of the mixed Puisqu'il s'agissait de la presidence des commiscommissions was involved, it is obvious that sions mixtes, it est evident que les parties ne s'en
the parties did not call upon an international' sont pas remises a un organisme international, tel
agency such as the Conciliation Commission to que, par exemple, la Commission de conciliation,
appoint a chairman. They appointed him them- pour designer un President. Elles 1'0nt designe
el1es-memes~
selves.
.
Cette initiative des parties, le projet depose
The draft resolution before the Council merely
takes note of that initiative taken by the parties, devant le Conseil se borne a en prendre acte, et
quite definitely, it would seem. The Acting Medi- ce, semble-t-il, sans equivoque. Le Mediateul." par
ato,,", who has carried out his mission, is formally interim ayant accompli sa missivn, it en est forrelieved of responsihility. The truce is declared mellement decharge. La treve est declaree caduobsolete;. the truce supervision machinery is que. L'appareil de surveillance de la treve est
eliminated with the sole exception of what is liquide, a la seule exception des elements destines
needed to ensure the implementation of the a assurer l'application des conventions d'armisArmistice Agreements. The representatives of tice. Les representants de l'Egypte, d'Israel et de
Egypt, Israel and Syria have confirmed before la Syrie ont confirme au Conseil [435eme seance]
que, pour un temps Cl.U moins, le concours de ces
.~ the Council [435th meeting] that, for some time
at least, t.~e assistance of that part of the elements etait en efIet necessaire.
machinery was actually necessary.
Le projet de resolution, en son huitieme para,---. The eighth paragraph of the draft resolution
takes note of the provisions relating to the Chief graphe, prend note de la stipulation concernant
of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision le chef d'etat-major de I'Organisme des Nations
Ot'ganization. It refers to that title because that Unies .'charge de la surveillance de la treve. Il
title appears in the Agreements. It is, however, mentionne ce titre parce que c'est ce1ui qui figure
clear that that officer will in future perform com- dans les conventions, mais il est clair que cet
pletely different functions from those previously officier exercera desormais des fonctions toutes
assigned to him. Those functions will be the differentes de celles qui.lui incombaient jusqu'ici.
functions of the chairman of mixed armistice Ces fonctions seront celles de President des comcommissions. In addition, since he is on the spot, missions mixtes d'armistice. En outre, etant sur
he will be qualified to represent the concern and place, it aura qualite ,pour representer, jusqu'au
the watchfulness of the Security Council until reglement pacifique definitif, la sollicitude et la
the final pacific settlement is advanced and to vigilance du Conseil, et faire lapport, en cas de
report, if necessary, on how the cease-fire' has besoin, sur la fa~on dont la suspension cl:'armes
been observed.
aura ete observee.
Je m'excuse de ces explications un peu longues.
I apologize for these somewhat lengthy explanations which are intended solely to avoid any Elles n'ont d'autre objetque d'eviter tout malenmisunderstanding.
tendu.

ticular attention bE::cause they coincide with my
own earlier comments [433rd meeting].

Mr. SMITH (Canada): I have a very small
. point to raise. Before a vote is taken on this
draft resolution, I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to a typographical
~r~or in the text of the draft resolution sponsored
Jomtly by the French and Canadian delegations.
In the sixth line of the second paragraph oJ document 5/1367, the word "concluded" should, of
course, read "conducted". This is the word used
in the text of the General Assembly resolution
to which this paragraph refers.

M. SMITH (Canada) (traduit de l'anglais) :

Je voudrais soulever une toute petite question.

Avant que nous ne passions au vote sur ce projet
de ·resolution. j'ainierais attirer l'attention des
membres du Conseil sur une erreur typographique
qui se trouve dans le texte anglais du projet de
resolution presente en commun par les delegations
du Canada et de la France. A la sixie.me ligne du
deuxieme paragraphe, dans le texte anglais du
document S/1367, -lemot concluded devrait
tiaturellement etre remplace par conducted. C'est
le motqui est employe dans le texte de la resolution de l'Assemblee generale a laqt<elle ce paragraphe serapporte.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
This change will be IPade in the text of the draft
resolution.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit du r1.(,SS€;) : Cette modification sera apportee dans le texte du projet de
resolution.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I shall be
very brief on a point of precision in connexiol1

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Je 'Voudrais, tres brievement, preciser

_ _ _. .
_
......
,

,,

-'P......
"
-..................-

. . . . . . .- -.. . . .-

~---==

............_ _.........

IIIS•••••-------..--..--·

~5·4t·'

21115

un point qui se rapporte a une observation que .
vient de faire le representant de la France.
D'apres lui, diverses delegations y compris celle
de 1'Egypte, auraient declare que la presence
d'observateurs est encore necessaire et le restera
pendant un certain temps. Or, j'ai dit quelque
chose qui et.ait a peu pres identique; sans l'etre
exactement. J'ai declare que nous devril)ns prendre garde de ne pas formuler quoi que ce soit
qui aille a 1'encontre des stipulations des conventions d'armistice, stipulations qui contiennent des
dispositions prevoyant 1'exercice de certaines
fonctions de controle par des observateurs de
1'0rganisation des Nations Unies. Je repete que
mes paroles sont analogues a celles qu'a mentionnees le representant de la France, mais eUes
ne leur sont pas identiques.

with a remark just made by the representative of
Franc-e.
He said something to the effect that various
delegations, including the delegation of Egyp~,
had said that the presence of the observers 1S
still necessary and will continue to be necessary
for some time. I said something similar to that,
but not exactly that. I said that we should take
care not to state anything here which would run
counter to the stipulations of the Armistice
Agreements, stipulations which include arrangements for certain functions of observation to be
exercised by United Nations observers. I repeat,
this is similar to, but is not quite the same thing
as, what the representative of France has said.

I

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America):
The delegation of the United States strongly
supports the revised draft resolution submitted
by the delegations of Canada and France in document S/1367, as. amended today, in connexion
with the report of the Acting Mediator on Palestine. The new draft not only meets the suggestions brought forward by the rep~esentative of
France, but substantially improves and clarifies
th~ original draft resolution.

M. AUS'!'IN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (trad~uif:
de l'anglais): La delegation des Etats-Unis
apporte un ferme Goutien au projet de resolution
revise, amende aujourd'hue relati;£ ·au rapport
du Mediateur par interim des Nations Unies pour
la Palestine que les delegations du Canada et de
la France ont presente dans le document S/1367.
Le nouveau projet, non seulement satisfait aux
suggestions du representant de la France, mais
ameliore considerablement, en le precisant, le projet de resolution primitif.
Sous sa forme revisee, le projet indique claire,...
ment que le Conseil desecurite reaffirme et
maintient l'ordre donne aux Gouvemements inh~­
resses d'observer la suspension d'armes inconditionnelle prescrite par sa resolution du 15 juillet
1948 [S/902], en vertu de l'Article 40 de la
Charte. Bien que les int~rdktions les plus
severes contenues clans cette resolution et dans la
resolution prececlente du 29 mai [S/801] soient
rendues caduques par les conventions d'armistice,
1'ordre donne aux parties d'observer une suspension d'armes devrait continuer - et, en vertu de
ce projet de resolution, continuera - cl etre en
vigueur et it les lier. Les conventions d'armistice
comprennent la suspension d'armes et, dans certains cas, se referentaux lignes de demarcation
tracees 10rs de la suspension d'armes. Toatefois,
nous pensons qu'il est sage, ainsi que le Mecliateurpar interim et les delegations du Canada et
de la France l'ont suggere, de confirmer explicitement l'ordre de cesser le feu.
Lorsqu'une paix pennanente aura He etablie
~n Palestine, il sera indique pour le Conseil' de
securite de revoquer cet ordre~ Toutefois, jusqu'a
ce. moment-la,· i1 est prudent et il convient que le
Conseil le maintienne. Nous . estimons qu'il est
egalement souhaitable, ainsi qui l'ont propose ·les
delegations canadienne et franc;aise, de demander
auSecretaire general d'assurer la continuite d'un
service reduit d'observateurs pour controler et
maintenir la suspension d'annes, de meme que
pour assister les parties aux conventions d'armistice dans lecontrole de 1'execution et de l'observance des termes de ces conventions.
Je p~sse maintenant aux amendements proposes
par le representant distingue de l'Union sovietique [S/1368]. Le premier de ces amendements,
relatif au deuxieme paragraphe du projet de re.,
solution du Canada et de la France, aurait pour
resultat de pousser les Gouvernements des Etats
arabes et de l'Etat d'IsraeI a ne pas tenir compte
de l'existence de la Commission de conciliation et
a ne procecler qtt'a. des negociations directes en

The revision makes it clear that the Security
Council reaffirms and maintains the order to the
Governments concerned to observe the unconditional cease-fire contained in its resolution of
15 July 1948 [Sj902] pursuant to Article 40 of
the United Nations Charter. Although the more
severe prohibitions contained in that resolution
and in ~he preceding resolution of 29 May
[S/801] have been outmoded by the Armistice
Agreements, the order to the parties to observe
a cease-fire should, and under this draft resolution would, continue in force and be binding upon
all parties. The Armistice Agreements embrace
the cease-fire and in certain cases refer to the
lines established under the cease-fire. However,
we believe that it is wise, as the Acting Mediator
and the delegations of Canada and France have
suggested, that the cease-fire order should be
explicitly maintained,

When permanent peace is achieved in Palestine, it will be appropriate for the Security
Council to withdraw its cease-fire order. Until
that time, however, it is prudent and fitting for
the Security Council to mClintain it. We think
that it is also desirable, as proposed by the
Canadian and French delegations, to request the
Secretary-General to maintain a skeleton staff
of observers to observe the maintenance of our
cease-fire order and assist the parties in maintaining and implementing the Armistice Agreements.

.I.n0W: turn to the amendments proposed by the
dlstmgl11shed representative of the Soviet Union
[S/1368]. The first of those 'amendments relating to the second paragraph of the Ca~adian­
French draft resolution, would have the effect
of urging the Governments of the Arab States
afl~ ~he Government of Israel to· ignore the Conclhat1~fl Commissio~ and only negotiate directly
regardmg the establIshment of permanent peace

1IIttr......-.....:-.

_

q

o'

{

in Palestine. As the representative of France has
said today, this would be. in conflict with the
will of the' General Assembly. The United
States supported the provision of the General
Assembly resolution of 11 December 1948 which
called upon the' parties to" negotiate dir~ctly or
through a United Nations agency. The CanadianFrench draft resolution, like the General Assembly resolution, urges the parties to achieve a final
settlement eiu'1er directly or through the Conciliation Commission. They have chosen to negotiate with the aid of the Conciliation Commission.
We shol.lldnot raise doubts about the desirability
of such a procedure; we ShOllld rather encourage
it. The experience of· the past year shows that
the United Nations can play a vital part in bringing parties together, in keeping them together and
obtaining agreement. We are today considering
the report of the Acting Mediator, who is. the
exemplar of the principle. that when parties are
gathered together:with. sympathetic and skilful
assistance, they ca:n ..be brought into agreement.

ce qui c{)ncerne 1'etablissement d'une paix permanente en Palestine. Ainsi que 1'a dit at!.
jourd'hui le representant de la France, cela serait
contraire a la volonte exprimee par l'Assbnblee
generale. Les Etats-Unis ont appuye la disposition de la resolution de l'Assemblee generale, en
date du 11 decembre 1948, qui invite les partIes
a negocier, sait directement, soit par l'intermediaire d'un organe de 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Le projet de resolution du Canada et de
la France, de meme que la resolution del'AssembIee gellerale, invite les parties a aboutir aun
reglement definitif, soit directeme11t, soit par l'intermediaire de la Commission de conciliation. Les
parties ont decide de negocier avec l'aide de la
Comt:lli~si,o!1, de, cm;J.ciliation. Nous ne devrions pas
mettre en dotite l'opportunite de cette procedure,
mais au contraire l'encourager. L'experience de
l'annee passee montre que l'Organisation des
Nations Unies peut jouer un role vital en rapprochant les parties, en les maintenant en contacl.
et en les amenant a Ul1( accord. Le rapport du
Mediateur par illterim que nous exan1inons en ce
moment illustre le .principe suivant lequel, lorsque
des parties sont reunies ensemble, on peut, avec
une aide bienveillante et habile, les amener a
conc1ure un accord.

The second amendment proposed by t.~e delegation of the Soviet Unioti, which relates to the
third paragraph of the Canadian-French draft
resolution, and the fourth amendment, which
"Would delete the sixth paragraph of the draft,
would have the effect of abruptly withdrawing
the United Nations observers from Palestine,
thereby frustrating the successful implementation
of the Armistice Agreements. As the Acting
Mediator cogently pointed out a.t bur last meetin'g,
to withdraw all United Nations personnel from
Palestine would disrupt the Armistice Agreements, each of which provides that the United
Nations should furnish a chairman for the mixed
armistice c~mmission provided for in each Agreement, that chairman being designated by each of
the Agreeinents as the Chief of Staff er senior
officer of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization in Pal~stine.

Le dcuxieme amendement que propose la delegation de 1'Union sovietique et qd se rapporte
au troisieme paragraphe du projet de resolution
presente par le Canada et la France, ainsi que
le quatrieme amendement qui supprimerait le
sixieme paragraphe de ce meme projet, auraient
pour effet le brusque retrait. des observateurs des
Nations Unies en Palestine, ce qui compromettrait le sllcd~e de 1'application des cOIlventions
d'armistice. Ainsi que l'a si justement fait remarquer le Mediateur par interim au cours de notre
seance precedente, si l'on retirait de Palestine tout
le personnel de I'Organisation des Nations Unies,
on portera.it atteinte, aux conventions d'armistice,
dont chacune prevoit que 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies aura a fournir un president pour
la Commission rnixte d'armistice instituee par
chaque c~mvention, ce president devantetre le
chef d'etat-major ou un fonctionnaire superieur
de)I'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de la
surveillance de la treve en Palestine.

Mr. Bunche, who is above all qualified to judge
on this issue, has told us that difficult and protracted negotiations for the armistices were on.
several occasion:. toa large extent resolved by
the provision for the impartial supervision which
can be furnished only by United .Nations·
observers He has assured us that the Agreements might not survive without the mixed armistice commissions as a means of settling disputes
and supervising the implementation of the
Agreements. We have heard the representatives
of Egypt,. Israel and Syria testify here that while
they naturally wish only the minimum amount
of supervision, that they desire that the necessary
,United Nations officials be provided to enable the
Armistice Agreements to be implemented. This
morning we have listened to the representative of
Egypt stating this in a differeut: way, without,. I
think, changing the sentiment at. all; I understood hUn to say today that the Security Council
should not take any action which would be in
conflict . \"Iith the provisions of the Armistice

M. Brinche, qui est plus qualifie que quiconque
pour juger de cette question, nous a declare que,
a plusieurs reprises, ce sont dans une large mesure
les dispositions prevoyant une surveillance impartiale, que sews des observateurs des Nations
Unies peuvent fournir, qui ont permis aux negociations longues et difficiles visant a la conclusion
de Ces armistices. d'aboutir a une solution. 11 nouS
a donne l'assurance que ces conventions ne peuvent etre viables sans les commissions mixtes
d'axmistice, dont le role est de regler les differends et de controler l'execution de ces conventions. Nous avons entendu les repn~sentants de
l'Egypte, d'Israel et. de la Syrie declarer ici meme
que, tout en ne .souhaitant, bien entendit, qu'~n
minimum de contr61e, ils desirent neanmoins VOIr
fournir le personriel de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies necessaire pour permettre l'application des
conventions d'armistice. Ce matin, nous avons
entendu le representant de I'Egypte dire cela en
des termes differents, mais qui, je pense, reviennent au meme; si j'ai bien compris, i1 a dit que le

.

~_. . . .

c

~.~_ . . ~~~~~_,-~.~,~,~ . _
. , '_".. ,."_~". __..~'''_' ~

" ,"~_. __."_~

. _._.. . . .~.~

rrtI

Conseil de securite ne devrait prendre aucune
decision qui fut en contradiction avec les dispositions des conventions d'armistice; j'interprete
cela comme ayant exactement le meme sens.
L'Union sovietique suggere de detruire l'orgaThe Soviet Union suggestion to destroy the
organization which the parties have voluntarily nisme auquel les parties ont librement demande
. requested to assist them to reach agreement in qu'il les aide a parvenir a un accord dans le cas
the event of disputes over the implementation of ou des differends surgiraient a i'oceasioil de
the Armistice Agreements asks the .Security l'application des conventions d'armistice: c'est hi
Council to discard an instrument of peace. This demander au Conseil de securite 1'abandon d'un
the Security Council, which is charg..;d with the instrument de paix. Or eela, le Conseil de· sepreservation of peace, cannot properly do. The Gurite, qui est charge du maintien de la paix,
Security Council certainly would not wish to peut decemment le faire. Le Conseil de securiie
destroy the effective organization which has been ne voudra certainement pas detrt1ire 1'organisme
built up by the Mediator and the. Acting Mediator efficace mis sur pied: par le Mediateur et par le
to watch over the peace in Palestine. Neither the Mediateur par interim pour veiUer la pai.."C en
Mediator nor the Truce Supervision Organization Palestine. Ni le poste de mMiateul', ni l'Orgawas named by this Council. We have to bear 1:l"lat nisme charge de la sm ;re~l1ance de la treve n'ont
constantly in mind. The post of Mediator was ete crees par ce Conseil. Nous ne devons pas .
created by the General Assemblyl. He built the l'oublier un seul instant. Le poste de mediateur
Truce Supervision Organization from the staff of a ete cree par l'Assemblee generale1 • Le Mediathe Palestine Truce Commission and from staff teUT" a forme l'Organismc charge de la surveilassembled by the Secretary-General in accordallce la..flce de la treve avec du pl~rsonnel de la Commis:'
with the request of the Council. Quite properly sion de treve en Palestine et avec du 'personnel
and wisely the Acting Mediator has, for some . reuni par le S'ecl'etaire general, conformement. a
time, been reducing the organizatien to meet the une demande du Consdl de securite. Depuis que1diminished requirements, yet even in its skeleton que temps, le Mediateur par interinl reauit le
form it retains its integrity and the confidence of I personnel de cet organisme, tout a fait opportune~
the parties and may be relied upon to assist the ment et sagement,;pour tenir compte tie la diminuparties to maintain peace and broaden the area tion des besoins; cependant, meme sous sa form ~
of agreement. It would not only be in.appropriate . r€.duite, il a garde son integrite et la confiance
but it would be a blow against peace for this des parties et on peut: compter sur, lui pOUT. les
Security Council to recall the experienced ob- aider a maintenir la paix et a elargir l'etendue
servers and break up the necessary administrative des· accords. Non seuiemen1: i!. ne conviendrait pas
organization established by the General Assembly que le Conseil de securite rappelle ces observaand the Security Council tD watch over peace .teurs experimentes et disloque l'organisation
in .Palestine.
administrative l'~cessaire a la surveillance de la
• paix en Palest~ne qu'avai,ent creee l'Assemblee
generale et le Canseil de securite, ma(is cc serait
la porter tme grave atteinte a la paix.
The Acting Mediator has clearly and correctly
Le Mediateur par interim a nettement indique,
stated that if the Security Council adopts this et a juste titre, que, si le Conseil de securite
resol1,1tion superseding the terms of the truce adopte cette resolution, qui viendrait remplacer
resolution, except for the provision for a con- les clauses de la resolution instituant la treve, a
tinued cease-fire, the Tmce Supervision Organi- l'exception de la clause maintenant la suspension
zation as an administrative unit established for d'armes, 1'Organisme charge de la surveillance de
a specific purpose, will come to its natural end. la treve viendra a snn terme nature1 en tant
It played a great role in bringing peace to Pales- qu'unite administrative etablie en .vue d'un but
tine, and· as it passes from the scene, each member determine. Cet organisme a joue un grand role
deserves our .unstinted praise. The Canadian- en apportantla paixa la Palestine et, au moment
French draft resolution asks the Secretary- ou i1 quitte la scene, chacun de ses membres
General to utilize the personnel· of that organiza- merite nos louanges sans reserve. Le projet de
tion for observance· of the cease-fire, and to resolution presente par le ,Canada et la France
assist the parties to implement the Armistice invite le Secretaire gentSral a utiliser le personnel
Agreements, This is as it should be.
de ceto:rganisme pour surveiller la suspension
d'armes et aider les parties a appliquer les conventions d'armistice. C'est bien ainsi que 1'on doit
proceder.
.
Le troisieme amendement de rUnion sovietique
The third Soviet Union amendment would end
the Mediator's office. Notice that I say "office". supprimerait le poste de mediateur. Remarquez
This the Security Council has no authority to que je dis "poste". Or, le Conseil de securite n'a
do. . The. General Ac;sembly established this pas autorite pour le faire. C'est l'Assemblee geoffice. The -United States delegation believes that nerale qui a cree ce poste. La delegation des
!he. draft of Canada and France more fittingly Etats-Unis estime que le projet du Canada et de
mdicates that the functions of the Mediator have la France est redige d'une maniere plus correcte
been discharged, and relieves the Acting Mediator lorsqu'il indique que le Mediateur et le Mediateur
of fur~her responsibility under Security Council par interim se sont acquittes des fonctions qui 'eur
resolutions. Such a provision is consonant with avaient ete confiees, et dega.gece dernier pour
Agreements, and ! interpret that to mean exactly
the same thing.

ne

a

I
I

1 See Official Records of the second special session of
the General Assembly, IResolutions, No. 186 (S-2).

1 Voir les Documents offidels de ·la cieu.xieme session
e.xtraordinaire de l'Assembl~e generale, Resolutions,
No 186 (5-2).

8

.....

the General Assembly resolution of 11 December
1948, which states that, when the Security
Council relieves the Mediator of any further
responsibifities, that office, established by lhe
General Assembly, shall be automatically terminated.

l'avenir de toute responsabilite decoulant des
resolutions du Conseil de securite. Dne telle dis~
position est en accord avec la resolution de l'Assemblee generale [194 (Ill)] en date du 11 decembre 1948 qui stipule que, lorsque le Conseil
de securite degagera. le Mediateur de toute responsabilite pour l'avenir, son poste, qui a ete
cree par l'Assemblee generale, prendra automatiquement fin.

We are therefore confident that the Security
Council should reject the amendments and
approve the Canadian-French dn.lit resolution.

C'est pour toutes ces raisons que nous SO!nmes
persuades que le Conseil de securite doit rejeter
les amendements et approuver le projet de resolution presente par le Canada et la France.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): For the
record, I should like to state that what I said
this morning in connexion with part of the statement made by the representative of France applies
also to part of the statement made by th~ representative of the United States. I do not intend,
however, to continue holding a microscope in any
hand; I am of the opinion that we should stick
to the broa.d, essential lines of the subject before
us.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Je tiens a ce que l' on prerme note que
ce que j'ai deja dit ce matin, apropos d'une certaine partie de la declaration du representant de
la France, s'applique egalement a une partie de
la declaration du representant des Etats-Unis.
Toutefois, je n'ai pas l'intention de tenir continuellement un microscope en main; a mon 'avis,
nous devriol1s nous en tenir aux grandes lignes,
aux lignes essentielles de la question dont nous
sommes saisis.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
I should like to say a few words as representative of the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REpUBLICS.

Le PRESIDENT (tradllJit du russe) : Je v01:ldrais
faire maintenant quelques observations en ma
qualite de representant de 1'UNION DES R;EPUBLIQUES SOCIALISTES SOVIETIQUES,

Certain delegations have criticized here the
amendments presented by the representative of
the Soviet Union. The main argument upon
which these objections are based is that the
General Assembly resolution provides for the
participation of the Conciliation Commission and
that the Agreements between the partie'l likewise
provide for the participation of United Nations
observers.

Certaines delegations ont formule des critiques
au sujet des amendementsqu'a soumis le representant de l'Union sovietique. Le principal argument qu'on a invoque a ce propos etait que la
resolution de l'Assemblee generale prevoit la participation de la Commission de conciliation et que
les accords intervenus entre les parties prevoient
egalement la participation d'observateurs de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.

I must point out that these objections are not
valid arguments against the amendments presented by the USSR delegation. The fact of
the matter is that not a single General Assembly
resolution lays down categorically that only the
Conciliation Commission shall conduct the negotiations between the parties. On the contrary, all
the decisions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly especially stress the principle
that the parties should reach agreement and settle
the questions :between them independently and
by direct negotiation. The participation of organs
of the United Nations in such matters is provided for only as one of the alternatives. - Experience has shown, however-and this is particularly clear from the report submitted to the
Council by the Acting Mediator-that direct negotiations between the parties concerned have been
successful; agreements have been concluded, military operations have ceased and a fairly stable
armistice, which is based on legal documents, on
agreements between the parties, has been established in Palestine. Furthermore, the Acting
,Mediator laid particular stress in his report on
,the fact that those Agre'ments were concluded
by voluntary accord between the parties, without
any outside pressure.

A mon avis, ces arguments qu 1'on presente
contre les amendetp.ents soumis par la delegation
de 1'URSS ne sont pas valables; en efIet, aucune
n~solution: de l'Assemblee generale ne prevoit
expressement que -la Commission de conciliation
doive etre seule a diriger les negociations entre
les parties. Au contraire, le Conseil de securite,
aussi bien que l'Assemblee generale, soulignent
tout particulierement, dans toutes leurs decisions,
que les parties doivent mener elles-memes des
pourparlers directs pour regler, d'un commun
accord, les questions en litige. Ces textes ne prevoient la participation d'organes de 1'Organisation
des Nations Unies que comme run des moyens
possibles. Toutefois, l'experience acquise a montre - et le rapport que le Mediateur par interim
a presente au Conseil le prouve d'une fa<son particulierement nette - que les pourparlers directs
entre les parties interessees ont ete couronnes de
succes: des accords ant ete conclus, il a ete mis
fin aux operations militaires et un armistice a ete
etabli en Palestine sur des bases assez solides, car
il est fonde sur des documents jnridiques et sur
des conventions conclues entre les parties. Le
Mediateur par interim a souligne tout particulierement, dans son rapport, que les parties avaient
conclu ces conventions de leur propre gre, sarIS
qu'aucune pression eut ete exercee du dehors.

Since experience has shown that direct negoti-

Puisque des negociations directes entre les

.

.HI~B ~ti~:~M,~:::::: ,::~,i~s*=:."~::::~.:b~~~:,,,,,"::~~,::,~{:~=.~::._~~~:~~:::=!;:~CX;~f"

such good results, namely, the cessation of military operations and the tem.fiorary settlement of
affairs in Palestine, why not continue this good
procedure in the future and allow the parties
themselves to settle the questions between them
by the method which they have used hitherto,
that is, by direct negotiations without any interference in this matter by a third party? There
can be ~o arguments against suc~ a measUl::e, .nor
has anyone suggested here that dIrect negotlatlOns
should not be employed and that United Nations
organs must necessarily be used to settle these
questions.
Furthermore, this is stated even in the final
text of the joint draft resolution of Canada and
France. But I must also point out a contradiction
in that draft resolution.
On the one hand, the first paragraph of the
joint draft resolution states: "Having noted with
satisfaction the several Armistice Agreeme.,ts
concluded by means of negotatioI].s between the
parties involved in the conflict in Palestine ...".
Emphasis is thus laid on the fact that the parties
have reached agreement through direct negotiation.
.
On the other hand, in the second paragraph
of the draft resolution, which refers to General
Assembly resolution 194 (Ill) of 11 December
1948, it is stated that the Security Council hopes
that the Governments and authorities concerned,
having undertaken to "seek agreement by negotiations concluded either with the Conciliation
Commission or directly, will at an early date
achieve agreement on the final settlement of all
questions outstanding between them".

9
a reussi par ce moyen a enrayer les hostilites et a
parvenir a un reglement temporaire des questions
qui se posent en Palestine, pourquoi ne pas continuer a appliquer cette excellente methode cl
l'avenir? Pourquoi ne pas laisser aux parties en
cause le soin de resoudre elles-memes leurs problemes par la methode qU'elles ont employee
jusqu'cl present, c'est-a-dire au moyen de negociations directes, sans intervention de tiers? On ne
saurait faire valoir aucun argument contre cette
these. D'ailleurs, aucun representant n'a dit que
des negociations directes n'etaient pas possibles et
que, pour regler ces questions, il fallait obligatoirement faire appel cl des organes de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
D'ailleurs. il en est fait egale!nent etat, meme
dans le texte definiti.: du projet de resolution
commun p'nSsente par le Canada et la France. Je
dois toutefois re1ever une certaine contradiction
qui existe dans ce projet de resolution:
D'une part, on lit dans le premier paragraphe
de ce projet de resolution commun: "Ayant pris
acte avec satisfaction des differents accords d'armistice. que les parties impliquees dans le conflit
de Palestine ont conclus par voie de negociations...". I1 est donc souligne dans ce projet que
les parties se sont mises d'accord au moyen de
pourparlers directs.
D'autre part, dans le deuxieme paragraphe, qui
se re£ere a la resolution 194 (Ill) de l'AssembIee
gemSrale en da.te du 11 decembre 1948, il est dit
que le COllseil de securite espere que les
Gouvernements et autorites interesses s'etant
engages ". . . a rechercher un accord par voie de
negociations, soit directes, soit avec la Commission de conciliation - parviendront rapidement cl
un reglement definitif de toutes les questions sur
lesquelles ils ne se sont pas encore mis d'accord".

This paragraph refers to the resolution of
11 December 1948. I must remind the Council
that the delegation of the Soviet Union was not
in favour of that resolution and did not vote
for it; but even that resolution provides for
direct negotiations between the parties. The
possibility of conducting nego,tiations through
the Conciliation Commission is mentioned only
as an alternative.

Ce paragraphe fait mention de la resolution du
11 decembre 1948. Je dois faire remarquer que la
delegation de l'Union sovietique n'a pas approuve
cette resolution et n'a pas vote en sa faveur; mais
cette resolution elle-meme prevoit des negociations directes entre les parties. C'est seulement a
titre de seconde solution qu'on y envisage la
possibilite d'engager des pourparlers par l'entremise de la Commission de conciliation.
L'experience a montre - je le repete une fois
I wish, however, to emphasize again that
experience has shown that there is no need for a . de plus - q~'n est inutiJe de faire interve~r un
third party which would bring pressure to bear tiers qui exercerait une pression sur les parties.
on the parties concerned. Those parties have CeIles-ci ont volontairemenf conclu une convenvoluntarily concluded armistice agreements. tion d'armistice. A quoi servirait done cette inWhat would be the purpose of this third party, tervention d'un tiers, sinon a conduire des
if not to carry out some sort of manoeuvres to manceuvres dont ce tiers a precisement besoin?
the advantage of outside interests ? The only Nous sommes obliges de conclure que ce tiers a
construction we can place on the matter is that besoin de cette intervention qui, je le souligne, ne
the intervention of a third party in these affairs serait .certes pas avantageuse pour les parties qui
is designed to meet the needs of' that third party, sont directement interessees au reglement des
but I emphasize that such intervention would not questions auxquelles elles doivent faire face.
benefit the parties directly interested in the settlement of the questions outstanding between t!J.em.
Experience of the work of the Commission has
shown that the in.tervention of that. body has
often served to impede a rapprochement between
the parties and the settlement of their disputes
rather than to contribute to the solution of those
disputes.

L'experience acquise par la Commission a
mohtre que l'activite de cette dernierea bien souvent compromi!; le rapprochement entre les parties et entrave le reglemellt du differend au lieu
de contribuer l'aplanir.

In the second part of the fourth paragraph of
the draf! r~solution submitted by Canada and

Dans la deuxieme partie du quatrieme paragraphe du projet de resolution commun du
Canada et de la France, i1 est dit que le .Conseil

. .a7;~::L~~.~!':~c~rity. C~uncil,

2Q

4

10
11. • • bearing in mind that the
several Armistice de securite ", •. conservant presen
Agreftments include firm pledges agair,,_ ~ any fait que les divers accords contien t a Itesprit le
further acts of hostility between the parties and engagements dteviter tous actes nent de fermes
rs d'hos~
also provide for their supervision by the parties tilite entre les parties et prevoieulterieu
nt
aussi
le conthemselves, relies upon the parties to ensttre the trOle de ces conventions par les
parties
eUescontinued application and observance of these memes fait confiance aces dernier
es pour cont
Agreements...
tinuer a. les appliquer et ales respecter't.
This fourth paragraph of the joint draft resoAinsi donc, dans ce quatrie
lution of Canada and France expresses confidence projet de resolution commun me paragraphe du
in the parties concerned and indicates that the France le Conseil de securitedu Canada et de la
exprime sa CGnt
Security Council relies on those parties them- fiance dans
les parties en cause; il leur fait conselves to maintain peace in Palestine and to fiance pour maintenir la
en Palestine et pour
ensure the implementation of the Agreements con- assurer elles-memes la paix
mise
en application des
cluded between them.
conventions qu'elles ont conclues entre eUes.
But if the Council affirms that the parties themMais alors, si le Conseil
selves should ensure the application nf the Armi- dOlvent appliquer elles-m affirme que les parties
emes les conventions
stice Agreements, if it expresses confidence in d'armistice, s'il leur
fait
confiance, pourquoi
those parties, why should a third party be brought ferait-il intervenir
in? What logic is there in this? It is a blatant que dans tout cela?unIttiers? Que devient la logi~
y a la une contradiction
contradiction. On the one hand, under the terms flagrante: d'une
part
le
Conseil de securite det
of the draft resolution of Canada and France, clarerait, aux termes
du
projet
de resolution du
the Security Council would state that it relied Canada et de la
France
,
qutil
fait
confiance aux
on the parties and was certain that they them- parties et qu'il
selves would be able to rea.ch agreement and to elles-memes a est certain qu'eUes parviendront
un accord et appliqueront, par leurs
find their own ways and means of applying the propres moyens
, les conventions dtarmistice
Armistice Agreements concluded between them; qu'eUes ont conclue
s entre elles; d'autre part, le
on the other hand, the Council would state that ConseH affirme
rait
qu'it
convient de faire interthe Conciliation Commission should intervene, venir la Commi
that observers should be sl::nt to the spot, and so des observateurs ssion de conciliation, d'envoyer
sur les lieux, etc. Tout cela n'est
forth. This is quite illogicaL
. pas logique.
The delegation of the Soviet Union, therefore,
C'est pourquoi, tout en acceptant certaines des
wLile agreeing with some of the proposals in- propositions qui figuren
t dans le projet de resocluded in the joint draft resolution of Canada lution commun du
Canada
et de la Francet la
and France, wishes to point out the inconsist- delegation de rUnion
sovietiq
ue fait observer que
encies contained in that text. The purpose of ce texte renferm
the amendments presented by' the USSR delega- ments que la e des contradictions. Les amendetion is to show' clearly that the Council relies on visent precise delegation de l'URSS a prescntes
a ce que cette resolution
the parties -indee d, it has no cause for doubting exprime aussi ment
nettem
ent que possible, l'idee que
t
that they will come to an agreement among them- le Conseil de
securit
e
fait confiance aux parties,
selves -and that it gives them the opportunity qu'il u'a aucune
rai50n de les croire incapables
to settle their differences independently, without de se mettre d'accor
d entre elles, qU'il est pret a.
pressure or interference frGm a third party, be leur donner la
possibi
lite de regler les questions
it the Conciliation Commission, observers or any- litigieuses
en
toute
indepen
dance, sans qu'elles
body else. That is the substance of the amend- aient a snbir
aucune
pressio
n
ni aucune intervenments presented by ~he delegation of the Soviet tion de
tiers, qu.'il s'agisse de la Commission de
Union.
conciliation, d,'observateurs ou de qui que ce soit.
Tel est le sens des amendements qu'a soumis la
delegation de 1'Union sovietique.
However, the Canadian draft resolution
Toutefois, le projet du Canada [S/1365} ,
[S/136S] to which the delegation of the Soviet auquel la delegation de .1'Union sovietiq
Union had submitted amendments, no longer propose d'apporter certams amendements,ue, a~a1t
exists, since it was combined with the French plus, puisqu'on y a incorpore les amenden eXlste
amendments [Sj136 4] and is now before the presentes par la France [S/1364}. LeCon fl.1ents
Council as t..~e joint draft rt$olution of Cap.ada saisi maintenant d'un nouveau document, sel1 e~t
a saV01r
and France. The USSR del,eW\tion is therefore le projet de. resolution soumis conjointement
par
compelled somewhat to :ater its amendments, le Canada et la France. La delegation de
l'UR$'S
without, however; 2.iiecting their substance. se voit done obligee de modifier, dans
une certaine
These modifications are as follows:
mesure, ses amendements, sans· toutefois e!1
changer le fond. Ces modif:.cations sont les SU1vantes:
The second paragraph of the draft resolution
Le deuxieme paragraphe du projet de resol~­
of Canada and France should be replaced by the ti011 commun du Canada et de la
France seralt
text which the SovIet Union proposed as a sub- remplace par celui que la delegation.
de rUnion
stitute for the second paragraph of the original sovietique avait propose
~e s~bstitu~r ..au
Canadian draft resolution.
deuxieme paragraphe de la resolutlOn prtmlt1Ve
du Canada.
With regard to the third paragraph of the
Pour ce. qui est du troisieme paragraphe du
present draft submitted by Canada and France, texte nctue! du projet presente par le Canadfl
the delegation of the Soviet Union propo ses- la France, la delegation de l'Union soviettq et
ue
as it did in connexion with the original Canadian propose, de meme qu'elle ravait fait pour
le pro-rrr

- - - - _......-~- -

.~-~~ ~.-~~.~" ""'.: -~~~, ~"-'-

"-=~~
. -,
.....,.....

'~''''''''<~-'''''''''~~'''«'~'''~'-~~.'"-'''''~'''''''''''''' -.;

1

-

11

jet de resolution initial du Canada, de completer
ce paragraphe par le texte meme qui figure au
uocument S/1368 contenant les amendements de
la delegation de l'URSS.
Quant au cinquieme paragraphe du texte du
projet de resoltltion commun du Canada et de la
France, son adoption conduirait precisement au
resultat que la delegation de l'Union sovietique
voulait vtteindre en soumettant son amendement
au cinquieme paragraphe du projet de resolution
primitif du Canada; la delegation de l'URSS est
prete a. retirer cet amendement et a. accepter le
libelle du cinquieme paragraphe, tel qU'il figure
au projet de resolution commun du Canada et
de la France.
The third amendment proposed by the delegaLe troisieme ametidement propose par la deletion of the Soviet Union is new and is considered gation de l'Union sovietique, amendement nou-:
ess~ntial : namely, the deletion of the sixth, veau qu'elle considere COl11me essentiel, vise a. la
seventh and eighth paragraphs of the draft reso- suppression des sixieme, septieme et huitieme
lution of Canada and France. In my previous paragraphes du projet de resolution du Canada
statement [43Sth meeting], and again at this et de la France. Dans mon intervention precemeeting, I have set forth in detail the reasons dente, ainsi qu'au cours de cette seance, j'ai deja
for which the USSR delegation proposes the expose en detail les raisons pour lesquelles la
deletion of those paragraphs. I believe that those delegation de l'URSS propose de supprimer ces
reasons are clear to everyone. .
paragraphes. Je pense done que ces raisons sont
claires pour tout le monde.
L'adoption de ces amendements rendrait le proIf these amendments are accepted, the Council
will have before it a draft resolution which will jet de resolution entierement logique et en ferait
be consistent throughout, which will no longer disparaitre les contradictions qui figurent actuellecontain the contradictions apparent in the present ment dans le projet de resolution du Canada et de
draft resolution of Canada and France and which la France; ce texte pourrait ainsi etre adopte a
l'unanimite.
can be adopted unanimously.
Speaking again as PRESIDENT, I wish to state
Pariant a. nouveau en ma qualite de PRESIDENT
that I have no more speakers on my list. Does je voudrais dire qu'il n'y a plus d'orateurs inscrits
sur ma liste. Quelqu'un desire-t-il prendre la
any.one else wish to speak?
parole?
Puisque petsonne ne demande a prendre la
Since no one else wishes to speak, I shall put
to the vote the draft resolutions and the amend- parole, ie vais mettre aux voix les projets de
resolution et les amendements que l'on a propose
ments thereto.
d'y apporter.
Le Conseil est saisi des textes suivants: il y a
The Council has before it the joint draft resolution submitted by Canada and Norway d'abord le projet de resolution presente conjointe[Sj1362]; the joint draft resolution submitted ment par le Canada et la Norvege [S/1362] ;
by Canada and France [S/1367]; and, finally, puis, le projet de resolution comulttn presente
the amendments thereto proposed by the delega- par le Canada et la France [S/1367]; et, enfin,
tion of the Soviet Union.
les am~ndements qu'a propose d'y appQrter la
delegation de l'Union sovietique.
The text of these amendments has not yet been
Le texte de ces amendements n'a pas encore
distributed to the Council, but the representative . ete distribue au ,Conseil, mais le representant du
of the Secretariat says that it will be ready in a Secretariat a declare qu'ille sera dans quelques
few minutes. I take it that the members of the minutes. Je pense, d'ailleurs, que ces amendeCouncil are familiar with these amendments f'l:on1 ments sont connus des membres duConseil,
the previous document; they have remained sub- d'apres le document qui a ete distribue precedemstantially unchanged.
ment, puisque le sens n'en a pas ete modifie quant
au fond.
Si personne d'autre ne desire intervenir, le
. If nobody else wishes to speak, the Council
will proceed to the consideration of these draft Conseil va aborder l'examen de ces projetsde
. resolution et des amendements.
resolutions and amendments.
draft resolution-that it should be supplemented
by the text given in document S/1368, which
contains the amendments of the USSR delegation.
As to the fifth paragraph of the draft resolution of Canada and France, its adoption would
lead precisely to the result desired by the delegation of the Soviet Union in submitting its amendment to the fifth paragraph of the original
Canadian draft resolution; the USSR delegation
is therefore prepared to withdraw that amendment and to accept the text of the fifth paragraph in the form in which it appears in the joint
draft resolution of Canada arid France.

Mr. SMITH (Canada): I do not wish to (' lay
the Council, but it seems to my delegation more
appropriate for the draft resolution submitted
jointly by Canada and Norway to be voted on
after the substantive draft resolution submitted
by Canada and France.
The PRESIDENT (translated from Rttssian):
I should like to point out to .the representative
Canad.a that the joint draft resolution of

IlI,t .

In

M. SMITH (Canada) (traduit de l'anglais):

Je ne voudrais pasfaire perdre de temps au
Conseil, mais l11a delegation estime qu'il serait
preferable de l11ettre aux voix le projet de resolution presenteen commun par le Canada et la
Norvegeapres le projet de resolution du Canada
et de la France, qui traite du fond de la question.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : J e voudrais
signaler au representant du Canada que le projet
de resolution commtin du Canada et de la Not-

-=

12
Canada and Norway was submitted on 4 August,
well before the joint draft resolution of Canada
and France. Of course, the Council has the right
to decide to put the former text to the vote after
the latter, but here seems to be notning in the
draft resolution of Canada and Norway to pre~
vent the Council from voting on it before the
others, since it was submitted first. Unless the
Council has some particular reason for postponing the consideration of the joint draft resolution
of Canada and Norway, and unless the repre~
sentative of Canada insists, I shall put it to the
vote first.

vege a ete presente le 4 aout, c'est~cl~dire bien
avant le projet de resolution commun du Canada
et de la France. Le Conseil de securite peut
naturellement decider de voter sur le premier de
ces projets de resolution en second lieu, mais
j'estime, pour ma part, qu'etant donne la teneur
de ce texte il n'y a aucune raison pour que le Con~
seil ne l'examine pas en premier lieu, puisqu'il a
ete presente avant les autres. Si le Conseil n'a
aucune raison particuliere d' ajourner rexamen du
projet de resolution du' Canada et de la Norvege
et si, de son cote, le representant du Canada n'y
voit pas d'inconvenient, je mettrai aux voix, en
premier lieu, ce projet de resolution.

Mr. SMITH (Canada): I am quite prepared
to follow the wishes of the President in this
matter.

Je suis tout dispose cl me conformer au desir
du President sur ce point.

The PRESIDENT. (translated from Russian):
I believe that since this draft resolution has been
before the Council for some time, it will not be
necessary to read out the text, and I think that
this draft resolution could be adopted by the
Council. If there are no changes or additions to
the text, I shall consider the draft resolution as
a whole adopted.

Le PRESIDENT (trad~~it du russe) : Etatlt donne
qne le Conseil est saisi depuis longtemps deja du
projet de resolution du Canada et de la Norvege,
je ne crois pas qu ' il soit necessaire d 'en donner
lecture. A mon avis, le Conseil pourrait adopter
ce projet. Si personne ne desire apporter de
modification ou d 'amendement a ce texte, je le
considererai comme adopte dans son ensemble.

The resolution was adopted.
i

M. SMITH (Canada)

(trad~cit de

l'anglais) :

Le projet de reso1ut·ion est adopte.

• The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
The Council will now proceed to the consideration of the joint draft resolution submitted by
. Canada and France. It must first·· consider and
;vote on the proposed USSR amendments to that
draft resolution. The text of these' amendments
[5/1375] has now been circulated among the
members of the Council. We shall start with
these amendments.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit du rl/sse) : Le Conseil
aborde maintenant l'examen du projet de resolution commun presente par le Canada et la France.
Il devra d'abord examiner les amendements que
la delegation de l'URSS a propose d'apporter a
ce texte, pour proceder ensuite au vote a leur
suJ.et.· Le texte de ces amendements [S/1375] a
deja ete distribue aux membres du ConseiL Nous
commencerons done par l'examen de ces amendements.

If there is a proposal that the draft resolution
of Canada and France should be considered
paragraph by paragraph, the Council will" begin
with the consideration ,of the first paragraph; and
when we reach the second paragraph, we shall
first vote on the Soviet Union amendment thereto and we shall then vote on the paragraph itself,
and so on. If, however, we do not consider the
draft resolution paragraph by paragraph, we
shall consider the USSR amendments first.

Si l'on propose d'examiner le projet de reSOlt1tion du Canada et de la France paragraphe par
paragraphe, le Conseil procedera a l'examen du
premier paragrappe, puis, avant de passer. a
I'examen du deuxieme paragraphe, il votera
d'abord sur l'amendement de 1'Union sovietique,
et, ensuite, sur ce paragraphe lui-meme, etc. Par
contre, s'il est decide de ne pas examiner le projet
de resolution paragraphe par paragraphe, le Conseil commencera par l'examen des amendements
presentes par l'URSS.
Puisque personne ne demande que la resolution
soumise par le Canada et la France soit examinee
paragraphe par paragraphe, le Conseil passera a
I'examen des amendements de l'Union sovietique.

Since there has been no request for a paragraph by paragraph consideration of the draft
resolution of Canada and France, the Council
will proceed to the consideration of the amendments of the Soviet Union.
Under the first USSR amendment the second
paragraph of the Joint draft resolution would be
replaced by the following text:
"Expresses the hope that the Governments
concerned will, by means of direct negotiations,
achieve agreement at an early date on the final
settlement of all questions outstanding' between
them."
If no one wishes to comment on this amendment, I shall put it to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:
In favour: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Le premier amel.1dement soumis par la delegation de l'URSS' tend a remplacer le deuxieme
paragraphe par le texte suivant:
"E:cprime l'espoir que les Gouvernements interesses parviendront rapidement, par voie de negociations directes, a un reglement ·definitif de
toutes les questions sur lesquelles ils ne se sont
pas encore mis d'accord."
Si personne ne desire se prononcer sur cet
amendement, je vais le mettre aux voix.
Il est procede a·u vote a main levee.
Votent pour: Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

P

13

i

"

Votent contre:
d'Amerique.

Royaume-Uni,

Etats-Unis

Against: United Kingdom, United States of
America.
Abstaining: Argentina, Canada, China, Cttba,
Egypt, France, Norway.

S'abstiennent: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, France, Norvege.

The amendment was not adopted, 2 votes being
cast in favofw and 2 against, with 7 abstentions.

Il y a 2 voi.'I:' pour, 2 voix- contre et 7 abstentions. L'amendeme1l.t n'est pas adopte.

Mr. ATJSTIN (United States of America): I
want the record to show that my vote was in
no sense a veto.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais) : Je tiens a. ce qu'il soit precise que
mon vote ne constitue nullement un recours au
veto.

The PRESIDEN't (translated from Russian):
Under the second USSR amendment, the following text would be added (0 the third paragraph
of the joint draft resolution:
~'. . . and in this connexion decides to recall
the United Nations observers from Palestine and
to release them from their duties, and to disband
the staff of the United Nations Truce Observation Organization."

Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Le deuxieme
amendement de l'URSS tend a. completer le
troisieme paragraphe par le texte suivant:

A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

"... et decide en l'occurrence de rappeler de
Palestine tous les observateurs de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, de les degager de toutes leurs
fonctions et de dissoudre l'organisme des Nations
Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve."
Il est Pf'OCeae a1t vote a main levee.

In favour: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet S06alist Republics.

Votent pou,r: Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

Against: United Kingdom, United States of
America.

Votent contre:
d'Amerique.

Abstaining: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway.

5'abstiennent: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, France, Norvege.

The a1nendment was not adopted, 2 votes being
cast in favOtw and 2 against, with 7 abstentions.

Il y a 2 voi% pmtr, 2 voix- contre et 7 abstentions. L'amendement n'est pas adopte.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
The third USSR amendment calls for the deletion
of the sixth, seventh and eighth paragraphs of
t~e joint draft resolution.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit d1~ russe) : Le troisieme
amendement de l'URSS tend a supprimer les
si.xieme, septieme et huitieme paragraphes du
projet de resolution commun du Canada et de la
France.

A vote was take'f1. by show of hands; as follows:

Royaume-Uni,

Il est procede au vote

Etats-Unis

amain levee.

In favour: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

V otent pour: Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

Against: Canada, Cuba, France, Norway,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

V otent contre: Canada Cuba, France, Norvege,
Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Abstaining: Argentina, China, Egypt.
The amendment was rejected by 6 votes to 2,
with 3 abstentions.

S'abstiennent: Argentine, Chine, Egypte.
Par 6 voix contre 2, avec 3 abstentions,
l'amendement. est rejete.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
Le PRESIDENT (traduit du fusse) : Le Conseil
The Council will now proceed to a vote on the passe maintenant au vote sur le proj et de resolujoint draft resolution submitted by Canada and tion soumis par le Canada et la FraIice [5/1367].
France [5/1367]. As there has been no request ?uisque personne ne demande que ce texte soit
for a vote paragraph by paragraph, I shall put mis aux voix paragraphe par paragraphe, le vote
this draft resolution to the vote as a whole.
. portera sur l'ensemble du projet de resolution.
A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

Il est procede au vote

a main levee.

In favour: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba,
Egypte, France, Norvege, Royaume-Uni, EtatsUnis d'Amerique.

A bstOlining: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
.

5'abstiennent: Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

The resolution was adopted by'9 votes to none
'
with 2 abstentions.

Par 9 voix- contre zero, avec 2 abstentions, le
projet de resolution est adopte.

Mr. BUNCHE (Secretariat) : In the wake of the
decision which ha:. ,~ust been reached I wish

M. BUNCHE (Secretariat) (traduit de l'anglais) : Apres la decision qui vient d'etre. prise,

14

merely to take this final opportunity of expressing my very deep appreciation to the members
of the Security Council for the courtesy which
has been extended to me in permitting me to sit
in on these meetings, and for the invaluable
support and assistance which has been rendered
to our Palestine mission throughout its effort in
the Near East.

je VNIX simplement saisir la derniere occasion
qui m'est offerte d'exprimer aux membres du .
Conseil de securite combien vivement j'apprecie
la faveur qui m'a ete faite d'assister a. ces seances, i
ainsi que l'appui et l'aide sans prix apportes
notre mission en Palestine pendant toute la periode au ('ours de laquelle celle-ci a. poursuivi ses
efforts dans le Proche-Orient.

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

La seance est levee cl 12 h. 45.

FOUR HUNDRED AND TIDRTY·
EIGHTH MEETING

QUATRE CENT TRENTE.HUITIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 15 August 1949, at 3 p.m.

Temee cl Lake Success,New-York,
le lundi 15 aout 1949 cl 15 heures.

President: Mr. S. TSARAPKIN
(Union of Soviet Socialist Repttblics).

President: M. S. TSARAPKINE
(Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants.
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France,
Norvege, Republique
socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagneet
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Official communique

1. Communique officiel

In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional
rules o~ procedure·· of the Security Council, the
following comm'zmique was issued by the Security
Council through the Secretary-General and L
circulated in place of a verbatim record:

Conformement a. l'Article 55 de- son reglement
interieur pruvisoire, le Conseil de securite a fait
publier par les soins du Secretaire general le
communique suivant, qui tiendra lieu de compte
rendu stenographique:

a.

"Le Const::il de securite a tenu une seance
"The Security Council held a closed meeting'
today and considered its draft report to. the privee aujourd'hui·· et a examine son projet de
General Assembly, covering the period f10m rapport, relatif a la periode s'etendant du 16 juil16 July 1948 to 15 July 1949. Observations were let 1948 au 15 juillet 1949, a. l'Assemblee generale.
made on the amendments submitted by various , Des observations ont ete faites sur les amendedelegations and the revisions prepared by the ments presentes par diverses delegations et sur
Secretariat pursuant to the requests' of several les textes reVises prepares par le Secretariat
representatives. Afte! some discussion, the comrne suite auxfdemandes de plusieurs represe.nCouncil unanimously approved its report for tants. Apres un" echange de vues, le Conseil a
transmission to the General Assembly."
approuve a I'unanimite son rapport qui sera
transmis a ItAssemblee generale".
~
