United Nations

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9308th meeting
Monday, 24 April 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vershinin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Tian Bingxu
Mr. Fiallo Karolys
Ms. Blachez-Eteneau
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Miftau Sulemana
Mr. Hamamoto
Ms. Galea
Mr. Bambissa
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Almahmoud
Ms. O’Kelly
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Effective multilateralism through the defence of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations
Letter dated 3 April 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/244)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11627 (E)
*2311627*

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and
resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Russian): I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, allow
me to thank Russian Federation for convening this
open debate.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Viet Nam strongly advocates and consistently
underlines the importance of multilateralism, upholding
the Charter of the United Nations and the role of the
Organization to best serve the needs and interests of
all Members. However, the pursuit of multilateralism
is currently hindered by formidable challenges that
threaten the spirit of cooperation and the international
rules-based order, thereby intensifying existing
tensions, eroding trust and destabilizing international
peace and security.
In that context, Viet Nam is of the view that, first,
multilateralism is effective only if it is based on respect
for the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Therefore, all Member States must adhere to
Charter, in particular the principles of respect for State
independence, the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, non-interference, refraining from threats or
the use of force, and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
All disputes should be resolved by peaceful means,
with full respect for legal and diplomatic processes.
All avenues and means should be exhausted to prevent
conflict and attain solutions to peace and security issues.
Secondly, multilateralism is effective only if
it is based on goodwill, mutual respect, mutual
understanding and cooperation, in a spirit of openness,
inclusiveness and equality. Imposition, intervention
and unilateral acts have no place in the good conduct
of international affairs. Major Powers are particularly
looked upon to behave responsibly and work for the
common good, and not their own selfish interests.
Constructive dialogue and respect for the legitimate
2/29

24/04/2023

rights and interests of all parties, in accordance with
international law, are key in resolving differences and
reducing tensions.
Thirdly, multilateralism is effective only when
there are strong multilateral institutions in place. The
United Nations and its main bodies must continue to
play a central role in promoting cooperation, dialogue
and solidarity for the sake of international peace and
security through the rule of law and multilateralism. In
that regard, we support the role of the Security Council
in ensuring respect for the Charter and the rule of law,
as reaffirmed in the Council’s presidential statement of
January 2020 (S/PRST/2020/1).
Strengthening collaboration and forging deeper
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations would also foster solutions to global and
regional challenges. I that regard, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, through its mechanisms and
constructive engagement with its external partners, has
contributed to peace and prosperity in South-East Asia
and beyond.
It is our duty to uphold the values enshrined in the
Charter and to champion effective multilateralism as
the most viable path to address the complex challenges
of our time. By doing so, we can secure a safer, more
prosperous and equitable world for generations to come.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): We thank the Russian
Federation for convening this open debate, as well as
the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing.
Indonesia, aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Charter of the United Nations laid the
foundation for multilateral cooperation. Principles of
multilateralism, such as inclusivity, solidarity, respect
for international law and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, have been the cornerstone of the United Nations
and guided its work through many turbulent times.
It is therefore disheartening that, in recent times,
we see a growing trend towards unilateralism or
actions by a small group of nations in addressing global
challenges, and not adhering to the United Nations
Charter. While some might highlight such actions as
being efficient and expeditious, we see it as eroding
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

multilateralism and the Charter. Indonesia believes in
ensuring balance between adherence to the Charter
and the speed of taking multilateral action as the best
way to address global challenges and close the space
for unilateralism.
In that context, allow me to highlight three points.
First, we must renew our commitment and our vows
to the Charter of the United Nations as our collective
guiding principles. The Charter embodies our collective
determination to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war and to promote social progress and
better standards of life in larger freedom. At the same
time, the Charter provides a rules-based platform for
multilateral dialogue and cooperation. By upholding
the Charter, we unite our strength in maintaining
international peace and security.
Secondly, we must have a new paradigm of
multilateralism that is fit for purpose. We need a win-win
paradigm, not one of zero sum. We also need a paradigm
in which respect for international law and the Charter of
the United Nations is consistently upheld. The Security
Council must also be well equipped and able to adapt to
the new global realities. An inclusive, democratic and
united Security Council is an important start. While
we are currently deliberating on the New Agenda for
Peace, we must also seize this moment to reshape the
United Nations security architecture to ensure it is fit
for current and future challenges. We therefore urge all
members, particularly those in the Security Council,
to push for clear timelines and practical and concrete
targets on Security Council reform, including making
use of the Summit of the Future.
Thirdly, strong partnerships with regional
organizations would further strengthen multilateralism.
The principle of neighbours know best brings regional
perspectives and best practices to the peaceful settlement
of dispute. That concept is clearly stipulated in the
Charter of the United Nations. We fully believe that a
strong synergy between the United Nations and regional
organizations, including the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, is essential. That ensures multilateral
and regional efforts are mutually reinforcing.
The Charter of the United Nations was written
for the purpose of uniting our efforts to reach our
collective goals through multilateralism. No nation or
a small group of nations can effectively address global
challenges on their own.

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Indonesia will continue to call for collective
work to strength multilateralism. We look forward to
contributing to that endeavour.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Sabo (Ethiopia): We wish to express
our appreciation to the presidency of the Russian
Federation for organizing this open debate on a timely
and important topic. I would also like to thank His
Excellency Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, for presiding over this open
debate and thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
this morning.
The principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations are timeless. No norm or consensus,
grouping or alliance should be allowed to undermine
the sovereignty and sovereign equality of States,
the principle of non-interference in internal affairs,
the prohibition of the use of force and the necessity
of the peaceful resolution of disputes. Preserving
those principles in all circumstances and aspects of
international relations is incumbent upon all States.
Unfortunately, the prevailing unhealthy geopolitical
competition is undermining multilateralism and
the effectiveness of collective security. The current
geopolitical landscape, underpinned by wars, an arms
race, instability and global economic challenges,
continues to pose unprecedented threat to humankind.
In addition, the United Nations-led global partnership,
encapsulated in the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), to eradicate poverty, tackle the effects of
climate change, ensure human development and address
inequality, among other goals, is adversely affected.
Because of the magnitude of the challenges and the
absence of a meaningful solution, our multilateral order
is rendered rhetorical and ineffective.
The United Nations is not unfamiliar with
such kinds of global impediments. However, at this
time, our multilateral order seems to have become
entangled before it could adequately reform itself in
a manner commensurate with the complexities of the
challenges we are currently facing. That mainly relates
to the inequitable representation of States, especially
African countries, in the organs of the United Nations.
Evidently, that inequity is posing greater difficulties for
the Organization.

23-116273/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Overcoming those difficulties requires us to act
with a great sense of urgency. We must translate into
action all the declarations we have made in support of
peace. We must ensure full respect for the Charter of
the United Nations and live up to our commitments
towards the implementation of the SDGs, climate action,
disarmament and all other agreed undertakings. It is
absolutely essential for Member States to ensure that
the United Nations commands political and functional
independence and neutrality, as well as a practical
capability to manage global affairs in accordance with
the Charter and earn the trust of the people of the world.
States continue, and rightfully so, to be at the centre
of the United Nations-led multilateral order. We reaffirm
our conviction that the United Nations-led multilateral
system must centre on equal and effective participation
of all States. That said, we also recognize non-State
entities’ increasing role in and influence on economic
and trade issues, as well as the movement of wealth.
Effective multilateralism can harness the capability
to address inequality issues and the distortions of the
international economic order. It is, however, critical to
underscore the notion of the State as the primary unit of
engagement under the United Nations-led multilateral
system. Notwithstanding the vital role of non-State
actors, any temptation to erode the intergovernmental
nature of our current multilateral system would be
immensely counterproductive.
Ethiopia, as a founding member of the United
Nations and the African Union and a member of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and with its own
robust experience with multilateralism and collective
security, believes that it is within the capability of our
community of States to unite towards reinvigorating
our global order based on the Charter of the United
Nations. We can be the bedrock of the United Nations,
enabling it to play its rightful role and prevail over
its challenges.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ethiopia’s
unwavering commitment to multilateralism and
collective security rooted in the Charter of the United
Nations. But, in the same vein, I wish to reaffirm our
conviction of the importance of equal representation in
all organs of the United Nations, the accommodation of
civilizational diversity, the promotion of solidarity, good
faith cooperation and respect for national sovereignty.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
4/29

24/04/2023

Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the Russian
presidency of the Security Council for the opportunity
to take part in this debate and to reflect on the meaning
and message of effective multilateralism and the
importance of defending the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We thank also the SecretaryGeneral for his valuable briefing earlier today.
Today’s date, 24 April, carries a special meaning
for the Armenian people, as it marks the date of the
commemoration of 1.5 million innocent lives lost as a
result of a systematic campaign of violence against the
Armenians in the Ottoman Empire. One of the darkest
pages in history of the early twentieth century, the
Armenian genocide is a stark reminder of the extent
to which humankind can degrade under the conditions
of a crisis of the international order. It also stands as a
compelling case in point in promoting the prevention of
such calamities to deliver on the promise of the Charter
of the United Nations “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war”, which twice in the twentieth
century brought untold sorrow to humankind.
The Armenian people, who experienced the horrors
of the unspeakable atrocities committed during the First
World War, demonstrated selfless courage and made
enormous sacrifices during the Second World War,
having paid, for a small nation, a disproportionately
high human cost for victory and hence for the creation
of the international Organization to be known as the
United Nations.
The distinctive contribution of the Armenian
people to ensuring victory in the Second World War is
well known. Almost 600,000 Armenians participated
in the war; more than half of them did not return from
the battlefield. Four marshals, one admiral of the fleet
and 60 generals were among the Armenians who fought
in the Second World War. Thousands of our diaspora
compatriots are known for their remarkable service in
the Allied forces in various parts of the world, including
those in the Resistance movement.
The calamities of the past have served to yield
unambiguous lessons for the future of multilateralism,
which effectively rests upon its capacity to protect the
people, the owners of the Charter of the United Nations,
from the tragic recurrence of extreme human suffering.
Adherence to the purposes and the principles of
international law is indispensable to the maintenance of
international peace and security; to the prevention and
removal of threats to the peace, and the suppression of
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

acts of aggression; and to the development of friendly
relations among nations based on the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, as prescribed
in the Charter.
Time and again Armenia has consistently alerted
the international community about instances of gross
violations of international law in our part of the
world. We have repeatedly brought to the attention
of the Council the fact that Azerbaijan — Armenia’s
neighbour, which is many times larger in terms of size
and quantity of resources — has been engaging in the
illegal practice of the acquisition of territories by force.
In 2020 Azerbaijan launched a wave of deadly
violence in the region in an attempt to resolve the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict by force, contrary to the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. The
reality is that Azerbaijan exploited the vulnerabilities
of the international order and the deficiencies of the
multilateral system to launch a large-scale military
aggression, conducted in gross violation of international
humanitarian law, accompanied by numerous cases of
atrocities, including against civilians. In September
2022, Azerbaijan launched yet another criminal
attack targeting densely populated areas and civilian
infrastructure in Armenia.
Since 12 December 2022, the 120,000 people in
Nagorno-Karabakh have been held hostage in the
blockade imposed by Azerbaijan, disrupting the only
lifeline connecting Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia and
the outer world.
On 22 February, the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) issued a provisional measure according to which
Azerbaijan shall
“take all measures at its disposal to ensure
unimpeded movement of persons, vehicles and
cargo along the Lachin Corridor in both directions”.
To date, it has failed to implement the Court’s
legally binding order, engaging instead in manipulative
interpretations, distortions and fabrications, which, as
we have seen, have little value in a court of law.
Notwithstanding the presence of the peacekeeping
contingent of the Russian Federation on the ground,
as per the 9 November 2020 trilateral statement, not
only has the corridor remained disrupted for more than
four months now, but as of yesterday an Azerbaijani

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

checkpoint had been installed, in flagrant violation of
the commitments under the trilateral statement and the
order of the ICJ.
We have been warning the United Nations and the
Council that the alarming situation in Nagorno-Karabakh
is close to turning into a humanitarian catastrophe. Two
and a half years after the establishment of the ceasefire,
the United Nations and its humanitarian agencies are
yet to render much-needed assistance to the people of
Nagorno-Karabakh.
By now it should be beyond any reasonable
doubt for anyone in the international community that
Azerbaijan has steadily established itself as a serial
violator whose record of aggressive, criminal actions
in the region must be acknowledged for what they
represent — premeditated, carefully planned and executed
efforts that are demonstrative of an intent to destroy, in
whole or in part, a national and ethnic group as such.
The masterminds of such plans in Azerbaijan, as well
as their enablers, must, however, bear in mind that no
amount of distorted narrative, corruption or manipulation
of energy resources can alter the fact that there is no
statute of limitations for a certain category of crimes and
that those committing such serious violations will have
to be held responsible, including through international
jurisdiction mechanisms, as justice and accountability
must be at the core of effective multilateralism.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): We thank the Russian
Federation for having organized this timely open debate
on a topic of growing relevance. I also thank the briefers
for their insights.
There are two key aspects to the title of today’s
debate: promoting effective multilateralism and doing
so, as the President terms it, through the defence of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Even as we debate this issue and would like effective
multilateralism to prevail, we are collectively aware of the
inadequacies of the multilateral system, which has failed
to respond to contemporary challenges, whether it be the
coronavirus disease pandemic or the ongoing conflict in
Ukraine. Moreover, significant global challenges such
as terrorism, radicalism, climate justice and climate
action, disruptive non-State actors, debt and several
geopolitical contestations continue to undermine global
peace and security.

23-116275/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Given that context, today’s debate should address
three pressing questions.
First, can we practice multilateralism effectively in
the twenty-first century through a body that celebrates the
principle of “to the victor belong the spoils”, privileged
more than three generations ago?
Secondly, can we actually promote effective
multilateralism by defending a Charter of the United
Nations where two of the permanent members have not
been able to even get their names changed? As made
clear in Article 109 of the Charter, the latter was never
intended to be cast in stone for perpetuity, which is why
it contains a recommendation that a general review
conference of the Charter should be held before the tenth
session of the General Assembly. Seventy-seven years
later, we are no closer to making that a reality.
Thirdly, can we practice effective multilateralism
by defending a Charter that makes five nations more
equal than others and provides each of those five the
power to ignore the collective will of the remaining 188
Member States?
How much longer will we keep embellishing the idea
of effective multilateralism, with the intent of reforming
multilateralism with only words and mere lip service?
Our starting premise must be widening the
representation of this core institution, the Security
Council, to more developing countries to ensure its
effectiveness and credibility. If we continue to perpetuate
the 1945 anachronistic mindset, we will continue to lose
the faith that our people have in the United Nations.
India was a founding signatory to the Charter on
26 June 1945 in San Francisco. Seventy-seven years
later, when we see the world’s largest democracy, along
with entire continents of Africa and Latin America,
being kept out of global decision-making, we rightly call
for a major course correction.
In that regard, I am happy to note that the recent
report of the Secretary-General’s High-level Advisory
Board on Effective Multilateralism has recognized the
inevitability of reform of the Security Council and has
called for renewed effort in that direction. To quote from
the report,
“the Summit of the Future is an opportunity to
reaffirm our common commitment to the Charter of
the United Nations and announce a Charter review
conference focused on Security Council reform”.
6/29

24/04/2023

This past September, the General Assembly heard a
similar call for reform from more than 70 global leaders.
As my Minister for External Affairs said during the
Council’s open debate held on 14 December 2022,
“Our Common Agenda and the Summit of the
Future will deliver results only if they respond to
the growing calls for reformed multilateralism.
Reform is the need of the day, and I am confident
that the Global South in particular shares India’s
determination to persevere”. (S/PV.9220, p.6)
Multilateral institutions rarely die. They simply
fade into irrelevance. Once upon a time there was a
very long distance between the Model United Nations
roleplay in colleges and universities and the real world.
Is that distance shrinking?
Lastly, this forum has today heard some mischievous
remarks by a Permanent Representative arising purely
out of ignorance and lack of understanding about the
basic facts of decolonization. I will not be wasting the
time of the Council in responding to those remarks.
Our advice to that delegation is to please refer to the
numerous rights of reply that we have expressed in
the past.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has the honour to take the floor on behalf
of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations.
At the outset, allow us to welcome you, Mr. President,
and your whole team to New York and to convey our
appreciation to the delegation of the Russian Federation,
a fellow member of our Group of Friends, for having
convened this open debate on such an important and
critical theme, particularly at the current international
juncture. We also express our appreciation to the
Russian delegation for having prepared the concept
note (see S/2023/244) that was previously circulated in
order to guide today’s deliberations.
Over the past 77 years, the United Nations has
registered great achievements in various fields.
Nevertheless, the fulfilment of the promise contained
in the Charter of the United Nations remains
elusive to humankind. The three pillars of our
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Organization — international peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights — are yet to
be fully realized.
While the United Nations has indeed had many
success stories to show — for instance, averting a
conflagration on a global scale — today’s world is not
exactly a safer one from the perspective of security or
at the economic, financial, environmental, energy or
food-security level.
That reality, as we are aware, is the result of multiple
factors. Nevertheless, several are worthy of mention
here today in the light of the tremendous impact that
they have had over the years on the international
relations system. We are referring to attempts to ignore
or even replace the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations with a new set of
so-called rules that to date remain unknown, and to
attempts to disregard the obligations and commitments
arising from the international agreements and treaties
to which members of the international community are
party, including on the basis of claims to a non-existent
exceptionalism. There are also attempts to divide our
world into blocs and to adopt selective approaches to
or accommodative interpretations of the norms of
international law, as well as continued attacks against
multilateralism, of which the United Nations is the
main standard-bearer.
In parallel, there is also a growing resort to
unilateralism, which can largely be seen in the illegal
application of unilateral coercive measures against
more than 30 countries worldwide, in flagrant violation
of international law. There are efforts to ignore and
even obscure that reality, which is negatively affecting
the daily lives of more than one third of humankind.
Those so-called sanctions, whose number has
exponentially increased over the years and which can
be defined as a new form of attempted domination
and neocolonialism, have become the preferred tool of
certain Governments to apply pressure, especially on
developing countries, in order to bend the sovereign will
of another State in order to obtain from it advantages
of various kinds while at the same time causing untold
suffering to entire peoples.
Such illegal measures have not only created a
systemic crisis in the entire system of international
relations, which is continuing to erode multilateralism,
but also deliberately exacerbated the multifaceted
global crisis while increasing uncertainty, instability,

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

mistrust and tensions around the world. That is the
reason why we cannot but continue to stress the pressing
need for the complete, immediate and unconditional
lifting of those measures.
It is in the light of that reality and in response to
the increasing threats against the Charter of the United
Nations, and therefore the urgent need to reaffirm and
defend its purposes and principles, which are as relevant
today as they were in 1945, that almost two years ago
a cross-regional group of countries came together and
decided to establish this Group of Friends as part of
its firm commitment to preserving, promoting and
defending the validity and relevance of the universal
code of conduct that is given us by the Charter of the
United Nations.
In that context, we stress the importance we attach
to ensuring compliance with and strict adherence to both
the letter and the spirit of the Charter of the Organization
and to the timeless principles contained therein,
ranging from the sovereign equality of States to selfdetermination, non-interference in the internal affairs
of States and the need to refrain from the threat or the
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State.
We are certain that to proceed in any other manner
would only divert us from our common aspiration of
establishing a more peaceful and prosperous world — a
truly just, democratic and equitable world order — while
at the same time hindering our ability to provide for a
dignified life and a future of peace and development
for all our peoples, in line with our pledge to leave no
one behind.
Multilateralism is collective action and a joint quest
for solutions to common problems. That is why we
concur with the statement contained in today’s concept
note that multilateralism indeed makes it possible to
facilitate, inter alia, long-term stability, indivisible
security and good-neighbourliness. We also believe in
that regard that finding solutions to the new and complex
challenges that we face today requires the strengthening
and revitalization of a truly inclusive multilateralism
in which all countries, large and small, are effectively
engaged in a discussion, because each and every national
contribution is essential to achieving the goals that
motivated the establishment of the Organization in 1945.
Consequently, that also requires, on the one hand,
achieving the democratization of international relations
as well as consolidating a multipolar system that is

23-116277/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

necessarily rooted in the Charter of the United Nations,
and, on the other, the total elimination of unilateralism
in all its forms and manifestations.
In the light of the aforementioned, the United Nations
is called on to play a key and central role in addressing
attempts to undermine multilateralism, mindful of the
fact that that our Organization is the platform with the
greatest legitimacy, convening power and normative
capacity to, in an increasingly interdependent world,
address jointly and in a coordinated and decisive
manner — on the basis of dialogue, understanding
and tolerance as well as mutual respect, solidarity and
consensus-building — all issues related to international
cooperation for economic development and social
progress, peace and security, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, human rights and the rule of law at the
international level, as well as the pressing challenges and
emerging threats that lie ahead of us, many of which are
common to us all, without any kind of distinction.
We would therefore like to take this opportunity not
only to reaffirm our commitment to the revitalization and
strengthening of both the role and the intergovernmental
nature of the United Nations in today’s world but also
to call on all members of the international community
to put an end to zero-sum games; supremacist or coldwar mindsets; punitive, divisive or confrontational
approaches; provocative, reckless actions and double
standards; and the deepening of divisions and the
imposition of visions and agendas of a dubious nature.
Instead, we should stake our bet once and for all
on win-win cooperation, commitment, good-faith
interaction and mutual accommodation, with a view
to bridging positions and forging broad consensus. We
believe that that is the best path to ensuring the effective
implementation of the commitments and decisions that
we adopt in this forum, achieving the goals and purposes
envisioned in the Charter of the United Nations and
giving free rein to the great power of multilateralism.
In conclusion, today, as we commemorate the
International Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy
for Peace, we reaffirm that we are confident that
multilateralism and diplomacy can strengthen progress
on the three pillars of the United Nations and that we
will spare no effort in upholding the Charter of the
United Nations and its tenets, which all are vital to
devising solutions to the major common challenges that
humankind is facing today.
8/29

24/04/2023

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important meeting on the topic
of effective multilateralism through the defence of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. I thank
you also for your useful concept note (see S/2023/244)
prepared for this meeting.
This meeting is taking place at a very delicate time.
The world is facing unprecedented, interconnected and
complex political, security, economic, humanitarian
and environmental challenges that are putting the
international multilateral system to the test — perhaps
the most difficult and urgent test since the establishment
of the United Nations in 1945
Given that historic test, the international community
as a whole must act in a united and collective way.
Member States must cooperate and stand shoulder to
shoulder to overcome the deep divisions and deeprooted challenges faced by the international community.
This meeting allows us to discuss and assess our
collective responsibilities with regard to our commitment
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which represent the constitution for international
multilateral action. That is the one of the most effective
ways of addressing the threats facing the world today.
The Charter of the United Nations is an instrument
of international law that provides a clear framework
for maintaining relations among States. If we uphold
its provisions, we can reduce threats to peace and
security. We also stress that there is a need to apply
that instrument in a collective and effective manner, in
parallel with ensuring compliance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter.
We must work together collectively to stop violence
and aggression. We must act to build up friendly
inter-State relations and strengthen equality of rights
and the right of peoples to self-determination. We
must promote and encourage respect for human rights.
To achieve those goals, there exist a set of principles
that are equally important and can serve as pillars of
international relations; they include the sovereignty of
States and their independence and territorial integrity,
as well as non-interference in their internal affairs.
Those principles also include the peaceful settlement of
disputes and refraining from the threat or use of force
against other Member States.
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Despite the existence of those purposes and
principles, which must be upheld by all States Members
of the United Nations, some States egregiously violate
them. The Charter of the United Nations and its
purposes and principles are the front line of defence for
small States
We in the State of Kuwait are well aware of that
fact. The liberation of the State of Kuwait in 1991 is a
clear example of what can be accomplished when the
efforts of the international community come together
under the auspices of the United Nations and through
resolutions of the Security Council. The goal is to
ensure the primacy of law, right and justice.
The liberation of the State of Kuwait is a historic
example of success that reflects the capabilities of the
Security Council. It vividly reflected the aspirations
of States with respect to the Charter and to addressing
aggression and occupation, which violated the Charter
and its noble purposes and principles. In addition to
those purposes and principles, an entire set of tools is
stipulated by the Charter that, if used correctly by the
Security Council, could help to resolve many regional
and international challenges.

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, since our meeting today coincides
with the International Day of Multilateralism and
Diplomacy for Peace, I would like to reaffirm the State
of Kuwait’s firm belief in the multilateral international
system and to express our strong support for all of the
noble efforts and good offices of the United Nations
in the context of its three basic pillars of peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer.
Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Albania, the Republic of Moldova and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the potential candidate country
Georgia and the European Free Trade Association
countries Iceland and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, as well as Andorra, Monaco and San
Marino, all align themselves with this statement.

We categorically believe that regional and
subregional organizations can play a constructive role
and contribute to maintaining regional and international
peace and security as laid out in Chapter VIII of the
Charter. It is deplorable that the successful use of the
tools set out in the Charter to maintain international
peace and security is conditioned on the unity of and
consensus within the Security Council.

Let me start by stating the obvious. By organizing
this debate, Russia is trying to portray itself as a
defender of the Charter of the United Nations and
multilateralism. Nothing could be further from the
truth. If Russia were truly interested in the topic on
today’s agenda, it would cease its violations of the
United Nations Charter and international law and
immediately and unconditionally withdraw all its
troops from the entire territory of Ukraine. It would
respect the order of the International Court of Justice
of 16 March 2022. It would stop abusing its veto
power to cover up its consistent rule-breaking. And it
would abide by the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly with an overwhelming majority. Russia’s
failure to do these things brings the Security Council
into disrepute, and only more so during its presidency
this month. Today is yet another deplorable example of
Russian information-manipulation, disinformation and
abuse of its membership in the Security Council.

For decades now, we have witnessed the Security
Council’s inability to resolve certain crises owing to
the major differences of position of its members and
the continued use of the veto. That is why we stress
the importance of unity in the Security Council, so
that it can fully assume its responsibilities under the
Charter in the best possible way and make effective and
final decisions in order to address all risks, challenges
and threats.

I also underline at the outset that Russia’s violations
have come at a high cost. The Ukrainian people have
paid the heaviest price, but the damaging impacts
are felt across the world. In close dialogue with our
partners, the EU has stepped up to address the global
consequences of Russia’s war. In this context, I want
to reassure the members of the Security Council that
every effort in support of Ukraine has come in addition
to, and not instead of, our global commitments.

Chapter VI of the Charter sets out very important
instruments for conflict settlement that ought to be
used more often by the Council — peaceful means,
negotiations, mediation and arbitration. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of prioritizing
preventive measures by the Council to prevent conflicts
from breaking out and to address crises at their
incipient stages.

23-116279/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

24/04/2023

Despite the blatant hypocrisy of this initiative,
effective multilateralism is too important to not be
defended. As the EU High Representative Josep
Borrell Fontelles recently stated in this Chamber (see
S/PV.9268), our world is suffering from an immense
deficit in multilateralism. Conflicts are proliferating,
the climate crisis is spiralling out of control, democracy
and human rights are under systematic attack,
and global inequalities are deepening. There is no
shortage of global challenges that need our urgent and
full attention.

a strong track record of cooperation with the United
Nations on peace and security. At the moment, we have
21 civilian and military missions deploying over 5,000
women and men around the world, from the Niger to
Armenia and from Mozambique to Ukraine. We are
proud to partner closely with the United Nations in all
our crisis-management operations. In Libya, Operation
IRINI contributes to the implementation of the United
Nations arms embargo, and in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Operation Althea assists the authorities in maintaining
a secure environment for all citizens.

Upholding the rules-based order, a term Russia
deliberately
misinterprets,
means
respecting
international law and the United Nations Charter, and
ensuring that these rules apply to everyone — in a phrase,
that might does not make right. It means engaging
in multilateral diplomacy to work out new rules
as necessary.

We support the Secretary-General’s call for a
New Agenda for Peace and reiterate our commitment
to adequate, predictable and sustainable financing of
peace-support operations led by the African Union (AU).
The EU supports the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions for AU-led operations authorized by the
Security Council and the implementation of the AU
human rights compliance framework in this context.

Like many other members of the United Nations,
the EU and its member States are doing their part. For
almost 80 years we have supported the United Nations
and its three interlinked pillars: peace and security,
human rights, and sustainable development. We do
this both politically and financially, as the largest
collective contributor to the United Nations budget.
Our action is based on our deep conviction that there is
no alternative to a strong United Nations as a catalyst of
effective multilateralism.
It is no secret that the United Nations and our
system of global governance, including the Security
Council, are in need of reform. The Secretary-General
has provided us with a dire analysis of its shortcomings
in his report “Our Common Agenda”. He reiterated
that this morning. He has also presented an urgent call
for action to reinvigorate multilateralism, making it a
more inclusive and more effective way of working, as
a bulwark against uncertainty, as he said this morning.
The EU stands fully behind this vision, and we are
committed to delivering on it with an ambitious outcome
at next year’s Summit of the Future. Last week’s
recommendations by the High-level Advisory Board
on Effective Multilateralism serve as a contribution to
our deliberations.
The EU and its member States are committed to
engaging in a sincere and open exchange on an equal
footing with other States Members of the United Nations
to jointly address our common challenges, and we are
convinced we have a lot to bring to the table. We have
10/29

Our efforts to maintain peace and security are
closely linked with our ability to promote sustainable
development. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development remains our universal and indivisible road
map, and we must accelerate its implementation. The
Sustainable Development Goals Summit in September
will be a crucial moment. As a sign of our commitment,
the EU will submit its voluntary review at the HighLevel Political Forum. The EU Global Gateway,
mobilizing €300 billion in investments for sustainable
and high-quality projects in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals, will be a tool for progress.
We also need far more ambitious climate and
biodiversity action by accelerating the green transition
in a just way. The EU’s Green Deal puts us on track to
meet our climate commitments, and we are the largest
contributor of public finance worldwide for climate and
biodiversity, with €24 billion per year.
Far too many people are left behind when it comes
to the enjoyment of human rights. The EU will continue
to vigorously promote and defend the universality
and indivisibility of human rights within the United
Nations system. Our joint commitment to human
rights is contained in the United Nations Charter and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
celebrates its seventy-fifth anniversary this year. We
are strong advocates of the integrity, independence
and functionality of the United Nations human rights
mechanisms. We also support the Secretary-General’s
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

new vision of the rule of law that puts people at the centre
of justice systems. We are committed to strengthening
transitional justice and accountability for serious
violations and abuses of human rights law and violations
of international humanitarian law. The international
community must remain firmly committed to ensuring
accountability for the crimes committed in and against
Ukraine. The EU also remains a steadfast supporter of
the International Criminal Court, and we continue to call
for the universal ratification of the Rome Statute.
Effective multilateralism is making a difference.
At the United Nations, we have often managed to find
pragmatic and agile solutions or throw our support behind
the lead of regional organizations such as the African
Union. Let me share some recent concrete examples.
On a daily basis, United Nations-led humanitarian
assistance saves the lives of people affected by natural
disasters and armed conflict. We call on new and
non-traditional humanitarian donors to step up their
contributions in line with the appeals of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The Black
Sea Grain Initiative, brokered by the Secretary-General,
has bolstered global food security and needs to be
fully implemented and extended. The veto initiative to
convene the General Assembly automatically every time
a veto is cast increases transparency and accountability.
The High Seas Treaty will ensure protection and
sustainable use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond
national jurisdiction, and the agreement on the Global
Biodiversity Framework provides an action agenda for
the next decade. The African Union’s mediation proved
invaluable in advancing peace and reconciliation in
Ethiopia. And the United Nations is leading the removal
of over a million barrels of oil from the decaying FSO
SAFER tanker off Yemen’s coast with a view to averting
a humanitarian and environmental disaster.
Across the daunting spectrum of global challenges,
the EU is proud to work with its partners around the
world in leading the multilateral response. We pay
tribute to the courage and professionalism of United
Nations staff around the world dedicated to defending
the United Nations Charter and protecting those most in
need. And we will be relentless in our commitment to
upholding international law and to working as a force
for inclusive peace, sustainable development and the
promotion and protection of human rights.
This cannot be said for everyone around this table.
As we speak, Russia is violating the United Nations
Charter with its war of aggression against Ukraine. On

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

23 February, the General Assembly reiterated its demand
that Russia immediately, completely and unconditionally
withdraw all of its military forces from the territory
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders (General Assembly resolution ES-11/6). Some
141 Member States supported this demand. If Russia
cares about effective multilateralism, that is the first way
to prove it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Singapore.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I thank the Russian
Federation for convening this important debate on the
topic of effective multilateralism and the defence of the
principles of the United Nations Charter. I thank His
Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, and SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, for their opening remarks.
We welcome the format of an open debate as it
contributes to greater transparency and inclusive
participation. It also allows Member States to convey
their views directly to the members of the Security
Council. Today Singapore would like to share its
perspective as a small, independent and sovereign
nation that is deeply committed to international law
and the principles of the United Nations Charter.
If we want a serious discussion on multilateralism
and the United Nations Charter, we cannot avoid
the elephant in the room. Let me therefore reiterate
Singapore’s position at the outset: that Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine is a serious and flagrant violation
of international law and the principles of the United
Nations Charter. There is no justification for Russia’s
illegal invasion and annexation of the territories of
Ukraine, a sovereign and independent nation and a
founding member of the United Nations.
There is a tragic and disturbing irony in the fact
that Russia invaded its neighbour while holding
the presidency of the Security Council in February
2022. The United Nations Charter gives Permanent
Members of the Security Council a privileged position
at the United Nations. With that special privilege
also comes a special responsibility. Accordingly,
much is expected of Permanent Members in terms of
defending the principles of the Charter and upholding
international law. That expectation applies to all the
Permanent Members.

23-1162711/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

International law and the principles of the United
Nations Charter are sacrosanct. For small States like
Singapore, this is the first line of defence to protect our
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The notion that
might is right and the strong can do what they can and
the weak suffer what they must is simply not acceptable.
For small States, multilateralism is not an option; it
is a necessity. The United Nations and the multilateral
system are now facing one of their greatest challenges
since 1945. The impact of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the consequences of the war in Ukraine
and the slowdown in the global economy have strained
global solidarity. There is a trust deficit among the
major Powers, and that has become both a symptom and
cause of political differences, economic competition
and geopolitical tensions.
The challenges we face are real, but the good news
is that there remains strong political commitment to
support the work of the United Nations. Last month,
United Nations members concluded an agreement to
conserve and protect the high seas. Also in March,
the General Assembly convened a very successful
United Nations Water Conference. Those examples
offer some hope that United Nations members can work
together and find compromises for the common good,
even if they hold different political views. That is the
foundation of multilateral cooperation.
We must continue the worthy work of the
United Nations in a focused, pragmatic and
non-ideological manner. It is also important that we
mobilize to strengthen, reform and re-energize the
multilateral system. As we navigate complex challenges,
we must recall the declaration on the commemoration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
(General Assembly resolution 75/1), in which our leaders
agreed that
“the purposes and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law remain
timeless, universal and an indispensable foundation
for a more peaceful, prosperous and just world”.
I wish to make three points with regard to creating
a strong and effective multilateral system.
First, the Security Council, which is entrusted with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security, must respond to global crises with a sense
of unity and urgency. The Security Council must be
an arena for building understanding and galvanizing
12/29

24/04/2023

solutions, not an arena for vetoes and counter-vetoes that
exacerbate the problem. The members of the Security
Council, in particular the Permanent Members, must
respect international law and uphold the principles
of the United Nations Charter. Given their privileged
status in the Security Council, the Permanent Members
must find ways to reduce tensions with one another,
manage their differences from spilling over and advance
the goals and interests of the international community.
We call on all Security Council Members to respect
the spirit of Article 27, paragraph 3 of the United Nations
Charter and abstain from voting on matters in which
they are a party to a dispute. The Security Council
must also remain accountable to, and transparent
with, the wider United Nations membership, whose
interests it is supposed to represent and protect. That
is why Singapore co-sponsored General Assembly
resolution 76/262 on a standing mandate for a General
Assembly debate whenever a veto is cast in the Security
Council. More broadly, Singapore supports reform of
the Security Council to reflect contemporary realities
and not that of the world of 1945. Given the changing
nature of security, the Security Council must also
address non-traditional security challenges such as
those arising from climate change and information and
communication technologies security.
Secondly, General Assembly is the cornerstone of
an effective multilateral system. As the universal organ
of the United Nations, it has unparalleled legitimacy and
credibility. The General Assembly has proven in recent
months that it can respond to crises by taking decisions.
The process of General Assembly revitalization is
therefore important and urgent; the Office of the
President of the General Assembly must be further
strengthened. The annual report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly, submitted in accordance with
Article 24, paragraph 3, is fundamentally an exercise in
accountability and inclusion. It is therefore important
that the annual report is submitted to the General
Assembly in a timely manner.
Thirdly, it is important to reform and adapt our
multilateral institutions to the challenges of the future.
If we do not make the United Nations future-ready,
the United Nations will have no future. In that regard,
the Secretary-General’s report entitled Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) and the report of the High-level
Advisory Board on Effective Multilateralism are
important and forward-looking documents that deserve
the serious attention of all Member States. After
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

months of serious deliberations and engagement with
stakeholders, the Advisory Board report put forward
many actionable, practical and innovative ideas on how
to achieve a more networked, inclusive and effective
multilateralism. I urge all Member States to consider
how we can follow up on some of those concrete ideas.
Ultimately, an effective multilateral system must deliver
concrete results for our people and our planet.
Let me conclude by thanking the Russian Federation
for convening this open debate in the Security Council.
It is our hope that this debate will represent the
beginning of serious reflection within the Security
Council on its critical role and responsibilities and lead
to a collective effort to strengthen the United Nations
and our multilateral institutions. That will require all
nations, large and small, to work together on the basis of
mutual respect and respect for international law and the
principles of the United Nations Charter.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Multilateralism,
anchored in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, is the first resort of many States and, at
times, the last safeguard for many States.
Multilateralism enables States to do things better:
to better pursue peaceful relations based on mutual
interests, to better generate cooperation in addressing
global issues, to better mobilize international assistance
and relief, when needed, and to better address outstanding
problems and disputes through peaceful means.
For
those
reasons,
promoting
effective
multilateralism is our common priority. I therefore
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important open debate so that the wider
United Nations membership can voice its views on that
issue. We also commend the Russian Federation for its
achievements during its presidency of the Council.
Thailand aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan, on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and wishes
to add the following four points.
First, renewed commitment to multilateralism
requires renewed commitment to the principles in the
United Nations Charter and to international law — from
sovereign equality to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
from non-use of force to respect for territorial integrity
and the political independence of States, from

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

non-intervention to the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Renewing
those commitments requires us to ensure that these
principles are applied universally, not selectively, in
order to strengthen respect for these principles by all.
Secondly, the critical means for ensuring effective
multilateralism is the strengthening of peaceful means.
Effective multilateralism is principally about effective
diplomacy, creative facilitation, impartial mediation
and rules-based arbitration, among other things. We
should seek ways to strengthen the instruments that
advance peaceful means in the United Nations system.
We should nurture a culture of peace among nations and
civilizations. And we should strengthen the convening
power of the United Nations to build bridges among
disputing parties and foster trust and confidence among
States, because polarization and confrontation benefit
no one. With regard to United Nations institutions, the
Security Council needs urgent reform to establish greater
efficiency, transparency and equitable representation.
The General Assembly needs to be revitalized to address
the contemporary agenda. And the Peacebuilding
Commission needs to be utilized more effectively. Those
organs and other multilateral bodies need to work in
greater synchronization.
Thirdly, the interconnectivity among peace,
sustainable development and human security means that
we must adopt complementary and multidimensional
approaches to addressing global challenges. The
current conflicts around the world serve to underscore
the magnitude of their impacts on human security
and sustainable development, from humanitarian and
food and energy crises to the consequences for States’
ability to address global challenges such as climate
change and the coronavirus disease pandemic. Effective
multilateralism therefore requires addressing challenges
to peace, sustainable development and human security
in an integrated manner. The prevention of conflict, for
example, is best achieved by encouraging sustainable
development and human security and allowing it to take
root through local, national, regional and international
cooperation. We should therefore not lose sight of the
importance of attaining the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as an investment in peace and human
security, and we should work towards a successful SDG
Summit in September in order to turbo-charge efforts to
rescue the SDGs and get us back on track to ensuring
that no one is left behind.

23-1162713/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Fourthly and lastly, more effective multilateralism
would benefit from a stronger global-regional interface,
involving closer coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations. The voices of the
region matter, as do the contributions and initiatives of
regional and subregional organizations. Thailand looks
forward to the United Nations continuing to strengthen
its partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, especially as it seeks to strengthen
multilateralism through the implementation of the various
proposals set forth in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
Coming from South-East Asia, Thailand places great
importance on the continued enhancement of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations-United Nations
comprehensive partnership and hopes that the views of
our region on matters affecting it will always be heeded.
In conclusion, Thailand believes that more effective
multilateralism should and can be achieved, which
should be a major priority as we prepare for the Summit
of the Future, to be held in 2024, bearing in mind that
without sustainable development there is no future.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
The topic of today’s open debate is timely, as we have
been witness to various acts that are inconsistent
with the Charter of the United Nations, while the
Security Council, for its part, has not lived up to the
world’s expectations. It is a sad reality that today’s
topic has been proposed by those illegally using
force against Ukraine’s territorial integrity and
political independence. No one could have expected
total ignorance of the Charter of the United Nations
from a permanent member of the Security Council.
The United Nations is the embodiment of
multilateralism. The Republic of Korea believes that
making our Organization well-functioning is the way
to pursue effective multilateralism. In that regard,
we need to first recall what we have agreed to. All
United Nations Members agreed to the purposes and
principles of the Charter and rendered their consent to
be bound by it. Its purposes constitute the raison d’être
of the Organization, in particular the determination to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which is enshrined in the Preamble to the Charter,
indicating that the ultimate goal of the United Nations
is to suppress war, which needless to say includes wars
14/29

24/04/2023

of aggression. In that sense, the principle of prohibiting
the threat or use of force is at the heart of the United
Nations Charter. As pointed out by the prominent
Russia-born international lawyer Louis Henkin, no
one can deny that the principles reflected in Article
2, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Charter are core values
that all United Nations Member States must uphold all
the time. The so-called legitimate security concerns
mentioned in the concept note (see S/2023/244) cannot
and will not justify any use of force incompatible
with international law. Neither can they be excuses
for any illegal act against binding Security Council
resolutions, or for systematic, widespread and gross
human rights abuses.
Speaking of the Council, it has frequently failed to
fulfil the mandate conferred upon it by the Charter. For
instance, the Security Council has remained silent on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s flagrant
violations of multiple Council resolutions since the
vetoes wielded by two permanent members last May.
For its part, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has issued more than 10 official statements over the
past year that reject the legitimate work of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General. For example, last
Monday, the Vice-Chairman of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s Central Military Commission
made a threatening remark to oppose the convening of
a briefing to the Council on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s Foreign Minister, Cheo Son-Hui, called the
Secretary-General a puppet of the United States when he
condemned its intercontinental ballistic missile launch
last November. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s words and deeds run manifestly counter to the
Charter of the United Nations. It is astounding that there
exists a United Nations Member that is so outspokenly
and consistently hostile to the main United Nations
bodies and that completely ignores its basic obligations
under the Charter. If the Council is really serious
about effective multilateralism and the defence of the
Charter, then it must first deal more seriously and more
effectively with such cases of outright non-compliance.
The Government of the Republic of Korea is a
staunch supporter of universal values such as freedom,
human rights and the rule of law, which are inextricably
connected with the Charter of the United Nations. We
reaffirm our dedication to the Charter, a truly universal
instrument that does not permit unilateral, arbitrary
interpretations. The very existence of the Republic
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

of Korea, which barely survived an act of aggression
70 years ago and pursued economic development and
democratization with the help of the United Nations, is a
living testament to effective multilateralism. That makes
us feel all the more responsible for the defence of the
United Nations Charter. My Government will undertake
to seriously engage in achieving such a noble goal.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Önal (Türkiye): I would first like to thank the
Russian Federation for organizing today’s open debate.
Multilateralism is in severe crisis, at a time when it is
needed more than ever. Regional crises in different
parts of the world continue to perpetuate themselves.
The war in Ukraine is well into its second year, with
little prospect of a diplomatic solution. The negative
repercussions of climate change and disruptions in
supply chains are being felt at the global scale, from
increasing energy prices to the high cost of living and
food insecurity.
Transnational threats such as terrorism, drug
trafficking and irregular migration continue to
be serious causes for concern. The failure of the
concept of economic interdependence as a way to
ensure continued peace and stability, as well as
disillusionment with globalization, has also increased
the strains on multilateralism. However, at a time when
the interconnected nature of global challenges calls for
stronger international engagement and cooperation,
multilateralism is not a choice but a necessity. No one
country can cope effectively with these interconnected
transnational threats. Isolationism and unilateralism
are concepts of the past and cannot be applied to
overcome the challenges of the twenty-first century.
Contrary to some arguments, multilateralism is not
a threat to others’ sovereignty. It is an effective way
to safeguard national interests in an interdependent
world. Indeed, multilateralism has been delivering
results for decades. It has been instrumental in building
institutions and codifying guidelines designed to help
resolve conflicts peacefully. Such institutions enable
us to establish norms and platforms for dealing with
our global challenges, from addressing climate change
and poverty reduction to combating terrorism and
disarmament, among other things.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative, the global
compacts on migration and refugees, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

on Climate are some examples of how diplomacy and
multilateralism produce results for the common good
of humankind. In the aftermath of the devastating
earthquakes in Türkiye, we have once again witnessed
multilateralism at work first-hand through international
cooperation in the form of disaster response and
humanitarian action. What needs to be done is therefore
to prioritize the peaceful resolution of conflicts through
constructive engagement and creative diplomacy.
The success of multilateralism obviously depends
on the effectiveness of its core institutions. The reality
today, however, is that our multilateral institutions
and rules are far from perfect. The United Nations in
particular is the embodiment of multilateralism. Yet it
is not immune to occasional moments of paralysis when
its guidance on matters of global peace and security
is most needed. The Organization should be more
democratic, transparent, representative and inclusive.
The Charter of the United Nations and its provisions
should be unequivocally complied with by all Members,
and first and foremost by the permanent members of
the Security Council.
True multilateralism requires that all Member
States, regardless of their size or power, have an equal
opportunity to voice their views and expectations. That
is why the General Assembly, as the most democratic
and representative organ of the United Nations, is well
positioned to play an increasingly important role in
global matters. In order to strengthen multilateralism,
we need a stronger General Assembly, and we
fully support the intergovernmental process for its
revitalization. As we commemorate the International
Day of Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace today,
it is important to reaffirm our commitment to the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter. Such a
commitment also entails re-energizing multilateralism
with a view to better addressing the increasingly global
and interrelated challenges of our time.
In conclusion, I would like to categorically reject the
baseless allegations made by the Armenian delegation
with regard to events in 1915. We call on everybody
to take into consideration our joint history commission
proposal and regional peace and cooperation initiatives,
rather than stoking historical animosity.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.

23-1162715/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this timely open debate at a time of global
crises, uncertainties and challenges.
Sierra Leone aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The seemingly unending cycles of conflict and
violence, the destructive and devastating impacts of
climate change, the spread of terrorism, as well as the
refugee, migration and humanitarian crises of recent
times, continue to challenge the effectiveness of our
current international system, as well as our ability to
promote peace and a decent life for all on a sustainable
planet. We are challenged to generate innovative ideas
and credible mechanisms that will bring all conflicts to
a peaceful end, maintain peace and security, promote
social progress, human rights and fundamental
freedoms and secure better standards of living for
humankind. We have limited options and no alternatives
to multilateralism to address such challenges. In that
regard, the Security Council should consider measures
that will reinforce our collective obligation to uphold
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations.
However, we cannot champion the causes of justice,
equity, accountability and legitimacy when Africa,
a continent on which two thirds of the discussions in
the Security Council are focused, remains excluded
and underrepresented in one of the most important
decision-making organs of the United Nations. In that
connection, we endorse the view of the High-level
Advisory Board on Effective Multilateralism that the
Security Council should be expanded to equitably
reflect the regions of the world that are chronically
underrepresented, including those such as Africa
with large and growing young populations, and to
ensure that voices from conflict-affected regions
are more meaningfully included in the Council’s
decision-making.
We also support the Advisory Board’s view that
our systems should be able to shift focus and resources
quickly to tackle new and emerging risks, positioning
our Organization for more effective prevention.
Ultimately, prevention should be seen as a universal
obligation according to which every State has a role
to play in prevention and peacebuilding. Sierra Leone
aligns with the view that we must stop thinking of
security within narrow nationalistic parameters and
16/29

24/04/2023

accept the fact that our collective survival depends on
greater investment in peace. That will require the United
Nations to become a more effective body at the centre
of the global security architecture. Looking ahead, we
must not lose sight of our shared obligation to ensure a
peaceful and secure world by resolving our differences,
including national and international disputes, through
constructive dialogue. We must respect and prioritize
strengthening the existing mediation mechanisms
provided for in the Charter.
Sierra Leone has indeed benefited from mediation
efforts under the auspices of the United Nations and
the Economic Community of West African States at the
subregional level. The role of regional organizations
in partnership with the United Nations should be
further strengthened to ensure a greater response at
the regional level in implementing preventive measures
such as early-warning mechanisms. As a small State,
and given its experience, Sierra Leone recognizes
the benefits of multilateralism and its significance
in promoting peace, security and development at the
national, regional and global levels. It is our firm belief
that we should consistently uphold the principles of
international law and fulfil our obligations as Member
States in accordance with the Charter in order to
maintain international peace and security. We have a
binding commitment to building a global society that
is more just, inclusive and equal than the one we live
in today.
In that vein, we are committed to supporting
effective multilateralism with the United Nations at
its centre. Therefore, preserving and strengthening the
values of the peaceful settlement of disputes, the dignity
of humankind and meaningful, sustainable economic
development, through international cooperation and
multilateral efforts, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and reaffirmed in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, are all essential for
promoting and supporting the three pillars of our
Organization, namely, peace and security, development
and human rights.
In conclusion, our collective resolve to recommit
to multilateralism must be an immediate necessity. Our
inaction will have a debilitating effect on the dignity of
humankind. In that regard, Sierra Leone reiterates its
commitment to the principles, ideals and objectives of
the Charter of the United Nations — a commitment that
we made when we joined the Organization as its 100th
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

member in 1961 and one that we prioritized in our bid
for election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council for the term 2024 to 2025.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Sergey Lavrov,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
for presiding over this Security Council meeting. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Mission of the
Russian Federation, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council for the month of April, for holding
today’s important debate on the International Day of
Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace to reflect on
how to enhance and ensure multilateralism by defending
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in the light of the various current challenges
faced by the world. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his valuable statement. The
various challenges faced by the world in recent decades,
in particular the coronavirus disease pandemic that has
raged over the past few years, have proved that no State
can manage and confront risks alone. We must all work
together as an international community, including all
stakeholders, for the good of humankind. Against that
backdrop, multilateralism, diplomacy and international
cooperation are the most important and effective tools
for achieving the goal of maintaining international peace
and security and achieving sustainable development.
Under the leadership of King Hamad bin Isa Al
Khalifa, King of the Kingdom of Bahrain, and with the
support of Prince Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa, Crown
Prince and Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Bahrain,
the Kingdom of Bahrain has stressed in all its diplomatic
positions and international actions the importance of
cooperation and international partnership, on the basis
of fraternity, understanding, good-neighbourliness,
respect for the sovereignty of States and non-interference
in their internal affairs, while prioritizing dialogue
and diplomatic solutions in settling conflicts and
calming regional and international tensions. We have
also supported consolidating peaceful coexistence
among religions, civilizations and cultures, based on
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law.
The Kingdom of Bahrain has been committed to
peace as a strategic choice. That is the premise of the
various initiatives it has launched to enhance international

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

cooperation, stability and peace and prosperity,
especially in the Middle East, which is experiencing
various conflicts and disputes. The Kingdom of Bahrain
has supported and enhanced the international order
based on international law, international instruments and
international human rights mechanisms and principles,
as enshrined in the legislation and instruments of
international organizations. We have also supported the
building of the international capacity to provide assistance
and ensure sustainable development throughout the
world. We have promoted the values of peace, peaceful
coexistence and dialogue through specific policies and
initiatives, such as through the establishment of the King
Hamad Global Centre for Peaceful Coexistence, which
promotes peaceful coexistence among various religions
and cultures.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain stresses
the critical role played by the United Nations as an
embodiment of one of the best multilateral frameworks
for maintaining international peace and security
and achieving sustainable development goals while
protecting and promoting human rights.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 120 member States of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
At the outset, I congratulate the Russian Federation
on its successful presidency of the Security Council
and express appreciation for the opportunity for the
Movement to submit its position on today’s topic. In
that regard, we cannot forget that the theme of today’s
open debate coincides with the annual commemoration
of the International Day of Multilateralism and
Diplomacy for Peace, a significant date that was
promoted by the Non-Aligned Movement, in line
with its historic commitment to the promotion and
preservation of multilateralism and the facilitation of
diplomacy, which, at the current international juncture,
serves as an opportunity for promoting the values of
the United Nations and reaffirming the faith of our
peoples in the purposes and principles enshrined in its
founding Charter.
The Non-Aligned Movement is committed to
supporting multilateralism, with the United Nations
at its core. Preserving and strengthening the values of
multilateralism and international cooperation, which
underpin the Charter of the United Nations and the 2030

23-1162717/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Agenda for Sustainable Development, is fundamental for
promoting and supporting the three pillars of the United
Nations, namely, peace and security, development and
human rights. At their eighteenth Summit, held in Baku
in October 2019, the Heads of State and Government of
the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirmed the validity of
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles and norms of international
law as indispensable for preserving and promoting peace
and security, the rule of law, economic development and
social progress and human rights for all.
The strict observance of the principles of
international law and the fulfilment in good faith of
the obligations assumed by States, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, are of the greatest
importance for the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Non-Aligned Movement is committed
to supporting and promoting the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
and norms of international law, including those relating
to the territorial integrity of States and the inviolability of
their international borders, the inadmissibility of the use
of force, non-interference in the internal affairs of States
and the right to self-determination of peoples under
foreign occupation and colonial or foreign domination.
Every State has the duty to refrain, in its
international relations, from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations. Such a threat or use
of force constitutes a violation of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations and shall never be
recognized as a lawful means of settling international
issues. The member States of the Movement greatly
emphasize the importance of taking effective measures
for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches
of peace, as well as to defend, promote and encourage the
settlement of international disputes by peaceful means in
such a manner that international peace and security and
justice are not endangered.
The Movement denounces and demands the repeal
of unilateral coercive measures against Member States
when such measures are not authorized by the Security
Council in accordance with the Charter or that are
inconsistent with the principles of international law
and the Charter. That is due to their extraterritorial
implications and illegal character and because they
violate human rights and hinder the full economic and
social development of the peoples subjected to them.
18/29

24/04/2023

The Movement reaffirms and underscores its
principled position and commitment with regard to
the promotion of the pacific settlement of disputes in
accordance with the Charter, international law and the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including
those adopted by the Security Council. In that context,
we want to emphasize the significant role played by the
International Court of Justice — the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations — in promoting and
encouraging the settlement of international disputes
by peaceful means in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and the Statute of the Court.
The Movement urges the Security Council, the General
Assembly and other organs of the United Nations, as
well as its duly authorized specialized agencies, to
make greater use of the Court as a source of advisory
opinions and interpretation of international law within
the scope of their activities.
The Movement, faithful to its commitment to
strengthening its role as an anti-war and peace-loving
force, reaffirms its determination to work for the
establishment of a peaceful and prosperous world and
a just and equitable world order. We also renew our
determination to work for a multipolar world through
the strengthening of the United Nations and multilateral
processes, which are indispensable to our efforts to
promote the interests of our nations and humankind as
a whole.
I will now make a few remarks in my national
capacity. The fundamentally flawed and false
allegations made by the representative of Armenia
earlier today in this meeting reveal the extent to which
hatred, intolerance and falsehoods dominate Armenia’s
discourse and the serious threat that it poses to regional
peace and security and stability. Its objective is clear.
It is to conceal its own responsibility for the aggression
against my country, Azerbaijan, including its 30-year
occupation of sovereign territories of my country, mass
atrocities, hate crimes and its undisguised racist policy.
Armenia’s recurring claims about the large-scale
military hostilities allegedly unleashed by Azerbaijan
in 2020 are sheer fantasy. Azerbaijan used a counterforce to restore its territorial integrity and protect its
people, acting exclusively on its sovereign soil in full
conformity with the Charter, international law and
Security Council resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993),
874 (1993) and 884 (1993).
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

As for the clashes in September 2022, they
occurred along the non-delimited Armenia-Azerbaijan
border — not in Armenia — and were provoked by
the armed forces of Armenia. That was properly
documented and reported to the United Nations.
Armenia’s allegations about the Lachin-Khankendi
road are equally false. Since the signing of the trilateral
statement in November 2020, the regime governing the
movement of persons, vehicles and cargo along the road
has remained unchanged, with Azerbaijan guaranteeing
security in accordance with the statement. Residents,
ambulances, humanitarian convoys and the International
Committee of the Red Cross have used the road without
restrictions. At the same time, Armenia itself has abused
the Lachin road for illegal military purposes, including
rotating armed forces personnel, transferring weapons
and planting landmines in the area. It has also used the
road for illicit trafficking in minerals and other resources
and for moving third-country nationals. Azerbaijan’s
establishment of a border checkpoint at the entrance to
the Lachin road on its sovereign territory is grounded in
the foundational principles of the territorial sovereignty
and integrity of States and their undeniable right,
prerogative and exclusive competence and duty to ensure
the security and protection of their borders and the rule
of law.
Instead of wasting time distorting the facts,
misinterpreting international documents, misleading the
international community and inciting enmity and hatred,
Armenia should abide by its international obligations,
completely withdraw its armed forces and illegal armed
formations from the territory of Azerbaijan and return
the eight border villages still occupied to Azerbaijan.
Armenia should cease and desist from territorial
claims, illegal activities and disinformation, end its
mine terrorism and shed light on the fate of the several
thousand Azerbaijanis who went missing during the
conflict. It should redress the harm caused to Azerbaijan
and engage faithfully in negotiations on a peace treaty
and the delimitation of the border between the two States.
No matter the number of falsehoods, insinuations and
disinformation disseminated by Armenia, Azerbaijan is
firm in its determination to rehabilitate, reconstruct and
reintegrate its conflict-affected territories, ensure the safe
and dignified return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes, advance the normalization agenda
and prevent and eliminate, by all legitimate means, any
threat to the safety and well-being of its people and its
State sovereignty and territorial integrity.

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate to discuss
the topic “Effective multilateralism through the defence
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations”. We
are deliberating on that important topic during a complex
time of heightened political tension, which requires
sober reflection on the multifaceted global challenges
affecting all of us. We must devise effective approaches
and innovative solutions to address those challenges as
we work to fulfil the common United Nations agenda and
strengthen our commitment to multilateralism.
The principles of the Charter, which embody core
tenets to which we, as Member States, have pledged
our commitment, are increasingly under threat. The
prescripts of the Charter were premised on the historic
horrors of the Second World War, the lessons of which
are still relevant to modern geopolitics. The prevailing
global political climate reminds us that all Member
States are bound by the Charter to settle disputes and
conflicts by peaceful means and make every effort to
pursue global peace and stability.
Despite the noble aspirations of the Charter of the
United Nations and its positive impact, some Member
States have violated and continue to violate some of its
central tenets. Although the Charter maintains that the
United Nations is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its members, in reality we are faced with
the Orwellian absurdity that some members are more
equal than others. Of course, that is often expressed
through unilateral actions and a blatant disregard for
international law. It enables those with power to violate
the Charter by, for example, settling their disputes by
non-peaceful means or violating or supporting the
infringement of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of others. However, this assumption of power does not
exempt them from the adverse consequences we all
have to bear if the principles enshrined in the Charter
are flouted. These consequences are often uncontrollable
and have an impact on the long-term security of all.
It remains vital for all Member States to be
steadfast in their resolve to maintain the centrality of
the United Nations in settling international conflicts
within the provisions of international law and the
United Nations Charter. The pursuit of global peace
and security requires Member States to put aside their
differences and prioritize the common goal of advancing
the course of humanity’s peace and development.

23-1162719/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The relevance of the United Nations has been
called into question with greater frequency in recent
times. Even more stark is the quest for the legitimacy
and integrity of the Security Council. This quest will
persist for as long as the paralysis in the Security
Council continues without resolution. This has brought
to the fore the urgent need for Security Council reform,
which requires fair representation and equality in the
decision-making processes of the Council. Similarly,
we impress on members of the Security Council to
rise above their differences on some of the issues on
its agenda and earnestly pursue unity and consensus,
which we hope will inevitably enhance the effectiveness
of the Council and therefore its legitimacy.
As we prepare in coming months for the
deliberations on “Our Common Agenda” and the
Summit of the Future, in particular the New Agenda
for Peace, we ought to reflect on a global peace and
security architecture that is responsive and effective
in resolving emerging threats to peace and security, as
well as outstanding and protracted conflicts. The New
Agenda for Peace provides an opportunity in a complex
geopolitical context to renew and strengthen our resolve
to preserve and improve upon the gains made on global
peace and stability in the past 77 years of existence of
the United Nations.
Conflict prevention, dialogue and mediation must
be at the centre of the endeavours of the United Nations
in pursuit of global peace and security. This will
require strong political will and utmost respect for
and consistent application of international law and the
United Nations Charter. It cannot be business as usual,
if we, as Member States, and the Security Council, with
the primary mandate to maintain international peace
and security, are to succeed at providing effective
management and resolution of global peace and security.
We wish to remind the Security Council and the
States Members of the United Nations that one of the
most serious impediments to the effective resolution
of conflicts is the prevailing selective application of
international law and the United Nations Charter.
Accordingly, South Africa believes that effective
multilateralism demands that unity, partnership and
collaboration be pursued as a first step to strengthening
collective action. Equally importantly, the Security
Council’s responsibility in ensuring the implementation
of its resolutions and fair and equal attention to the
issues on its agenda remains vital.
20/29

24/04/2023

I would like to conclude by reaffirming South
Africa’s unwavering commitment and support for a rulesbased multilateral system that is based on international
law, and which is fair, equitable, representative and
fit for purpose, with the United Nations at the helm
and providing the platform for intergovernmental and
collective solutions to common global challenges. The
prevailing global economic, development, health, peace
and security and other pressing challenges attest to
the principle that no single country can alone resolve
them. We therefore have to rebuild trust and redouble
our efforts to work together towards addressing
these challenges.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to the representative of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic.
Mr. Vongnorkeo (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate, and
I congratulate the Russian Federation on assuming
presidency of the Security Council this month. My
delegation would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his important briefing.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement.
We have arrived at this very critical juncture
where the international community is confronted with
multifaceted challenges, including armed conflicts and
economic, financial and environmental difficulties.
Further, multilateralism, which has always been at the
core of international cooperation, has been undermined,
whereas unilateralism has been on the rise.
“We”, as stipulated in the Charter, are the peoples of
the United Nations, and we gather at the United Nations
to find the most appropriate solutions and take urgent
actions in addressing the problems facing us all today.
This cannot be done without firmly upholding the
principles of the United Nations Charter and preserving
multilateralism. The United Nations was founded
to avert another global catastrophe. Our collective
wisdom and political will to find the most pragmatic
approach to tackling the increasing number of crises
imperilling us today must be above all unilateral and
political interests. In so doing, we must bolster our
solidarity, address differences and avoid confrontation
and division.
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

In this context, the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, must effectively fulfil its mandate to
maintain peace and security. It is our shared aspiration
that the Council be transformed in order to respond
to the current global security threats and needs. The
international community must find peaceful and longlasting solutions to ongoing conflicts and disputes. We
believe that unilateral coercive measures contradict
the principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law. They continue to impede the rights
and prevent the full economic and social development of
the innocent peoples subjected to them. To ensure lasting
peace and prosperity, we must create opportunities for
peaceful solutions and an environment conducive to
diplomatic negotiations.
As an active and responsible member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has attached
great importance to the promotion of regional peace
and stability. Through the Treaty on the Southeast
Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone, we in ASEAN have
firmly upheld the importance of the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, which lays a solid foundation for
maintaining regional peace and security. In this same
vein, ASEAN’s role in addressing regional security
challenges by peaceful means, including the issue of
Myanmar, remains essential. We must also do our utmost
to ensure the continuation of humanitarian assistance to
people in need, as well as to advance full and effective
implementation of the five-point consensus agreed by
the ASEAN leaders.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic’s unwavering commitment
to upholding the principles of the United Nations
Charter. My country stands ready to continue working
closely with all States Members of the United Nations in
maintaining international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to speak on this important topic.
Australia is a country that shares common ground
with so many of the world’s peoples. We are a land that
is home to the oldest continuous culture on the planet
and to people from more than 300 ancestries. We see
ourselves reflected in the world, just as the world can see
itself reflected in us. And we want to see the interests of
all the world’s peoples upheld along with our own.

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Our interests lie in a world that operates by rules,
standards and norms, where a larger country does not
determine the fate of a smaller country and where each
country can pursue its own aspirations and its own
prosperity. We want to live according to our own laws and
values, determined by our own citizens — respecting,
but not deferring to others. In order to maintain those
sovereign choices, the small and medium countries of
the world, including Australia, must work together.
The purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations are fundamental to our
aspirations, and they are critical to the multilateral
system being able to effectively address the global
challenges we all face. We want to see all countries
uphold the United Nations Charter.
Russia’s illegal and immoral invasion of Ukraine
renders stark our interest in living in a world where no
country dominates and no country is dominated. The
attack on Ukraine is an attack on all small countries.
It is an assertion that a larger country is entitled to
subjugate a smaller neighbour — to decide whether
another country can even exist.
We cannot accept a situation where large countries
determine the fate of smaller countries. Aside from
terrible damage and loss of life in Ukraine, Russia’s
invasion is compounding human suffering. It is
propelling the global crisis in food and energy security
that is having such a terrible impact on the populations
of so many Member States. It reminds us all how much
is at stake if we fail to protect the United Nations
Charter. We cannot be passive when big Powers flout
the rules. We must continue to work together to hold
Russia to account.
Australia’s vision is for a multilateral system that
delivers security, stability and prosperity for Australia,
our region and the world. Being genuinely committed to
the United Nations means being genuinely committed
to reforming the United Nations in order to keep it vital.
We are committed to working with each other to that end.
The Security Council’s inability to respond to
Russia’s attack on Ukraine has once again highlighted
the importance of reform. Member States must have
confidence that the Security Council can respond
effectively to threats to, and breaches of, international
peace and security. The Security Council veto power
was never intended to be used to enable unchecked abuse
of the United Nations Charter by the very countries that
were given the veto.

23-1162721/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The declaration on the commemoration of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
(General Assembly resolution 75/1) and the Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982) report demonstrate the
broad political support for a multilateral system that
is equitable, inclusive, efficient and effective. The
Summit of the Future is an opportunity to consider
whether the United Nations we have now is both the
United Nations we want and the United Nations we
need for the future. We look forward to engaging in this
process with countries genuinely committed to reform.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): I thank the presidency of the
Russian Federation for convening this important debate.
Today’s world has been marked by increasing
geopolitical tensions among big Powers since the
period of the Second World War. A trust deficit
within and among nations is presenting a grave test
to multilateralism. A strong sense has prevailed that
the United Nations, particularly this very organ, the
Security Council, is incapable of maintaining peace
and solving the critical challenges confronted by
humankind today. There is an urgent need to shelve
off parochialism and muster political will to build
understanding, cooperation and coordination in order
to dispel geopolitical tensions and to chart a path for a
peaceful and prosperous future for humankind.
Multilateralism is central to Nepal’s foreign
policy, with the United Nations at its core, to maintain
international peace and security and to tackle global
challenges. For small nations like ours, defending the
Charter of the United Nations equates to defending
sovereign equality, territorial integrity, dignity and
justice for an inclusive and equitable world order.
We view the United Nations Charter as a foundation
for the rules-based multilateral system in which all
Member States participate with dignity, irrespective of
their economic prowess or military might. All Member
States must always respect the Charter provisions.
Their selective application is a rejection of the values of
rules-based multilateral order.
While we stand for unequivocal adherence to the
United Nations Charter, we call for timely reform that
promotes fairness, equality, inclusivity and justice for
all Member States. Peace and security, human rights and
sustainable development are mutually reinforcing. We
22/29

24/04/2023

emphasize the timely achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals in order to prevent conflict and
address their root causes.
There is a need for closer coordination among the
General Assembly, Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission if
we are to achieve lasting peace. As the Security Council
carries the primary responsibility of maintaining peace
and security, its membership must assume the vital
responsibility of upholding the Charter’s tenets and
values. The Council’s failure undermines the very
credibility and legitimacy of the entire United Nations
system. We therefore expect the Council’s members,
especially the Permanent Members, to work harder to
reach a consensus in addressing the problems the world
is facing today.
Throughout its 77 years, the United Nations has
distinguished itself as the only credible multilateral
Organization with universal membership. Its success
was not an accident, but a result of the relentless
commitment exhibited by its Member States. We
cannot imagine or create yet another such institution
with the same membership and credibility. But the time
has come to take a historic step at this turning point in
history to make the United Nations a capable institution
that maintains peace and helps Member States secure
sustained prosperity.
We must demonstrate a genuine intention to deliver
through the United Nations system. Narrow national
interests must therefore not prevent the United Nations
from acting on common global threats. Member States
must abide by the United Nations Charter for the
maintenance of peace and stability in the world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. Sergey Lavrov,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
for organizing and presiding over this open debate on the
theme of effective multilateralism through the defence
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Charter of the United Nations lays the
foundation for the conduct of predictable international
relations, based on a set of common values and principles.
The latter, particularly respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Member States, the peaceful
resolution of disputes and international community,
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

are critical for facing global challenges. They represent
a safety valve for multilateralism based on the rule
of law, respect for human rights, international peace
and security and development. The backbone of the
founding text of the United Nations was and remains
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Today, as in 1945, that objective continues to be at
the heart of United Nations action. And it is precisely the
Security Council, the guarantor of peace and security
in the world, that has the primary responsibility in that
regard. Today we need a more united, effective and
pragmatic multilateralism. The coronavirus disease
pandemic has clearly shown us that we depend on
each other and that multilateralism is required. For
Morocco, building a renewed, equitable multilateral
system is fundamental to ensuring that international
solidarity is adequately strengthened to meet the
current multidimensional and multiform challenges.
We also need to take a fresh look at multilateral action,
develop renewed and innovative approaches and define
consensus concepts that can give new impetus to facing
immediate and future challenges and strengthening the
effectiveness of international institutions.
In accordance with the guidelines provided by
King Mohammed VI, Morocco actively contributes
to the promotion of multilateralism based on peace,
stability, mutual respect and sustainable development
at the global and continental levels. Morocco has
always believed that multilateral cooperation is the
most effective way to respond to the global challenges
facing humankind, especially in an interconnected and
ever-changing world. In that regard, the Kingdom of
Morocco is firmly committed to important multilateral
initiatives, such as intercultural, intercivilizational
and interreligious dialogues, combating terrorism
and violent extremism, the humane and humanitarian
management of migration, the promotion of sustainable
development and the protection of the environment, to
name but a few very important topics. Morocco has also
made it a top priority to ensure the peace, security and
sustainable development of our African continent, as
well as to take multilateral action in favour of Africa, in
accordance with the instructions of King Mohammed VI.
Morocco welcomes the efforts and initiatives of
Secretary-General António Guterres, in particular his
report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) and the New
Agenda for Peace, which aim to strengthen the action
of our Organization, equipping it to face the challenges
of our times and ensuring a better future for succeeding

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

generations. Those initiatives, in addition to the reforms
undertaken in the United Nations, including the reform
of the Security Council — with respect to which we
reaffirm our full support for the African Common
Position, as contained in the Ezulwini Consensus and
the Sirte Declaration — contribute to strengthening
the role of the United Nations and multilateralism in
general by encouraging an inclusive, equitable approach
to international cooperation.
In conclusion, we believe that a strong and equitable
multilateralism is indispensable for addressing common
challenges, finding collective solutions and building a
better future for current and succeeding generations. To
that end, the United Nations remains the most effective,
efficient and appropriate framework for cooperation
and the platform for multilateral action par excellence
for achieving those new objectives.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon) (spoke in French): Allow
me to congratulate Russia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April, and I
commend it for the convening today’s open debate of
the Security Council, presided over by Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov. On behalf of my delegation, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on a key issue, at a time when the rules-based
multilateral system continues to be undermined.
Nevertheless, despite the imperfections of that
system, it must remain our preferred framework,
because none of us alone can deal with the multitude
of global and often existential challenges we face,
including armed conflicts, pandemics, food insecurity
and the climate emergency, to name but a few. However,
as the Secretary-General reminded us in 2020 at the
height of the pandemic, it is not enough to proclaim the
virtues of multilateralism; we must continue to show its
added value, and international cooperation must adapt
to changing times. That international cooperation must
be more agile, effective and inclusive, so that we can
be better prepared and respond to the global challenges
that affect the peoples of the world and ultimately
prevent many more from arising.
In that regard, the Charter of the United Nations
must remain the cornerstone of multilateralism.
Lebanon therefore supports any institutional reforms
aimed at increasing the credibility of the United
Nations and reducing the mistrust — which is often

23-1162723/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

justifiable — towards international institutions. In
that regard, I would like to reaffirm Lebanon’s support
for the Secretary-General’s efforts, as proposed in
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), to adapt the United
Nations to this new era. That is also reflected in the
New Agenda for Peace.
As we are now in a multipolar world, governance
institutions must be more representative and
democratic, which of course applies to the Security
Council. Lebanon therefore continues to support the
intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the
Council, on the question of equitable representation on
and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and on other matters related to the Security Council,
and we reaffirm the position of the Group of Arab
States in that regard. Lebanon has also subscribed to
several initiatives aimed at enhancing transparency and
accountability with respect to the use of the veto. In
that context, we support two complementary initiatives:
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group’s code of conduct, regarding the Council not
voting against any credible draft resolution aimed at
preventing or deterring mass atrocity crimes; and the
French-Mexican initiative on veto restraint in the case
of mass atrocities. Last year, Lebanon also co-sponsored
General Assembly resolution 76/262, entitled “Standing
mandate for a General Assembly debate when a veto is
cast in the Security Council”.
Finally, it remains important to ensure the
harmonious and coherent implementation of our
international obligations and to abandon selective
approaches. For Lebanon, a small State and a founding
Member of the United Nations, multilateralism is a
shield, and just as it was vital for my country when it
went through its previous conflicts, it remains vital in
the face of today’s crises. An international order based
on the rule of law and respect for it therefore cannot
be optional and must act as a necessary vehicle for
international peace, stability and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada): Canada supports the theme
chosen for today’s open debate — “Effective
multilateralism through the defence of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations”. However, the
concept note (see S/2023/244) prepared by the Russian
Federation is what George Orwell would have called
a deliberate exercise in doublethink. The Russian
24/29

24/04/2023

Federation, in fact, holds two completely contradictory
beliefs in its mind at the same time. It believes that it
is a faithful defender of the principles of the Charter,
and it also believes it is a guarantor of a new system
built on those principles. At the same time, by its
actions, it shows that it actually believes that it can
tear those very principles to shreds wherever and
whenever it pleases — whether in Ukraine, Syria or in
Russia itself, against its very own people. The Russian
Federation operates as if it is above the law. I cannot
imagine anything more unilateral than that. But none
of us are above the law. The arrest warrants issued
by the International Criminal Court for the massive
forced deportation of Ukrainian children are a clear
demonstration of that fact. We are on several other
paths now to hold Russia accountable for its violations
of international law in Ukraine, and we will pursue
them with great determination.
We believe that Russia must also be held accountable
for peddling disinformation on a daily basis, and even
lies here at the United Nations. In the concept note
prepared for today’s debate, Russia tells us that we are
facing a
“steep deterioration of the situation in the area of
global security caused by the desire to review the
strategic balance and ignore other States’ security
concerns.” (S/2023/244, p. 3)
The concept note goes on to say that some countries are
“imposing the ‘might is right’ principle ... [and that
any attempts to resolve conflicts] should proceed
from the principles of equality [and that] [t]he
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of States, enshrined in Article 2 of the Charter,
remains crucial.” (ibid., pp.2,3)
What is the reality? The reality is quite different.
The world would not be facing such a steep deterioration
in global security had not Russia launched a full-scale
invasion and war of aggression against its sovereign
independent neighbour Ukraine. Russia protests the
imposition of the “might is right” principle. Yet it is
doing just that in Ukraine. What could more easily
describe what is taking place in Ukraine than a decision
by a powerful neighbour to attack its neighbour?
Fortunately, Ukraine has continued to defend itself
with the support of many partners, something that
is in fact envisaged under Article 51 of the Charter,
which specifically grants nations the right to defend
themselves and other countries the right to help a nation
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

that is defending itself. Russia also calls on us all to
“reject all neocolonial manifestations” (ibid., p.3). But
I would encourage Council members to actually read
the speeches given by President Putin, in which he says
that he sees no distinction between Ukraine and Russia
and that in fact he refuses to recognize the sovereignty
of Ukraine. Hence the illegal annexation of more
Ukrainian territory, the pummelling of Ukrainian cities
by daily bombardment and the rounding up, forcible
deportation and “re-education” of tens of thousands of
Ukrainian children.
(spoke in French)
Russia also accuses others of ignoring the security
concerns of States as it pursues an expansionist and
revisionist policy throughout the world. It has suspended
or reneged on key disarmament agreements. It openly
threatens to use nuclear weapons while undermining
nuclear safety and security in Ukraine.
If there is a single country that is mainly responsible
for ignoring the security concerns of other States, it is
the Russian Federation. If there is one country that has
most flagrantly violated the Charter, it is the Russian
Federation. And if there is one country that has done
the most to compromise the Security Council, it is the
Russian Federation. Russia maintains that we must not
undermine the Council’s prerogative or its central role
in the maintenance of peace and security. The Charter
does indeed clearly say that the Security Council’s role
is central. But what the Russian Federation conveniently
fails to mention is the fact that it has used its right of
veto to block action to maintain international peace and
security more often than any other permanent member.
In essence, it is Russia’s abuse of this organ and its right
of veto that has seriously undermined the credibility
and legitimacy of the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
In addition to the staggering costs of Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine for the country and its people,
we need to understand — as many speakers have said
today — that Russia’s actions are costing the wider
world even more dearly. We all know that food and
energy prices have spiked. Global markets have been
rattled. Countries are facing deeper and greater debts.
Those impacts have affected the most vulnerable in
many countries around the world, many of whom were
already struggling with the effects of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Of course, we all recognize that
every one of us has do more to support countries that

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

are grappling with economic hardship, the effects
of climate change, fragility, conflict and growing
humanitarian and development needs. Many of those
issues predate Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, even if
they have been exacerbated and compounded by the
invasion. They are also symptoms of deeper issues that
require serious reform to make the multilateral system
more equitable and effective.
But for heaven’s sake, we have to recognize that
when we read the Charter, we must read the whole
document. We cannot just selectively cite one paragraph
or another. We must read every article and understand
the document as a whole. Then, lo and behold, we
will find that the Charter embraces human rights. It
embraces gender equality. It especially embraces the
need for social solidarity and economic development.
The Charter is much, much more than a simple
celebration of national sovereignty. We should never
limit our ability to create new institutions to meet new
threats and challenges, and that is exactly what we have
all done since 1945. The Charter is not a straitjacket that
is intended to stop us from addressing pressing issues.
If I may borrow a phrase, Canada considers the Charter
to be a living tree — a living document — whose
principles are clear and whose vitality depends on our
common and good-faith commitment to renewal.
In short, our sense of the Charter and multilateralism
is very different from that of the Russian Federation
as demonstrated by its conduct over the past year. We
believe firmly in rules that apply to each and every one
of us, including ourselves. We believe in human dignity
and equality. We believe those values must be advanced
by national, regional and international instruments and
institutions. We do not think that the world stopped in
1945. We have no nostalgia for a world that is divided
up into spheres of influence or power blocs. Above all,
we want to keep building a United Nations that will
deal with the challenges of today and tomorrow. And
yes, we unabashedly believe that “We the peoples of
the United Nations”, in the stirring words at the very
beginning of the Charter, are every bit as important as
States themselves.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
thank the Russian presidency for convening this Security
Council meeting on an extremely timely subject.

23-1162725/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Today we are all witnessing a global political,
social and economic transformation — a transition
towards a multipolar world order. It is not easy to give
up the privileges that we have assumed and accept
current realities. In the struggle to preserve a unipolar
world order and its structured monopoly, we are seeing
an entire arsenal deployed of political, economic and
security instruments such as sanctions, the incitement
of political, social, ethnic, religious, linguistic and
cultural unrest and the intentional destabilization
of entire regions’ security. The unilateral coercive
measures instituted against more than 30 sovereign
States, whose implementation is in violation of all
norms of international law, have negatively affected the
quality of life of more than one third of humankind.
Sanctions are a modern form of neocolonialism.
Sanctions have essentially become an everyday tool
used by Washington and its satellites to exert pressure
on countries that have their own opinions and that
they find unsatisfactory. Belarus has never initiated
any restrictions to cooperation with the United States
or the European Union. In violation of all norms of
international law, political, trade, financial and other
sanctions have been imposed on our country, which
limits the development of ordinary people. Despite that
unprecedented external pressure, Belarus is open to
returning to normal relations with all countries in all
areas, but not at the expense of its national interests
and values.
Today the future of multilateral cooperation and
the role of the United Nations are at stake. Throughout
its history, the Organization has been successful in
several areas. But now, more than ever before, the world
needs a platform for true multilateral cooperation based
on the principles of the sovereign equality of States,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States and
respect for all the legitimate concerns of States as they
pertain to issues related to security and development.
Achieving the goals of the Charter of the United
Nations remains difficult. Here are just a few of the
reasons for that grim reality — the attempts of some
countries to ignore the goals and principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter, or even to replace them
with a set of so-called rules that are unknown to the
majority of States and imposed solely to serve their own
interests; selective approaches to the implementation
of the norms of international law or their arbitrary
interpretation; the failure to comply with obligations
under international agreements and treaties to which
26/29

24/04/2023

the members of the international community are
parties, including on the basis of claims of exclusivity;
the revival of bloc mentality and the opposition to the
emergence of a multipolar world. True multilateralism
is not possible without dialogue and compromise
that take into account the interests of all parties
concerned. Therein lies the value of consensus-based
decision-making.
In the light of the statements made by some
partners about the need — and in some cases the
demand — to reconsider traditional forms of seeking
mutually acceptable solutions, the proposal issued a few
days ago by the High-level Advisory Board on Effective
Multilateralism is particularly worrisome. It relates to
the possibility of redefining or even abandoning the
notion of consensus. According to the proposal,
“consensus is extremely ineffective and unjust,
allowing a small number of States to block
actions that are clearly needed to address issues of
global concern”.
We strongly reject that approach. In that regard, we
recall the principle of sovereign equality, on which
the Organization was founded, whereby the voice of
every State is equally important. It is that principle that
enables us to avoid dictating and imposing unacceptable
decisions. Only with the consent of all concerned will
any initiative be effective and equitable.
Multilateralism means taking collective action
and making joint efforts to resolve common issues.
We believe that the United Nations plays a key role
in combating efforts to undermine multilateralism.
The United Nations is the universal platform with
the greatest legitimacy and normative capacity in an
interdependent world to respond to challenges and
threats, on the basis of dialogue, mutual understanding,
tolerance, mutual respect, solidarity and consensus, in
the interests of political and economic development,
social progress, peace and security, respect for human
rights and the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I warmly congratulate
Russia on its presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April and thank the Permanent Mission
of the Russian Federation for organizing today’s timely
debate on the International Day of Multilateralism and
Diplomacy for Peace. We express our appreciation
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

to Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, for presiding over today’s
debate, and we also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful statement.
The world today is confronted with multiple
complex and multidimensional challenges, such as
climate change, conflict, post-coronavirus disease
recovery, the preservation of biodiversity and the
prevention of environmental pollution and the food,
energy and financial crises. We believe that effective
multilateralism, with the participation of all Member
States and other relevant stakeholders, is the best solution
for overcoming those multiple and interconnected
challenges, inter alia, through upholding the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Allow me to
highlight a few points in that regard.
First, the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations remain at the centre of effective
multilateralism in resolving global conflicts and crises
and promoting peace and security. The Constitution
of Bangladesh includes obligations that are similar to
those of the United Nations Charter in its unwavering
commitment to international peace and security, based
on the principles of respect for national sovereignty
and equality, non-interference in the internal affairs of
other countries, the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and respect for international law. The Father
of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman,
was also an ardent supporter of multilateralism and a
defender of the principles of the United Nations Charter.
In his maiden speech delivered at the United Nations in
1974 (see A/PV.2243), he said that the United Nations
remains the centre of hope for the future of the people
in this world of sadness, misery and conflict.
Secondly, since Bangladesh’s membership of the
United Nations in 1974, we have been at the forefront
of activities at the United Nations, including with
respect to the maintenance of international peace and
security, which is a core pillar of the Charter of the
United Nations. Today Bangladesh is the largest troopand-police-contributing country to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and we therefore play a
crucial role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Bangladesh-led flagship resolution on
a culture of peace (General Assembly resolution 53/243)
was adopted at the General Assembly in 1999 and was
followed up every year by the adoption of a resolution
on that theme to promote the peaceful settlement
of conflicts, mutual respect and understanding and

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

international cooperation. The Prime Minister of
Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina, is a flagbearer of effective
multilateralism and a defender of the Charter of the
United Nations. The country’s humanity and courage in
hosting more than 1.2 million Rohingyas, which saved
the region from potential destabilization, also stems
from her abiding commitment to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Thirdly, effective multilateralism must be
re-energized and reinvigorated, including through
visionary guidelines and a strategy for resolving
potential future crises through global solidarity and
cooperation. In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
which looks ahead to the next 25 years and represents
the Secretary-General’s vision on the future of
global cooperation.
Fourthly and lastly, we are passing through a
critical time, when the very notion of multilateralism is
in question. It is imperative now — perhaps more than
ever before — for the entire United Nations membership
to unite and engage in upholding the Charter in its true
spirit in order to address global realities and fulfil the
aspirations of current and future generations. We must
explore the opportunities for the innovative application
of the Charter’s principles. The Security Council
has the primary responsibility in that regard and for
safeguarding the interests of humankind to remain in
peace. Bangladesh stands ready to do its part.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): It has been said that the
well-being of humankind and its peace and security
are unattainable unless and until its unity is firmly
established, which we believe can be achieved
only through effective multilateralism, based on
foundational principles such as consultation, inclusion
and solidarity. Seventy-eight years ago, the world came
together to sign the Charter of the United Nations and
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Today, as the world faces one of the greatest challenges
we have seen to the global peace architecture, the
Charter is more significant than ever. In our quest for
effective multilateralism and diplomacy for peace,
we, the global community, reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to multilateralism, respect for the rule of
law and global governance.

23-1162727/29

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Just as the world was beginning to heal from the
extraordinary challenges posed by the pandemic,
new conflicts have confronted us, bringing even more
uncertain times. The aggression we are witnessing is
not only a humanitarian catastrophe for those directly
affected, but it is also seriously affecting the global
community, especially the developing world. The
founding fathers of this Organization established it
with the purpose of maintaining international peace
and security, developing friendly relations among
nations and taking other appropriate measures to
strengthen universal peace. They also wished to achieve
international cooperation in order to resolve economic,
social, cultural, and humanitarian problems and promote
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all. The political, military, economic, ecological, social
and cultural environment in which the United Nations
operates has changed considerably over the years and
continues to evolve.
The maintenance of international peace and security
is a primary objective of the Security Council, the
principal organ of the United Nations for such action.
I was pleased to hear the Secretary-General state his
steadfast position this morning (see S/PV.9308) on the
serious situation in the Sudan and other conflicts that
threaten world peace. I believe it is apt here to recall the
words of Emperor Haile Selassie, who was pleased to
observe that
“The Charter of the United Nations expresses
the noblest aspirations of man: the abjuration of
force in the settlement of disputes between States;
the assurance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion; the safeguarding of
international peace and security.” (A/PV.1229,
para.5)
In addition to those initial goals of safeguarding
peace, protecting human rights, establishing the
framework for international justice and promoting
economic and social progress, in the almost eight
decades since its creation the United Nations has tackled
new challenges, such as the fight against HIV/AIDS,
pandemics, big data and climate change. It was former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon who said that the basic
building block of peace and security for all peoples is
economic and social security, anchored in sustainable
development. It is a key to solving all problems, he
said. Why? Because it allows us to address all the great
issues — poverty, climate, environment and political
stability — as parts of the whole.
28/29

24/04/2023

The question has been asked as to whether the Security
Council can do more to ensure world peace and security.
We have to be sensitive to what is currently happening to
the United Nations system, where the political objectives
and priorities of many modern States are undergoing
large-scale qualitative changes. The world is in transition
from a “cold peace” structure of international relations
towards a new system of survival even at the cost of
human values, and one that is repugnant to the principles
of multilateralism. We need to respond to such changes
effectively if we are to give life to Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), the Sustainable Development Goals Summit,
the Summit of the Future, the New Agenda for Peace and
a declaration for future generations.
It has been said that the world is in need of an
encompassing, just and humane order under which the
rights of all are preserved and peace and security are
safeguarded. It is in our interest and crucial to our survival
that we not lose sight of that goal. We appeal to all parties
to all hostilities to act with restraint and resort to best
practices in diplomacy with the aid of their multilateral
partners, as peace is well within our grasp if we have
the will to know where to look for it. The developing
world needs peace as a matter of the utmost urgency.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Muhamad (Malaysia): At the outset, I would
like to thank Russia, as President of the Security Council,
for convening today’s open debate. Malaysia would also
like to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for his briefing (see S/PV.9308).
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The convening of this open debate is timely, as the
world continues to be bitterly divided. Conflicts have
proliferated and peace efforts have witnessed multiple
failures. Suffering continues in places such as Palestine,
Myanmar and Ukraine, to name but a few. Around the
world there is growing hatred and mistrust, an increasing
threat of extremism and terrorism, and the continued
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The United Nations came into existence 78 years
ago, envisioned as a guardian of international peace
and security, a promoter of human rights, a protector
of international law and an engineer for socioeconomic
advancement. As the Charter of the United Nations
23-11627

24/04/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

stipulates, the common denominator is world peace. Yet
the prevailing crises that we are witnessing today only
confirm that multilateralism is tremendously threatened.
To preserve the centrality of the United Nations as the
bedrock of international cooperation, we need to defend
and strengthen it to make it fit to confront increasingly
complex global challenges. For those reasons, Malaysia
firmly believes that it is in our collective interest to
work together to uphold that system, which is based
on our shared universal values. All of us Member
States must remain united in our collective effort to
uphold and respect the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, as enshrined in its Charter. We must
intensify our dialogue and cooperation for the purpose
of safeguarding those principles and multilateralism. As
prescribed in the Charter, the United Nations has been
and remains at the forefront of various international and
multilateral efforts to combat challenges and maintain
international peace and security.
Malaysia also reiterates its full support for the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Leaders’ Declaration on Upholding Multilateralism,

S/PV.9308 (Resumption 1)

adopted at the thirty-eighth ASEAN Summit in
2021, and reaffirms its belief that regionalism and
multilateralism are vital means for global cooperation.
The strength and value of such systems lie in their
rules-based nature and their inclusivity, transparency
and openness, based on mutual benefit and respect. In
our view, the Secretary-General’s report Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) and its recommendations set forth
the right visions and strategies for ensuring that the
multilateral system can work in a coordinated manner in
order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. It
presents an opportunity for Member States to cooperate
more effectively through common global platforms.
Malaysia has always premised its foreign policy on
constructive cooperation through multilateralism. In
that regard, we will continue to work closely with all
stakeholders through positive participation in various
multilateral forums.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

23-1162729/29
