172

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

Convinced of the critical role of transport and communications in economic development and the importance,
therefore, of the improvement and growth of transport and
communications infrastructure and services in a manner
commensurate with the anticipated growth of all sectors of
the economy generating the demand for transport and
communications,

I. Endorses the recommendation made in paragraph 2
of Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/78 and
proclaims a Transport and Communications Decade for
Asia and the Pacific during the period 1985-1994. with a
view to:
(a) Raising the transport and communications infrastructural facilities of States members of the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific which are
developing countries to a level commensurate with their
development objectives and priorities, giving particular
attention to the special needs of the least developed, landlocked and island developing countries of the region;
(b) Identifying systematically and in a comprehensive
manner the problems of transport and communications in
the region and working out feasible solutions;

(c) Promoting a more effective and efficient transport
and communications network comprising all modes and
means in an integrated way, in particular for development
of intraregional and interregional transport and communications linkages, as well as in the fields of maintenance and
co-ordination of networks, tariff setting and physical planning;
(d) Encouraging effective co-ordination and co-operation in the field of transport and communications in the
region;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to extend all necessary facilities and support to the Executive Secretaries of
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific and the Economic Commission for Western Asia in
their development of the regional action programme for
the Decade in a practical and integrated manner and to
mobilize the necessary international support for the successful implementation of the programmes for the Decade,
bearing in mind the contents of the seventh preambular
paragraph of resolution 236 (XL) of the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific;
3. Urges all relevant international organizations, particularly the United Nations Development Programme, to
contribute to and provide assistance for the effective
implementation of the regional action programme for the
Decade;
4. Invites all Governments, in particular those of the
developed countries, to contribute to and participate effectively in the implementation of the regional action programme for achieving the objectives of the Decade;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the implementation of the present resolution to the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1986, and every two years thereafter until the end of the
Decade.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984
195 Report of the lnternatwnal Conference on Population, 1984. Mextn•
Cur. 6-14 August 1984 (United Na1ion, publication. Sales No. E.84.XIII H
and corrigenda). chap. I sect. fl

39/228.

International Conference on Population

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 /
87 of 25 November 1981 on the convening of an international conference on population in 1984.
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1982/7 of 30 April 1982, 1982/42 of 27 July I 982 and
1983/6 of 26 May 1983,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 38/148
of 19 December 1983,
I. Endorses the report of the International Conference
on Population, containing the recommendations for the
further implementation of the World Population Plan of
Action; 195
2. Welcomes and strongly supports the Mexico City
Declaration on Population and Development, 1% adopted
by the Conference on 14 August 1984;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Government and
people of Mexico for their generous hospitality. co-operation and support;
4. Commends the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General of the Conference for
the successful organization of the Conference;
5. Affirms that the principal aim of social, economic
and human development, of which population goals and
policies are integral parts, is to improve the standards of
living and quality of life of the people;
6. Also affirms that population growth, high mortality
and morbidity and migration problems continue to be
causes of great concern requiring immediate action;
7. Emphasizes the need, in implementing the recommendations of the Conference, to respect national sovereignty, to combat all forms of racial discrimination, including apartheid, and to promote social and economic development, human rights and individual freedom;
8. Reaffirms the importance attached by the Conference to the formulation and implementation of concrete
policies which will enhance the status and role of women
in the area of population policies and programmes, and the
need to pay attention to specific problems of population
structures;
9. Invites Governments to consider the recommendations for action at the national level and to implement
appropriate population policies and programmes, in the
context of their national plans, needs and requirements;
I0. Emphasizes that international co-operation in the
field of population is essential for the implementation of
recommendations adopted at the Conference and, in that
context, calls upon the international community to provide adequate and substantial international support and
assistance for population activities, particularly through
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, in
order to ensure more effective delivery of population
assistance in the light of growing needs and the increasing
efforts being made by developing countries;
11. Invites the Population Commission, at its twentythird session, to review, within its area of competence, the
recommendations of the Conference and their implications for the activities of the United Nations system, and
to transmit its views to the Economic and Social Council
at its first regular session of 1985;
12. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
examine, at its first regular session of 1985, the recommen196 !hid.. sect. A.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

dations of the Conference for the further implementation
of the World Population Plan of Action, in order to provide overall policy guidelines within the United Nations
system on population questions, and to undertake or to
continue, on an appropriate basis, the review, monitoring
and appraisal of the Plan of Action, in accordance with the
Plan and relevant recommendations of the Conference;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to take, without
delay, appropriate steps regarding the relevant recommendations, in particular recommendation 83, 197 for further
implementation of the World Population Plan of Action
concerning the role of international co-operation, taking
note also of the suggestions offered by various delegations
and benefiting, in the process, from the deliberations of the
Economic and Social Council, and to report to the General
Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, on
their implementation as soon as possible but not later than
1986.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

39/229.

Protection against products harmful to
health and the environment

The General Assembly.
Reaffirming its resolutions 37/137 of 17 December 1982
and 38/149 of 19 December 1983,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General on products harmful to health and the environment, 198
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General on
the exchange of information on banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products, 199 and welcoming
the effort being made in various international forums with
regard to the exchange of information on such products,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and commends him for the distribution of the first issue of
the consolidated list of products whose consumption and/
or sale have been banned, withdrawn, severely restricted
or, in the case of pharmaceuticals, not approved by Governments;
2. Reiterates its appreciation for the co-operation
extended by Governments in the preparation of the consolidated list, and urges all Governments that have not yet
done so to provide the necessary information for inclusion
in the updated versions of the list;
3. Notes with satisfaction the co-operation provided by
the appropriate organs, organizations and bodies of the
United· Nations system and other intergovernmental
organizations in the issuance of the list and urges them,
particularly the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organisation, the United Nations Environment Programme, the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade and the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations, to continue to co-operate fully in
the preparation of the updated versions of the list;
4. Expresses its appreciation for the co-operation provided by non-governmental organizations in this regard,
and urges them to continue to extend co-operation to the
Secretary-General in the preparation of the consolidated
list, particularly in the identification of potential sources of
information among national Governments and in obtain19 7 Ibid., sect. B. para. ,7
198 N39/452.

173

ing governmental information on relevant regulatory
actions:
5

Decides that:

(a) An updated consolidated list should be issued
annually and that the data should be made available to
Governments and other users in such a form as to permit
direct computer access to it:
(b) In order to keep costs to a minimum, the consolidated list should be published and made available in all
the official languages of the United Nations in sets of alternating languages each year, with no more than three languages per year and with the same frequency for each language:
(c) The format of the consolidated list should be kept
under continuing review with a view to its improvement,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 37/137,
in co-operation with the relevant organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, taking into
account the complementary nature of the list, the experiences obtained and the views expressed by Governments
on this matter, and that the next review should be submitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at
its forty-first session;
(d) The review of the consolidated list should cover
particularly the advantages and disadvantages of introducing to the list such information as the legal, public health
and commercial context of the regulatory actions, as well
as complementary information on safe uses of the products:

6. Urges importing countries, bearing in mind the
extensive legal, public health and safety information
already provided to the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the International Labour Organisation, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Health Organization and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, to avail themselves of the
information provision facilities of those organizations,
which include, in some cases, direct computer access;

7. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance
of the appropriate specialized agencies, to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on a
review of the various information exchange schemes now
in operation within the United Nations system;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the competent
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to continue to provide the necessary technical
assistance to the developing countries, at their request, for
the establishment or strengthening of national systems for
managing hazardous chemicals and pharmaceutical products, as well as for an adequate monitoring of the importation. manufacture and use of those products:
9. Also requests the Secretary-General, through the
Economic and Social Council, to inform the General
Assembly at its forty-first session and every three years
thereafter about the implementation of resolutions 371137
and 381149 and of the present resolution;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to take the
necessary measures for the implementation of the present
resolution.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984
I4q A ,91290-E I 984' 120
