General Assembly-Fifth Session

10

3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in
consultation with the specialized agencies, to develop
plans for relief and rehabilitation on the termination of
hostilities and to report to the General Assembly within
three weeks 3 " of the adoption of the present resolution
by the General Assembly;
4. Also rl'Commcnds the Economic and Social Council to expedite the study of long-term measures to
promote the economic development and social progress
of Korea, and meanwhile to draw the attention of the
authorities which decide requests for technical assistance
to the urgent and special necessity of affording such
assistance to Korea;
5. Expresses its appreciation of the services rendered by the members of the United Nations Commission on Korea in the performance of their important
and difficult task;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
United Nations Commission for the Unification and
Rehabilitation of Korea with adequate staff and facilities, including technical advisers as required; and
authorizes the Secretary-General to pay the expenses
and per diem of a representative and alternate from
each of the States members of the Commission.
294th plenarv meetinq.
7 October 1950.
377 (V).

Uniting for peace
A

The General Assembly,

Reaffirminy the importance of the exercise by the
Security Council of its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
the duty oi the permanent members to seek unanimity
and to exercise restraint in the use of the veto,
Rcaf]irmi11_1J that the initiative in negotiating the
agreemenb for armed forces provided for in Article
43 of the Charter belongs to the Security Council, and
desiring to ensure that, pending the conclusion of such
agreements, the United Nations has at its disposal
means for maintaining international peace and security,
Conscious that failure of the Security Council to discharge its responsibilities on behalf of all the Member
States, particularly those responsibilities referred to in
the two preceding paragraphs, does not relieve Member
States of their obligations or the United Nations of its
responsibility under the Charter to maintain international peace and security,
Rccogni:::ing in particular that such failure does.not
deprive the General Assembly of its rights or relieve it
of its responsibiiities under the Charter in regard to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Rccogni:::ing that discharge by the General Assembly
of its responsibilities in these respects calls for possibilities of observation which would ascertain the facts
and expose aggressors ; for the existence of armed
forces which could be used collectively; and for the
possibility of timely recommendation hy the General
Assemblv to Members of the United Nations for collective acti~n which, to be effective, should be prompt,

Recognizing that the first two stated Purposes of the
United Nations are:

A

"To maintain international peace and security, and
to that end: to take effective collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
and for tht; suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful
means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement
of international disputes or situations which might
lead to a breach of the peace", and
"To develop friendly relations among nations based
on respect for the principle of equal rights and sf'lfdetermination of peoples, and to take other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace",
Reaffirming that it remains the primary duty of all
Members of the United Nations, when involved in an
international dispute, to seek settlement of such a dispute by peaceful means through the procedures laid
down in Chapter VI of the Charter, and recalling the
successful achievements of the United Nations in this
regard on a number of previous occasions,
Finding that international tension exists on a dangerous scale,
·
Recalling its resolution 290 (IV) entitled "Essentials of peace", which states that disregard of the Principles of the Charter of the United Nations is primarily
responsible for the continuance of international tension,
and desiring to contribute turthcr to the objectives of
that resolution,

1. Rcsol'Z·cs that if the Security Council, because of
lack of unanimity of the permanent members, fails to
exercise its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security in any case where
there appears to he a threat to the peace, breach of the
peace, or act of aggression, the General Assembly shall
consider the matter immediately with a view to making
appropriate recommendations to Members for collective measures, includir1g in the case of a breach of the
peace or act of aggression the use of armed force when
necessary, to maintain or restore international peace
and security. If 11ot in session at the time, the Crneral
Assembly may meet in emergency special session within
twC'nty-four hours of the request thercfor. Such emergency special session shall be called if requested by the
Security Council on the vote of any seven members, or
hy a majority of the Members of the l:nited Nations;
2 . .,Jdupts for this purpose the amendments to its
rull's of procedure set forth in the annex to the present
resolution;

Ba See resolution 410

(V), page 31.

B
3. Fsta/,/ishes a Peace Observation Commission
which, for the calendar vears 1051 and 1952 shall be
composed of fourteen Me'mbers, namely: Chin~, ·Colomliia, Czechoslovakia, France, India, Iraq, lsrael, New
lealand, Pakistan, Sweden, the L: nion of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
awl Uruguay, and which could observe and report on

Resolutions adopted on reports of the First Committt-P

the situation in any area where there exists international tension the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security. Upon the invitation or with the consent of
the State into whose territory the Commission would
go, the General Assembly. or the Interim Committee
when the Assembly is not in session, may utilize the
Commission if the Security Council is not exercising
the functions assigned to it by the Charter with respect
to the matter in question. Decisions to utilize the Commission shall be made on the affirmative vote of twothirds of the members present and voting. The Security
Council may also utilize the Commission in accordance
with its authority under the Charter;
4. Decides that the Commission shall have authority
in its discretion to appoint sub-commissions and to
utilize the services of observers to assist it in the performance of its functions;
5. Recommends to all governments and authorities
that they co-operate with the Commission and assist it
in the performance of its functions;
(i. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary staff and facilities, utilizin1;, where directed
by the Commission, the United Nations Panel of Field
Observers envisaged in Ccneral Assembly resolntion

297 B (IV);

C
7. Invites each l\lember of the United Nations to
survey its resources in order to determine the nature
and scope of the assistance it may be in a position to
render in support of any recommendations of the
Security Council or of the General Assembly for the
restoration of international peace and security:
8. Recommends to the States Members of the United
Kations that each Member maintain within its national
armed forces elements so trained, organized and equipped that they could promptly be made av:1ilahle, in
accordance with its constitutional proces,;es, for service
as a United Nations unit or units, upon recommendation bv the Securitv Council or the Ceneral Assemblv,
withm;t prejudice t~ the use of such ekmenb in exc~cise of the right of indiYidual or collective self-defence
recognized in Article 51 of the Charter ;
0 In, i!cs the Members of the United Nations to
inform th:: Collective :'vieasures Committee provided
for in paragraph 11 as soon as possible of the measures
taken in implementation of the preceding paragraph;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint, with
the approval of the Committee provided for in para~;raph 11, a panel of military experts who could be
m;ide available, on request, to Member States wishing
to olitain technical advice regarding the organization.
trair;ing, and equipment for prompt service as linited
;\J 2-ticm., units of the elements referred to in paragraph 8;
D
11. Establishes a Collective Measures Committee
consisting of fourteen Members, namely: Australia,
Belgium, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Egypt, France,
Mexico, Philippines, Turkey, the United Kingdom of

11

Great Britain and ?\ orthern Ireland, the United States
of America. \'enezm·la and Yugoslavia, and directs the
Committee, in consultation with the Secretary-General
and with s11ch niemher States as the Committee finds
appropriate. to study and make a report to the Security
Council ;ml the ( ;eneral Assembly, not later than
1 Septemlwr 1951, on methods, including those in section
C of the present resolution, which might be used to
maintain and strrngthen international peace and security in accordance with the Purposes and Principles
of the Charter, taking account of collective self-defence
and regional arrangemt>nts ( Articlt>s 51 and 52 of the
Charter);
12, F'l'coi:1mrnds tn all :\Tember States that they cooperate· with the Committee and assist it in the perforn1a11,·c ui its functions:

13. Ncqucsts the Secretary-General to furnish the
staff and facililies necessary for the effective accomplishment , if the purposes set forth in sections C and
I) of the p;-c ,,·11t resolution;

E
1--1. /.1 fully conscious that, in adopting the proposals
set forth above, enduring peace will not be secured
solely hy collective security arrangements against
breaches oi international peace and acts of aggression,
hut 1hat a genuine and lasting peace depends also upon
the olN-r\':mce of all the Principles and Purposes establi,hed in the Charter of the United Nations, upon
the implen 1entation of the resolutions of the Security
Ccn111cil. the General Assembly and other principal
organs of l he l; nited Nations intended to achieve the
111ai11te1,a1,cc of international peace and security, and
especialh 11pon respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all and on the
esta!1lish111cnt ancl maintenance of conditions of economic and social well-being in all countries; and
acconlingl:,

15. [ · ry<"s l\Tember States to respect inlly, and to
intensifv, juint action, in co-operation with the United
X at ion:;;, to develop and stimulate universal respect for
and uhsen ance of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to intensify individual and collective efforts
to achic\·e conditions of economic stability and social
progres,. particularly through the development of
llll(kr-dt·\-cloped cmmtries and areas.

ANNEX

The rule, · l procedure of the General Assembly are
amended in , :1e following respects:
1. Tlir present text of rule 8 shall become parag-raph
(a) of that rule, and a new paragraph ( b) shall be added
to read a, follows:
"Emergency special ,e,,;ions pt1rsuant to resolution
377 A (\') shall be convened within twenty-four hours
of the receipt by the Secretary-General of a request
for s11ch a session from the Security Council, on the
vote "f any seven members thereof, or of a request from
a majority of the Members of the United Nations expressed by vote in the Interim Committee or otherwise,
or of the concurrence of a majority of Members as
provi<lcd in rule 9."

12

General Assembly-Fifth Session

2. The present text of rule 9 shall become paragraph
(a) of that rule and a new paragraph (b) shall be added

to read as follows :
"This rule shall apply also to a request by any Member for an crneq~ency special session pursuant to resolution 377 A (V). In such a case the Secretary-General
shall communicate with other Members hy the most
expeditious means of communication available."
3. Rule 10 is amended by adding at the end thereof
the following:
" ... In the case of an emergency special session convened pursuant to rule 8 ( b), th~ Secret_ary-General
shall notifv the I\Ternbers of the U111ted Nations at least
twelve ho~rs in advance of the opening of the session."
4. Rule lG is amended by adding at the end thereof
the following:
" ... The provisional agenda of an emergency special
session ·,hall be communicated to the Members of the
United Nations simultaneously with the communication
summoning the session."
5. Rule 19 is :imended by adding at the end thereof
the following:
" . . . During an emergency special session additional
items concerning the rn;itters dealt with in resolution
377 A (V) may be aclcled to the agenda by a two-thirds
majority of the Members present and voting."
6. There is added a new rule to precede rule 65 to re:id
as follows:
"Notwithstanding the provisions of any other rule
and unless the General Asse.mbly decides otherwise,
the Assembly, in case of an emergency special session,
shall convene in plenary session only and proceed directlv to consider the item proposed for consideration
in tl;c request for the holrling of the session, without
previou, reference to the General Committee or to any
othcr Committee; the President and Vice-Presiclents
for rnch emergency ~pccial ses ions shall he, re,p~ctivcly, the• Chairman oi those delegations from which
were elected the President and Vice-Presidents of the
previous sescion."
302nd pfrnary meetinq,
3 November 1950.
0

The above dispositions should in no manner prevent
the General Assembly from fulfilling its functions under
resolution 377 A (V).

302nd plenary meeting,
3 November 1950.

C
The General Assembly,
Recogni:::ing that the primary function of the United
Nations Organization is to maintain and promote peace,
security and justice among all nations,
Recogni::::ing the responsibility of all Member States
to promote the cause of international peace in accordance with their obligations as provided in the Charter,
Reco_gni::::ing that the Charter charges the Security
Council with the primary responsibility for maintaining international peace and security,
Reaffirming the importance of unanimity among the
permanent members of the Security Council on all
problems which are likely to threaten world peace,
R ecal!ing General Assembly resolution 190 (III)
entitled "Appeal to the Great Powers to renew their
efforts to compose their differences and establish a
lasting peace",
Rccommrnds to the permanent members of the
Security Council that:
(a) They meet and discuss, collectively or otherwise,
and, if necessary, with other States concerned, all
problems which· are likely to threaten international
peace and hamper the activities of the United Nations,
with a view to their resolving fundamental differences
and reaching agreement in acccrdance with the spirit
and letter of the Charter ;
( b) They advise the General Assembly and, when
it is not in session, the Members of the United Nations,
as soon as appropriate, of the results of their consultations.

302nd plenary meeting,
3 November 1950.

B
For the purpose of mainta1111ng international peace
and secmity, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, and, in particular, with Chapters V,
VI and VII of the Charter,

The General Assembly
Recommends to the Sernrity Council:
That it should take the necessary steps to ensure
that the action provided for under the Charter is taken
with respect to threats to the peace, breaches of the
peace or acts of aggression and with respect to the
peaceful settlement of disputes or situations likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security;
That it should devise measures for the earliest application of Articles 43, 45, 46 and 47 of the Charter
of the United Nations regarding the placing of armed
forces at the disposal of the Security Council by the
States Members of the United Nations and the effective functioning of the Military Staff Committee;

378 (V).

Duties of States in the event of the
outbreak of hostilities
A

The General Assembly,
Reaf]irnzing the Principles embodied in the Charter,
which require that the force of arms shall not be resorted to except in the common interest, and shall not
be used against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State,

nesiri11_q to create a further obstacle to the outbreak
of \var, even after hostilities have started, and to facilitate the cesi,ation of the hostilities by the action of the
parties themselves, thus contributing to the peaceful
~,cttlcment of disputes,
1.

Recommends:

(a) That if a State becomes engaged in armed conflict with another State or States, it take all steps
