A/66/PV.118

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

118

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 28 June 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Royal Highness
Prince Nayef Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Crown
Prince of Saudi Arabia
The President: Before we proceed to the items on
our agenda, I would like to take the opportunity to pay
my respects on the passing away of His Royal Highness
Prince Nayef Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Crown Prince
of Saudi Arabia. It was with profound sadness and
heartfelt grief that we learned of the passing away of
His Royal Highness.
On my own behalf and on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations, I would like to extend
my deepest condolences to the Royal Family and to the
Government and people of Saudi Arabia.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/66/L.48/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that at its
72nd plenary meeting, on 2 December 2011, the General
Assembly held a debate on agenda item 14 jointly with
agenda item 117, agenda item 123 and its sub-item (a),
and agenda item 124.
It is a particular honour and pleasure for me
to introduce to the General Assembly this draft

(Qatar)

resolution as a text of the President on behalf of the
Member States. I was very encouraged by the two-day
high-level event organized at the United Nations this
past April devoted to happiness. In my statement
at that meeting, I underscored the need for a more
inclusive, equitable and balanced approach that will
promote sustainability, eradicate poverty and enhance
well-being and happiness. In that context, I intended
to take the initiative to follow up on resolution 65/309,
of 19 July 2011, which recognized that the pursuit of
happiness is a fundamental human goal. The same
resolution invited us to elaborate measures that better
capture the importance of the pursuit of happiness and
well-being in human development.
I believe that the proclamation of an International
Day of Happiness by the General Assembly, to be
observed every year with the full participation of
the international community as a whole, would be
a forward-looking way of focusing on the value of
happiness as a universal goal and aspiration in the lives
of all.
The choice of the date 20 March as the International
Day of Happiness has the general support of all. As
a day of equinox, it is a day of special planetary and
global significance. That date would also be more
convenient for all, including civil society, to join in the
celebration of the Day by the United Nations.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/66/L.48/Rev.1, entitled “International Day
of Happiness”.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-39301 (E)

*1239301*

A/66/PV.118

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.48/Rev.1?

enhance the happiness and well-being of their citizens
in a peaceful and secure environment.

Draft resolution A/66/L.48/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 66/281).

Allow me, therefore, to pledge my delegation’s
full and unconditional support for resolution 66/281,
which proclaims 20 March as the International Day of
Happiness. I request and encourage all Member States
to also do so in a timely manner.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bhutan.
Mrs. Namgyel (Bhutan): To lead a happy life is the
aspiration of every human being; it may be the ultimate
purpose of life. Yet it is becoming abundantly clear that
our policies and actions are not only out of sync with that
fundamental goal, but they are beginning to undermine
the very foundations of our collective security and
survival. We urgently need to change course and adopt
a new paradigm.
Inspired by that belief, my delegation initiated
a draft resolution entitled “Happiness: towards a
holistic approach to development”, which the General
Assembly adopted by consensus in July 2011 (resolution
65/309). Pursuant to that resolution, my Government
was honoured to host, on 2 April here in New York,
a high-level meeting on the theme “Well-being and
happiness: defining a new economic paradigm”.
The Prime Minister of Bhutan has often stated the
following:
“One common use of the word happiness is to
denote an ephemeral, passing mood — happy today
or unhappy tomorrow — due to some temporary
external condition like praise or blame, gain or loss.
However, happiness can also refer to a deep, abiding
state that comes from living life in full harmony
with the natural world, with our communities and
fellow beings, and with our culture and spiritual
heritage — in short, from feeling totally connected
with our world.”
The need of the hour is for all of us — big and small,
rich and poor — to take steps that will help transcend
our differences and unite us, so that we may experience
a richer connection with each other and with our world.
It is therefore with a deep sense of satisfaction
that my delegation welcomes the President’s noble
initiative to proclaim 20 March as the International
Day of Happiness. Resolution 66/281, just adopted by
the General Assembly, truly captures the essence of our
universal goal.
I am confident that the President’s initiative will
encourage Member States to pursue policies that will

2

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
14.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/66/762 and
A/66/762/Add.1)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.53)
The President: In connection with this item,
members will recall that the Assembly adopted
resolutions 66/10 and 66/12 at its 60th and 61st plenary
meetings, respectively, on 18 November 2011.
The Assembly now has before it the reports of the
Secretary-General contained in documents A/66/762
and A/66/762/Add.1, and a draft resolution issued as
document A/66/L.53.
Today’s meeting serves to undertake an examination
of the reports of the Secretary-General and of the
implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy by Member States, and to consider updating
the Strategy to respond to change, in accordance with
resolution 64/297, of 8 September 2010.
We have come together today at the third review
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in accordance with resolution 64/297. I
welcome representatives of the States Members of
the United Nations and their counter-terrorism focal
points who have joined us at this important meeting.
Member States have been presented with the report
of the Secretary-General entitled “United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy: activities of the
United Nations system in implementing the Strategy”.
The report contains five recommendations, which are
relevant to our discussions today.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is a watershed document in the international

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

community’s fight against terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. The Strategy is comprehensive in
scope, preventive in nature and integrated in approach.
It was adopted by consensus by all Member States in
2006 and signifies universal condemnation of all acts
of terrorism.
The Strategy is a unique policy framework. It is a
significant achievement of the international community
and shows the goodwill and ability of the international
community to come together even when faced with
difficult choices. Its four pillars cover all the issues
that are necessary for an effective global fight against
terrorism.
The time has come for a more effective
implementation of the Strategy. It is my hope that this
third review of the Strategy will provide the necessary
momentum towards its full implementation on the
ground. During the Secretary-General’s Symposium
on International Counter-Terrorism Cooperation,
held in September 2011, I reiterated the resolve of
Member States to implement the Strategy, especially
through enhanced regional cooperation. In fact, the
Secretary-General’s Symposium as a whole highlighted
the importance of regional strategies against terrorism.
I wish to take this opportunity to underscore
the importance of regional cooperation in our
counter-terrorism efforts. Several regions around the
world have demonstrated the advantages of bringing
regional cooperation to counter-terrorism activities.
We need to learn from those experiences and see
how we can use improved regional collaboration to
strengthen counter-terrorism work, both at the national
and international levels. In short, multinational efforts
that go beyond traditional and localized approaches are
required.
No nation acting alone, no matter how powerful,
can prevent every threat from being carried out. In
the Strategy, all four pillars are important for proper
implementation, but I wish to stress that two pillars,
pillars I and IV, deserve equal emphasis as we engage
in our counter-terrorism activities.
Yesterday, my Office organized a thematic
discussion on the importance of promoting dialogue and
understanding and countering the appeal of terrorism,
which is an essential element of pillar I of the Strategy.
During the thematic discussion, among other initiatives
and structures, I mentioned the critical role being
played by the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations

in fostering mutual understanding around the world.
With more cohesive, tolerant and resilient societies, we
can deny terrorists the space and the profile they need
to spread their narratives and campaigns. Similarly,
protecting human rights and countering terrorism
are two complementary issues that remain important
responsibilities for all States.
In our efforts to stamp out terrorism we must not
abandon our principles and values for the protection of
the life, property and dignity of all citizens. We need
to take action with respect to our resolve concerning
pillar IV of the Strategy. One way to achieve this is
to make progress in promoting the rights of victims of
terrorism and other forms of political violence. It is our
moral obligation to do so. It is also a pragmatic way
of delegitimizing terrorist violence by exposing the
horrors that such violence causes.
I would like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, the Permanent
Representative of Canada, who has been willing to
undertake the important responsibility of serving as a
facilitator for consultation with Member States, and I
thank him for the work he has done in producing an
outcome document.
In conclusion, I invite representatives to give
their views on how we can make progress on the
implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. The Strategy is the cornerstone of our
international counter-terrorism framework. Our
resolve is strong, but it requires action and results. Only
through strong political will and by implementation
and delivery can we realize our hopes of a world free
of terrorism.
Mr. Baird (Canada): As we gather to renew our
multilateral commitment to fighting terrorism, we
are mindful of a powerful monument that stands
just 5 kilometres from this very Hall. I am referring
to Ground Zero, site of the single deadliest terrorist
attack in world history. As I said in my address to the
General Assembly last fall, the events of 11 September
2001 were a stark reminder that evil exists, that life is
fragile, that freedom has enemies and that the poison of
radical terrorism is all too real.
While fascism and communism were the great
challenges of previous generations, terrorism is the
great challenge of ours. No country is immune from
this threat. Nor can any country ignore this challenge.
From the truck bombings in Iraq, to the Cinema Rex

12-393013

A/66/PV.118

arson in Abadan, Iran, to the Beslan school massacre
in the Russian Federation, to the mid-air destruction
of Air India flight 182, to the synchronized Mumbai
bombings of 1993, the most deadly attacks in our history
demonstrate that terrorism observes no boundaries,
respects no civilians and favours no regions.
It is with sadness and no sense of pride that I convey
Canada’s first-hand experience with the brutality
of terrorism. The 1985 Air India bombing to which I
referred was planned and executed on our soil and
killed 280 Canadians. On 9/11, 24 Canadians tragically
lost their lives. Because Canada is a nation enriched by
the contributions of immigrants from all over the world,
from other lands, no matter where in the world a terror
attack occurs, the pain is felt and shared by Canadian
families and friends.
Canada defines terrorism as intentionally causing
serious harm to intimidate the public with respect to
its security, or to pressure a person, Government or
organization for political, religious or ideological
purposes.
Political, religious or ideological causes are not
terrorism. But using violence in support of politics,
religion or ideology is terrorism. I make this point to
underscore the fact that terrorist acts are never justified,
regardless of the cause and no matter how legitimate the
grievance. In this regard, it is telling that the United
Nations of the world have come together to condemn
terrorism in clear and unambiguous terms.
The 2006 United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (see resolution 60/288, annex) employs prose
that is categorical and absolute:
“We, the States Members of the United Nations,
resolve:
“1. To consistently, unequivocally and strongly
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever
purposes, as it constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security.”
It is said that pragmatic vagueness is the language
of diplomacy. Solutions to the issues before the General
Assembly are often sketched not in black and white, but,
rather, in shades of grey. The same cannot be said of our
resolve against terrorism. It is not fuzzy or ambiguous.
The words are clear as crystal: “in all its forms and
manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and
for whatever purposes”.

4

Far too often, the international news media refuse
to the use the word “terrorist”, in the naive and mistaken
belief that to report violence as a terrorist act is to cast
judgement on the perpetrators’ cause. By pretending
that everything is relative, these news media deny the
very existence of terrorism. Terrorism is not a political
or a religious cause. Terrorism is using violence
against civilian, police and military targets to pursue
that cause. According to the United Nations Global
Strategy, committing such acts is terrorism regardless
of who commits them or where and for what purposes
they are committed.
In the same vein, the teachings of the great
Mohandas Gandhi remind us that we must not confuse
the righteousness of a cause with the use of terrorist
violence to advance that cause. The Mahatma wrote,
“Truth can never be propagated by doing violence”.
Canada welcomed the adoption of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in September 2006, and I
am pleased to renew our commitment to it today.
Canada embraces the four pillars of the United
Nations Strategy, specifically: addressing the conditions
that spread terrorism; preventing and combating
terrorism; capacity-building; and respect for human
rights and the rule of law.
Member States are primarily responsible for
implementing this important strategy. Canada has made
significant progress in doing so, both at home and around
the world. This year, in February, the Government of
Canada released its formal counter-terrorism strategy.
Canada’s strategy is based on four reinforcing elements:
prevent, detect, deny and respond.
The first pillar of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy corresponds to the first
element of the Canadian strategy, which is to prevent
individuals from engaging in terrorism.
We are working to make Canadian communities
more resilient against violent extremism and
radicalization. We will not hesitate to challenge and
counter violent extremist ideology. We intend to
reduce the risk of individuals succumbing to violent
extremism and radicalization. Our Government is also
investing significantly in research on terrorism and
counter-terrorism, such as how to prevent and counter
violent extremism.
Further to the second pillar of the United Nations
Strategy, preventing and combating terrorism,

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

Canada is taking many concrete steps. These include
adopting domestic laws to implement and give effect
to the 12 United Nations conventions and protocols
on Terrorism to which Canada is proud to be a party;
an asset freeze, travel ban and arms embargo on
individuals and organizations identified as supporting
or being associated with terrorism; a new law that
allows the victims of terrorism to sue the perpetrators
and supporters of terrorism, including those States
that support it; criminal law amendments to give
law enforcement officers the tools that they need to
respond effectively to terrorism and to address nuclear
terrorism better; a cybersecurity strategy for Canada;
and investing in enhanced security for air travel and
air cargo.

Working Group members are bringing together experts
to build networks across borders, share best practices
and enhance skill sets for detecting and combating
terrorism.

Currently, the Canadian Parliament is reviewing
the Nuclear Terrorism Act. Once it has been enacted,
that will put Canada in a position to ratify both the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism and the Amendments to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Materials.

All of our partnerships allow us to strengthen our
counter-terrorism efforts and to share best practices.

Terrorism is a global phenomenon; it knows no
borders. An effective response to terrorism must
be equally global and leave no gaps for terrorists to
exploit. That is why pillar III of the United Nations
Strategy — developing State capacity to prevent and
combat terrorism — is absolutely vital. Canada’s
Counter-Terrorism Capacity Building Program provides
other countries with training, equipment, technical,
legal and other security assistance and expertise to help
them prevent and respond to terrorist activities. We give
other countries the training and equipment they need to
enable law enforcement agencies to share information
and launch investigations, enhance border security and
stop terrorist groups from utilizing funds to finance
attacks around the world.
To that end, I am pleased to confirm that Canada,
through its Counter-Terrorism Capacity Building
Program, will be contributing up to an additional
$8 million in support of capacity-building projects
that aim to enhance counter-terrorism cooperation
globally. We attach great value to the recent creation
of the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF), an
action-oriented coordination forum that mobilizes
commitment and capacity to combat terrorism and
strengthen international counter-terrorism cooperation.
Canada is pleased to act as co-Chair, along with
Algeria, of the Sahel Working Group within the GCTF.

We have also renewed Canada’s Global Partnership
Program, which helps combat the threat of nuclear,
radiological, biological and chemical terrorism. As
Prime Minister Stephen Harper said when he announced
its renewal at the Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul,
“Canada’s Global Partnership Program is
essential to the international effort to combat
nuclear terrorism and to prevent weapons of mass
destruction and related materials from falling into
the wrong hands.”

The final pillar of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, respect for human rights
and the rule of law, echoes Canada’s own principles.
Canadian society is built on the rule of law as a
cornerstone of peace, order and good Government.
It follows that all counter-terrorism activities must
adhere to the rule of law. Government institutions must
act within legal mandates while countering terrorism.
Upholding the rule of law includes adherence to
international and domestic legal obligations to protect
human rights. The respect for, and promotion of, human
rights are core Canadian values.
But security is also a human right. Terrorism is
an attack on those very rights that are fundamental
to our society, such as freedom of thought, freedom
of expression and association, and a person’s
right to life, liberty and security. Belief in human
rights is fundamental. It governs policy choices
and decision-making, and it governs standards in
investigations. While our capacity to counter threats
on all fronts has increased significantly over the past
decade, the threat of terrorism persists and evolves.
So the fight against terrorism continues and must also
evolve. In this ongoing struggle, it is important for the
nations and citizens of the world to keep faith. We must
maintain hope that we will prevail. No matter how dark
the storm clouds of terror and violence, let us remember
the confidence with which John F. Kennedy approached
this very challenge. Speaking to the Assembly back in
1961, President Kennedy shared the certain knowledge
that terrorism will not succeed:

12-393015

A/66/PV.118

“Terror is not a new weapon. Throughout
history it has been used by those who could not
prevail, either by persuasion or example. But
inevitably they fail, either because men are not
afraid to die for a life worth living, or because the
terrorists themselves came to realize that free men
cannot be frightened by threats, and that aggression
would meet its own response.”
I thank the President of the Assembly for the
opportunity to address today’s meeting. I want to
reaffirm Canada’s commitment to working with Member
States, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force and the relevant United Nations agencies
towards the full and timely implementation of this
incredibly important Strategy.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) on the third biennial review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
After the first part of my statement, I will address the
Assembly in my national capacity.
At the outset, the OIC would like to express
its appreciation for the efforts of His Excellency
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, Permanent
Representative of Canada, in his capacity as facilitator
of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Strategy third
biennial review consultations, aimed at reaching a
consensus draft resolution on the third review. The OIC
reaffirms the principles of the United Nations Charter,
particularly the sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and political independence of Member States.
The OIC strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, including State terrorism as
well as individual and group terrorism, committed by
whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes. It also
underlines the need for respect for international law,
international humanitarian law, the rule of law, human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the fight against
terrorism. The OIC continues to support the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which,
among other objectives, should also address the root
causes of terrorism, including the unlawful use of force,
aggression, foreign occupation, festering international
disputes, denial of the right of peoples living under
foreign occupation to self-determination, political and
economic injustices, and political marginalization and
alienation. At the same time, the fight against this threat

6

requires a comprehensive set of measures, to which the
security component is indispensable but not sufficient
on its own. Therefore, when the necessary security
measures are implemented, the social, political,
cultural and economic aspects of the matter should also
be addressed.
The OIC reaffirms that the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as contained in resolution
60/288, is an ongoing effort and a living document that
should be updated and examined biennially. The OIC also
reaffirms its support for the balanced implementation of
all aspects of the four pillars of the Strategy. It continues
to reject unequivocally the association of terrorism with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
We believe that irresponsible statements that attempt
to associate terrorism with any religion or nationality
are themselves a clear incitement to terrorism. The OIC
would also like to express its concern about the payment
of ransoms to terrorist groups, which constitutes one of
the sources for financing terrorist activities, as well as
to stress the central role of the General Assembly in
countering terrorism, since it is the only United Nations
body that enjoys universal membership.
The OIC joined the consensus on the draft
resolution. However, it is unfortunate that the draft
resolution could not take on board some of the OIC
group’s proposals, such as noting the changing nature
and character of terrorism, the need to counter acts
committed by self-radicalized individuals around the
world, and the links between international organized
crime and the financing of terrorism.
The OIC took note of the recommendations
for the way forward contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (A/66/762) on the activities of
the United Nations system in implementing the
Strategy, in particular the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to appoint a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator. The OIC is of the view
that the transparency and coordination of the activities
of the United Nations counter-terrorism-related entities
should be enhanced and that any duplication of work
is to be avoided. In addition, while the OIC supports
the institutional coherence of the United Nations, it also
emphasizes the importance of respecting the mandates
of various organs of the United Nations, as outlined in
the Charter.
The OIC recognizes the importance of the
regular briefings on activities undertaken by the

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF)
during the past two years. We commend the work of
the Task Force so far and strongly encourage it to
continue to carry out its work with the same diligence
in order to keep the members of the General Assembly
updated on its activities in implementing the Strategy.
Moreover, we would also like to encourage the CTITF
to enhance its consultations with Member States during
the planning and preparation phase of its activities.
The OIC stresses that the implementation of the
Strategy lies first and foremost in the hands of Member
States and calls for the enhanced engagement of Member
States with the work of the CTITF.
The OIC firmly believes that the involvement of
the United Nations specialized agencies, funds and
programmes in the implementation of the Strategy as a
whole should not affect their mandates and operational
activities. The OIC notes with appreciation that the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre has initiated
its activities and intends to use its resources to strengthen
the United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.
The Group recognizes the need to strengthen
support to Member States, upon their request, in the
domestic implementation of the Strategy through
enhanced technical assistance and capacity-building
based on their national priorities.
I shall now speak in my national capacity.
(spoke in Arabic)
My country, Syria, has recently witnessed painful
events as a result of terrorist acts carried out by extremist
terrorist groups using unconventional criminal methods.
Those acts are based on radical Takfiri religious fatwas
issued by instigators residing in countries that are well
known to all. The Takfiri religious extremist groups
use suicide agents, booby-trapped cars and explosive
belts and ordnance to strike at targets of vital use and
infrastructure in order to inflict widespread death,
destruction and terror among the citizens. The targeting
of civilians and law enforcement forces, as well as
private and public properties, has unfortunately become
the daily routine of the armed terrorist groups, which
have now become professional perpetrators of armed
robbery, banditry, the burning of hospitals and clinics,
plundering, assassination and acts of aggression against
peaceful citizens in their homes and places of business
in order to terrorize and displace them, in addition to
holding civilian and military hostages for financial

ransom in order to support their terrorist acts or to
achieve political objectives.
Among those operations was the recent action
taken by armed groups in Syria, with foreign support,
against a number of Lebanese pilgrims returning from
Iran via Turkish territory. Some of those organized
terrorist acts bear the fingerprints of the Al-Qaida
organization and its ideology in the way they kill,
dismember and mutilate bodies, murder entire families
on a sectarian basis; and carry out coordinated suicide
bombings in more than one place in order to terrorize
Syrian society. I regret to inform the Assembly that two
terrorist attacks took place today close to the Palace
of Justice in Damascus. We do not yet know the toll in
terms of lives or material cost.
Such terrorist operations could not be carried out
without adequate financing and support in the form of
money, weapons or persons, or without the media and
political coverage of the groups responsible for those
operations. Indeed, it is regrettable that some Arab and
regional States, among others, provide such resources
to armed terrorist groups in order to carry out terrorist
acts in my country, Syria. In fact, those countries have
pledged openly and in broad daylight, at conferences
whose organizers claim that they are friends of the
Syrian people, to provide support in terms of weapons,
money, training and safe haven to terrorists and to allow
them to carry out terrorist acts from their terroritories.
The interception of the ship Lutfallah II has
demonstrated the involvement of Arab and non-Arab
countries seeking to send lethal weapons to terrorist
groups in Syria for the purpose of killing and
destruction. Reform is the legitimate demand of all
Syrians. Fighting corruption is a demand of 99.9 per
cent of the Syrian people, but reform and fighting
corruption cannot be undertaken via terrorist means.
We have drawn the attention of the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council to the incident
of the Lutfallah II, in addition to information related to
the smuggling of weapons and terrorists across borders
from neighbouring countries.
The mass media instigation of terrorism inside
Syria has unfortunately become a de facto painful
intervention from which all the Syrian people are
suffering. An impartial and serious approach is needed.
The terrorists have recently been using information
and communications technologies provided openly
even by some of those countries that have suffered the

12-393017

A/66/PV.118

scourge of terrorism. Unfortunately, however, those
countries call such technology “non-lethal”. We have
also seen television channels directed at Syrian society
that broadcast extremist religious ideology that incites
terrorism, killing and sectarian and religious sedition,
which are supported by some countries and radical
groups.
It is a striking paradox that, at the same time,
some Syrian satellite television stations have been
banned under a resolution adopted by the League
of Arab States, on top of the unilateral sanctions
imposed by the European Union on the Syrian Radio
and Television Organization, as well as those imposed
before that by the United States Government on some
Syrian information outlets. This fierce campaign
against private and public Syrian media has encouraged
so-called peaceful terrorist groups to carry out a
terrorist attack on the headquarters and buildings of the
Syrian Ekhbariya television news station, including the
assassination of four innocent Syrian journalists and
five administrative staffers, after tying their hands,
as well as blowing up the entire building. It is indeed
sad that, at a time when we are discussing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, beginning
with the Secretary-General and the Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Commission, no one has expressed
condolences to the people of Syria and the victims or
condemned the act of terrorism that led to the loss of
those Syrian journalists.
The number of victims of terrorist groups in Syria
is continually growing. The Syrian Government has
been cooperating with the relevant United Nations
entities and non-governmental organizations in order to
provide humanitarian assistance to those victims and to
all who have been forced by the armed groups to leave
their homes and places of worship by violence based on
vicious sectarian or religious beliefs that are far from
the morals and values of the Syrian people, who over
the centuries have set an example unique in the region
of perfectly harmonious coexistence among the people
of all the faiths, races and sects of which it is composed.
Hundreds of thousands of residents of Homs and
Hama have been displaced from their homes and
expelled. One hundred and ten thousand Christian
Syrian citizens have been expelled en masse from their
neighbourhoods. Their churches have been occupied and
they have been intimidated and threatened with death if
they return to their homes. Hundreds of thousands of
other, Muslim residents of those two cities have also

8

been displaced and expelled. They have also been told
that they will be killed if they return to their homes.
Syria calls on all States to work with it in order
to scrupulously implement the provisions of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We must
follow our words with deeds by taking the steps
necessary to prevent and halt the financing of any
terrorist acts or the preparation of such acts against
Syria from the territories of neighbouring States,
and by refusing to provide sanctuary for any who
plan, support or commit terrorist acts. Such acts have
spilled the precious blood of our people, both civilian
and military. The day will come when we will hold to
account all who participated in those acts, instigated,
financed or facilitated them.
The terrorist acts taking place in my country,
aimed at destabilizing the State, society and people,
are no less dangerous than any of the terrorist acts
that have targeted many States Members of the United
Nations, developed and developing alike. There is no
sanctioned or unsanctioned terrorism according to
religious fatwas; there is only one kind of terrorism and
it must be combated, and the terrorism that is targeting
Syria is the very same terrorism that has targeted and
continues to target other Member States. There is
nuclear terrorism, information terrorism and cultural
terrorism. There is political and economic terrorism.
All of those are terrorism. But the ensuing suffering
remains the same.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Marinaki (European Union): On behalf of the
European Union and its member States, I am honoured
to speak on our contribution to the third review of
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align
themselves with this declaration.
The European Union pursues a civilian approach
towards addressing counter-terrorism globally, on
the basis of criminal justice and the rule of law,
while protecting human rights. The European Union

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

condemns terrorism unreservedly in all its forms and
manifestations. What unites us is our determination to
step up our collaboration and achieve more effective
international efforts to prevent and fight terrorism, as
well as our desire to increase mutual understanding and
trust. Both those objectives are important.
Broadening the international consensus and
enhancing international efforts to combat terrorism
remain key objectives for the European Union. We fully
support the key role of the United Nations in preventing
and combating terrorism, and we advocate compliance
with recognized international standards. The European
Union fully appreciates the fact that the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy has expanded the
global counter-terrorism framework to include not only
law enforcement and other security measures, but also
measures to ensure respect for human rights and to
address underlying conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism, such as prolonged unresolved conflicts, rule
of law problems, violations of human rights and social,
economic and political marginalization. The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy contains
a complete set of measures that must be implemented
in their entirety. As such, it offers an opportunity to
recalibrate all our efforts and develop more balanced
responses to the threat of terrorism by bringing together
security, the rule of law, development objectives and the
protection of human rights.
The 2012 review of the implementation of the
Strategy is an important step forward. The European
Union appreciates the Secretary-General’s report
on the Strategy (A/66/762), and fully shares the
recommendations in part VII of the report. It therefore
endorses in particular: first, appointing a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator; secondly, developing
national and regional Strategy implementation plans;
thirdly, enhancing capacity-building efforts; fourthly,
promoting international cooperation; and fifthly,
strengthening international solidarity with victims of
terrorism.
The United Nations has a unique international role,
and its Strategy is of fundamental importance to the
European Union and its member States, in the context
both of their own national efforts and their world-wide
partnerships. The implementation of the Strategy should
be pursued. As highlighted at the Secretary-General’s
Symposium on International Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation on 19 September 2011, greater efforts are

required, particularly in the field of the prevention of
terrorism.
The European Union believes in the importance
of supporting countries that encounter difficulties
in confronting terrorism in order to strengthen their
counter-terrorism capacities. That is why the European
Union and its member States will enhance their
counter-terrorism capacity-building measures.
The focus on implementation and international
cooperation serves to underline the importance and
added value of national and regional counter-terrorism
strategies. The European Union and its member
States have established their own counter-terrorism
strategies, which address external and internal security
issues. In our cooperation with other countries and
regions, we have started to develop comprehensive
counter-terrorism strategies, building on national
and regional counter-terrorism approaches, thereby
ensuring ownership and participation.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The European Union encourages States and
regions to adopt counter-terrorism strategies and we
support the United Nations efforts in promoting the
establishment of regional counter-terrorism strategies
in Central Asia. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF) should continue its coordination
efforts to promote the implementation of agreed
national and regional counter-terrorism strategies.
Comprehensive national and regional counter-terrorism
strategies are vital if we are to combine all necessary
efforts relating to external and internal security
aspects, law enforcement, criminal justice, rule of
law, prevention — which includes countering violent
extremism — and the protection of human rights,
together with the involvement of civil society.
Close cooperation of State institutions with citizens
and private companies can give us a broader awareness
of the perils endangering our lives and thus improve our
countermeasures. Therefore, the role of civil society and
public-private partnerships in countering terrorism is
an important aspect to be taken into consideration. The
increased importance of civil society and public-private
partnerships should be reflected in the draft resolution
(A/66/L.53).
Measures taken to counter terrorism must be in
full compliance with human rights obligations, in

12-393019

A/66/PV.118

accordance with international law, in particular human
rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian
law. Human rights should form an integral part of
national, regional and international counter-terrorism
strategies. Grave violations of human rights can create
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. We
remain convinced that effective counter-terrorism
and the promotion and protection of human rights are
mutually reinforcing and linked with development.
Often, the places where assistance is most
needed are those accused of having the most serious
human rights violations. Such concerns are becoming
increasingly acute for States as they undertake to
build counter-terrorism-related justice sector capacity
in third countries because of the considerable risk
that those enhanced capacities may be employed in a
manner inconsistent with human rights obligations. The
core challenge lies in mitigating risk by strengthening
capacity to reduce it through raising awareness and
enhancing implementation of human rights standards
and norms in practice.
Specific
programming
related
to
the
capacity-building initiatives of the European Union and
its member States and partners in third countries in this
field prove to be good practices, in terms of both general
guidance to inform counter-terrorism and human rights
capacity-building. The European Union reiterates its
strong support for the work of the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.
The European Union continues to stress the
importance of respecting the rights of the victims of
terrorism. Terrorism is a crime directed at society as a
whole, and society as a whole needs to show solidarity
with those who suffer from it. Victims are the best
witnesses of the futility of the violence with which
terrorists seek to impose their will, and the European
Union would like to express its solidarity with all who
suffer as a result of terrorism. The European Union
calls upon all States Members of the United Nations and
relevant United Nations entities to promote international
solidarity in support of the victims of terrorism.
Externally, the European Union promotes
confidence-building through regular political dialogues
on counter-terrorism and security, and assists countries
in need in their efforts via capacity-building measures.
The European Union is increasing its support for such
counter-terrorism capacity-building measures. In 2009,

10

we developed our first comprehensive counter-terrorism
programme, which includes the implementation
of the United Nations standards and, in particular,
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in priority regions. In its
wider assistance programmes, the European Union also
addresses the nexus between development and security.
The European Union also welcomes the
establishment of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum
(GCTF), which aims at promoting the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and reinforces United Nations efforts in that respect.
The GCTF fosters multilateral counter-terrorism
cooperation, builds confidence and trust, and promotes
counter-terrorism capacity-building. Together with
Turkey, the European Union is co-chairing the GCTF
Horn of Africa Region Capacity-Building Working
Group, and we have already started the identification
and coordination of capacity-building measures, in
particular to support law enforcement cooperation and
capacities to tackle terrorist financing.
The European Union and its member States have
directly experienced the benefits of closer coordination
in the prevention of and the fight against terrorism.
Based on our experience, we would like to thank the
United Nations for its efforts to step up the coordination
of its counter-terrorism-related policies and actions.
The European Union encourages the United Nations to
continue enhancing its coordination efforts. Therefore,
we fully support the Secretary-General’s proposal
to consider creating the post of a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator.
The European Union welcomes the fact that the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is starting
its operations and in doing so will make a substantive
contribution to promoting the implementation of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Strategy through the
CTITF. We encourage the Centre to find synergies with
other relevant actors in order to maximize the impact of
its programmes.
Finally, the European Union and its member States
have a particular commitment through the Lisbon Treaty
to supporting the United Nations and an international
system based on the rule of law. We will continue
to strongly support international counter-terrorism
cooperation and the promotion of United Nations
standards on counter-terrorism, including the protection
of human rights and the promotion of the rule of law.

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to
echo other speakers in expressing my gratitude for the
convening of this meeting on the third biennial review
of the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its 2006 Plan of Action.
Spain aligns itself fully with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.
I would also like to express Spain’s appreciation for
the work carried out by the Permanent Representative of
Canada, Ambassador Rishchynski, and his colleagues,
who facilitated the preparation of the draft resolution
(A/66/L.53) submitted for consideration today by the
General Assembly.
Six years ago, the Assembly took an historic step
in adopting by consensus the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in whose elaboration Spain
played a leading role. It is now the responsibility of us
all to continue to promote its effective implementation.
Spain deems it imperative to take further measures
to address conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism, as highlighted in part I of the Strategy’s plan
of action. In that regard, one of the priority actions
undertaken by Spain in the fight against terrorism is
the promotion of international solidarity in support of
the victims of terrorism.
Spain believes that victims must play a central role
in any strategy to combat terrorism. We have therefore
developed a system for the provision of care, support,
assistance and reparations to the victims which, I would
go so far as to say, is one of the most comprehensive
such systems in the world. I would also like to take this
opportunity humbly to make available our experience
in this field to all States wishing to implement similar
measures in support of victims of terrorism.
Spain welcomed and supported the convening of
the international Symposium on Supporting Victims of
Terrorism by the Secretariat Task Force, convened by
the Secretary-General and held here at Headquarters in
2008. We would like to see a similar meeting held in
the very near future, and, in that regard, we urge the
Secretary-General and the Task Force to take the steps
necessary to make such a meeting possible.
Spain welcomes the progress made in the area of
assisting victims of terrorism, as reflected in the draft
resolution to be adopted today, which stresses the need to
promote international solidarity and to protect the rights
of victims of terrorism. Here we wish to emphasize our

support for the request, made by the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
that a specific international instrument on such rights
and obligations be created within the framework of the
United Nations.
In terms of measures taken to prevent and combat
terrorism, I would like to emphasize the fact that Spain
has ratified the 18 United Nations Conventions and
Protocols that constitute the current international legal
framework to combat terrorism. Spain will continue to
work towards the consolidation and development of that
framework, which should lead to the early conclusion
of a United Nations comprehensive convention on
terrorism.
In that context, and in particular regarding security
issues, I would also like to stress the importance of
developing relations between the private and public
sectors. Security issues require the establishment of
public-private partnerships that allow for pragmatic
responses to terrorism, in areas such as research,
databases and information exchange, border
management and airports, civil aviation, the protection
of critical infrastructures, cyberterrorism, mass events
and the protection of tourism, inter alia.
The international community should also redouble
its efforts to improve prevention practices in all areas
of interest, with particular emphasis on the academic
and educational sector. It is important to work with
young people, as they are especially vulnerable, and to
focus on social issues that could give rise to intolerance,
extremism
and
fundamentalism.
International
cooperation at the regional and subregional levels is
vital in that respect.
As regards measures to build the capacity
of States to prevent and combat terrorism and to
strengthen the role of the United Nations in this
regard, Spain has consistently made contributions to
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
in the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Spain is also providing support to the technical
assistance work being carried out by the Security
Council Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, as well as other agencies and regional and
sectoral institutions.

12-3930111

A/66/PV.118

I would like here, for various reasons, to highlight
the importance of developing national, regional and
subregional strategies to fight terrorism. They are key,
first, because of the complex situation that prevails in
some regions of the world, such as the Sahel, which
requires that such strategies be strengthened; secondly,
because this is one of the major priorities of the new
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre; and thirdly,
because of the efforts made to date by the Task Force
to coordinate the strategies of countries to implement
the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
Initiative, which is already bearing fruit.

cooperation and strengthening the central coordinating
role of the United Nations in that process. Thanks
to the efforts of the United Nations, we have a
successfully functioning, broad-based infrastructure
for counter-terrorism cooperation that includes
many regional organizations and associations. An
international legal basis for countering terrorism has
been created. Work is under way on formulating and
promoting standards in that domain. What is important
is the consistent implementation of all resolutions
and decisions on counter-terrorism adopted by our
Organization.

Finally, in line with the provisions of the Global
Strategy on measures necessary to ensure respect for
human rights and the rule of law as the fundamental
basis of the fight against terrorism, Spain has taken an
approach that gives pride of place to international law,
respect for human rights and rule-of-law instruments.
Spain strongly believes that respect for human rights
and the rule of law are the the instruments proper to the
rule of law.

The adoption by consensus of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288) by the
General Assembly in 2006 was a key element of the
global counter-terrorism system. For the first time in
international law practice, it enshrined a comprehensive
and holistic approach towards counter-terrorism,
flexibly combining traditional law enforcement
measures with prevention and addressing the various
social root causes of terrorism by enhancing the legal
structure and upholding human rights.

Spain firmly believes that respect for human rights
and the rule of law form the legal foundation and limit
of all actions taken by a State and the international
community in the fight against terrorism. Consequently,
the sharing of best practices among States should be
facilitated and cooperation among countries encouraged
in order to enhance the training of police officers,
judges and prosecutors.
By way of conclusion, I would like to touch on the
Secretary-General’s proposal for the establishment
of the post of a single United Nations coordinator in
the fight against terrorism. Spain firmly supports that
proposal and hopes that in the near future the necessary
restructuring will be carried out within the United
Nations system so as to allow for its creation.
Spain is firmly committed to active multilateralism
in the fight against terrorism and believes that
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy is a valuable tool in the
fight against the global threat of terrorism. To achieve
the objective of eradicating terrorism, there must be a
firm commitment and cooperation on the part of all,
and the Global Strategy must be fully implemented, as
these are key elements in that respect.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is a strong proponent
of intensifying effective international counter-terrorism

12

Russia is in favour of intensifying efforts to
implement the Strategy, including in such priority
areas as preventing the radicalization of society,
counteracting violent extremism, and preventing
the media and Internet for terrorist purposes. An
important role in its implementation lies with national
counter-terrorism strategies and the coordination
mechanisms of interdepartmental interaction in the
sphere of counter-terrorism. We note the contribution
towards the implementation of the Strategy carried
out by the Security Council, its Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, and its Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1540
(2004) and 1988 (2011), together with their Expert
Groups.
We support the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. We are keen to further
develop substantive dialogue within the existing
working groups under its aegis. We hope that the recent
launching of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre will galvanize the Task Force’s work. We are in
favour of further strengthening the interaction among
the Task Force, the General Assembly and the Security
Council.
In that regard, we support the Secretary-General’s
proposal to create the post of a United Nations

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

counter-terrorism coordinator. We believe that
promoting the Strategy should be the central element of
its mandate. In that regard, we believe that it is important
that any reform in the counter-terrorism sector of the
United Nations linked to the creation of a new post
should not affect the mandates of the counter-terrorism
bodies or hamper the effectiveness of their work. We
would also like to see the effective involvement of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum in the work of the
United Nations specialized agencies. In that regard, we
welcome the planned establishment through the Forum
of an international centre to counter violent extremism.
We are determined to enhance Russia’s contribution
to implementing the Strategy. Ahead of today’s
review, we have presented detailed information on
counter-terrorism efforts undertaken by the Russian
counter-terrorism authorities and all of Russian society
in the context of the Strategy. Since the last review
of the Strategy two years ago, Russia has pursued its
active participation in projects carried out through the
Task Force, above all in such priority areas as public/
private counter-terrorist partnerships and countering
the terrorist use of the Internet.
Setting great store by the role of regional
organizations in implementing the Strategy, we have
actively participated in the work in that field carried
out by the Commonwealth of Independent States,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The adoption of
a joint declaration on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
contributed to general efforts to implement the Strategy.
A notable role in mobilizing global counter-terrorism
efforts is also played by the annual international meeting
of the heads of the relevant special services held in
Russia, the outcomes of which are regularly conveyed
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate.
My country continues to implement the concept
of counteracting terrorism in Russia, approved by
the Russian President. It defines the main principles
of State policy in that sphere, including the effective
implementation of the Strategy. A special focus in
that regard is placed on developing counter-terrorism
cooperation with the media, scientific and cultural
circles, academia and religious organizations. Such
cooperation should help tackle the important tasks of
preventing terrorism, teaching and educating youth

to reject terrorism and extremism, and establishing
principles of tolerance and cultural and religious
equality in society. We have a successfully functioning
national counter-terrorism committee that brings
together the heads of the Russian security bodies, law
enforcement structures, the Foreign Ministry, other
departments and the speakers of both chambers of
the Russian Parliament. Russia is ready to continue to
actively share its counter-terrorism experience, which
has already proven its worth, with foreign partners.
During the current review, it is especially important
to stress the importance of the comprehensive
implementation by States of the Strategy, highlight
its significance and prevent any watering down of its
primary goals. We believe that this is fully in accordance
with the draft resolution on the review of the Strategy
to be adopted at the end of this debate. We believe that
it would be a good basis for our further joint work on
the implementation of the Strategy. In that regard, we
thank the facilitator of the preparatory process for
the draft resolution, the Permanent Representative of
Canada, Mr. Rishchynski, for all his successful work.
Mr. Diseko (South Africa): We extend our
appreciation to the President for convening this
high-level event, which coincides with the third
biennial review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. This event, coming soon
after the high-level Symposium on International
Counter-Terrorism Cooperation, hosted by the
Secretary-General in the General Assembly last year, as
well as the 10-year commemoration of the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) — which, inter alia, established
the Counter-Terrorism Committee — confirms the
centrality of the United Nations in fighting the scourge
of terrorism. Those events have further contributed to
enhancing the visibility of the United Nations in the
international campaign against terrorism.
My delegation supports the approach that continues
to place the United Nations at the centre of multilateral
efforts to counter terrorism, and we are firm in our
belief that no country can address that challenge on its
own and that terrorism will not and cannot be defeated
by military means.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is a
product of the collective efforts of the Members of the
United Nations. The Strategy is premised not only on
addressing the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism, but also on respect for the rule of law and

12-3930113

A/66/PV.118

human rights. South Africa therefore supports the
adoption of the consensus draft resolution (A/66/L.53)
following the third biennial review process because we
view this decision as one that ensures a holistic and
multifaceted approach to countering the scourge of
terrorism.
Taking stock of what we have collectively achieved
in the lead-up to this third review of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, we note the seminal
institutional developments in the following areas: first,
the establishment and growth of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, which now comprises
31 entities; secondly, the contribution of the Integrated
Assistance for Countering Terrorism initiative
towards facilitating an integrated and coordinated
approach among the 31 entities through effective
information-sharing, including with Member States;
thirdly, the creation and recent operationalization of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre; fourthly, the
adoption of the first regional action plan by the Central
Asian region to assist in implementing the Strategy; and,
fifthly, the hosting of at least three regional workshops
with key partners in five regions in order to widely
disseminate better understanding and knowledge of the
Strategy.
Notwithstanding those substantial gains at the
international level within a relatively short space of
time, much more needs to be done in order to fully
implement the Strategy. The focus on coordination
and cooperation will shift to the regional and national
levels, cognizant that the responsibility to implement
the Strategy lies primarily with Member States. At the
same time, the United Nations must remain seized of
ongoing efforts to refine its institutional framework so
that it can provide effective support to Member States
in implementing the Strategy.
South Africa has always maintained that the
four pillars of the Strategy must be implemented in a
balanced and integrated manner. As affirmed at the 2011
Symposium, the Strategy remains the most credible and
relevant international mechanism, enjoying the wide
political support of all Member States, for countering
the scourge of terrorism worldwide.
In addition to the strides that have been made
in preventing and combating terrorism, as well as
measures to build States’ capacity in that regard,
a balanced approach would mean renewed effort
and commitment on the part of the international

14

community to addressing the conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism. There is therefore an urgent
need for the international community and the United
Nations to step up efforts to resolve long-outstanding
conflicts in accordance with international law and
international human rights law, and to adopt strategies
aimed at limiting political exclusion and rejecting
socio-economic marginalization.
A balanced approach to the implementation of the
Strategy would require the international community
to remain steadfast in its commitment to ensuring
the timely and full realization of the development
goals and objectives of eradicating poverty and
promoting sustained economic growth, as well as
sustainable development and global prosperity for all.
In the prevailing international economic and financial
climate, the international community must reinforce
development and social inclusion agendas, especially
regarding youth unemployment, as such efforts can
help to reduce marginalization and counter the potential
appeal of extremism and recruitment by terrorists.
We concur with the view expressed in the
Secretary-General’s report (A/66/762) that human
rights protection should be seen not as an obstacle to
effective counter-terrorism but as an essential element
of any sustainable counter-terrorism strategy. The
strengthening of the international legal architecture, the
rule of law and systems of criminal justice represents
the fundamental basis of our common approach to
counter-terrorism. In that context, promoting and
protecting human rights for all is essential to all
components of the Strategy, and that approach is
complementary and reinforcing.
The Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights should continue to play a leading
role in examining the question of protecting human
rights while countering terrorism. The Office has
the relevant authority and mandate to make general
recommendations on the human rights obligations of
States and to provide them with the requisite assistance.
This area requires renewed attention, given the concern
expressed by the High Commissioner about the erosion
of respect for due process guarantees. These are related
to the Security Council’s individual sanctions regimes
and other practices that impede the right to a fair trial
in the context of counter-terrorism, such as the use of
intelligence in criminal justice proceedings. In that
regard, our delegation welcomes the enhancement of the
Ombudsperson’s mandate and the institutionalization

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

of the sunset clause as steps towards improved due
process standards, and is fully supportive of the work
of the Ombudsperson’s Office.
The work of the Special Rapporteur on promoting
and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism must also be fully supported.
The Special Rapporteur’s Office complements all
counter-terrorism efforts and contributes to an integrated
and balanced approach through its interaction with all
the relevant stakeholders, including Member States,
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities.
The biennial review process must continue to
provide a forum for Member States for the frank and
honest assessment of progress made in implementing
the Strategy. South Africa maintains that while this
review must entail a balanced approach, Member
States must also confront the core issues related to
the spread of terrorism. In the action plan that we
collectively adopted in 2006, we undertook to make
every effort to conclude a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism that would also address the gaps
in the international legal arena that might exist, while
also encouraging Member States to become parties to
existing international conventions and protocols. We
believe that adoption of a comprehensive convention
should be delayed no longer. Failure to adopt it is not only
a serious indictment of our commitment to countering
terrorism, but also undermines all our current reviews
of the Strategy.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba firmly supports the collective efforts of the United
Nations to combat terrorism. The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288) is a
milestone in the international battle against this scourge,
and assigns the General Assembly the central role in
those efforts. Cuba reiterates its unwavering resolve
to combat terrorism, as well its thorough rejection and
condemnation of every terrorist act, method and practice
in all their forms and manifestations by whomever,
against whomever and wherever they are committed,
regardless of their motivation, and including those
in which States are directly or indirectly involved.
Moreover, Cuban territory has never been and will

never be used to organize, finance or execute terrorist
acts against any country.
My people have lost 3,478 of its sons to terrorist
attacks. Another 2,099 have been crippled for life by
terrorist acts committed against my country for half a
century. Many of the individuals responsible for those
acts walk the streets of these United States freely and
peacefully. Despite that, and with no justification, the
Government of this country continues to include Cuba
on a spurious list of States that sponsor international
terrorism. My country firmly rejects its inclusion
on that list; it is unilateral, politically motivated and
determined by a country bereft of any moral authority
to judge others regarding terrorism.
Our country was one of the first three States to
ratify the 12 original international instruments dealing
with international terrorism. We are party to 13 existing
international conventions treating the subject, in
accordance with which we have implemented legal
and institutional measures to address this scourge
effectively. The Republic of Cuba has a general law
against terrorist acts and has adopted non-legislative
internal measures to prevent and combat terrorism.
As a State Member of the United Nations, our country
complies strictly with its obligations under Security
Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540
(2004), and thus regularly supplies the United Nations
with updated information on the steps we are taking to
combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
The international community should not accept
that, under the pretext of a supposed struggle
against terrorism, certain States may commit acts
of aggression and interfere in the internal affairs of
others, perpetrate or enable flagrant violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law such
as torture, abduction, illegal detention, disappearances
or extrajudicial executions. To accept that would be in
total contradiction with the United Nations Charter and
the principles and standards of international law. Any
violation of those legal and ethical principles weakens
the legitimacy of our combat against international
terrorism and sullies the values of the humanist culture
that we defend in the face of hatred, vengeance and
terror.
This year, we have made considerable progress in
this matter through the periodic review of the Global
Strategy. We thank the delegation of Canada for
coordinating this complex issue, and those delegations

12-3930115

A/66/PV.118

that have shown the political will to move ahead in the
struggle against the scourge of terrorism. The draft
resolution (A/66/L.53) for the first time contains a
direct reference to the need to work against the causes
fostering the spread of terrorism, and a clear call to
implement the Strategy in a balanced manner. Alas,
due to the opposition of certain delegations, it was not
possible to introduce a specific mention of the failure to
implement pillars I and IV of the Strategy on measures
to address conditions that foster the spread of terrorism
and to ensure respect for the human rights of all and the
rule of law as the fundamental basis of the fight against
terrorism.
The Secretary-General’s proposal concerning the
creation of the post of a coordinator has been discussed.
It is clear that doubts have arisen around that proposal,
and that Member States need more information if the
matter is to be discussed appropriately. A decision of
that magnitude can be adopted only by consensus in the
General Assembly.
Other matters of great importance have been
incorporated into this year’s draft resolution; more still
will have to be included in the future. For instance, a
reference to support for the rights of victims of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations has been included. On
that point, we stress that States must comply with their
international obligations without double standards so
that the victims of terrorism, including State terrorism,
may enjoy their rights fully.
States must comply with their obligations to try and
extradite all terrorists without exception, such as the
well-known confessed terrorist Luis Posada Carriles,
who walks freely in the streets of the host country
without having been brought to justice for his criminal
acts. By contrast, five young Cubans, whose only crime
was to combat terrorism in order to save the lives of
Cuban and American citizens, received lengthy prison
sentences in the United States. In the coming days, it
will be 14 years since those young people were unjustly
imprisoned in that country after a rigged trial of no
substance.
The draft resolution recognizes the efforts that have
been made by States and international organizations,
taking into account their different national and regional
circumstances. However, what is lacking is a clear
condemnation of all unilateral acts undertaken by
certain States that, counter to international law, have
illegitimately arrogated the right to classify conduct and
draw up politically motivated lists. We must continue to
16

work to clearly condemn such harmful practices and
any attempt to undermine the core authority of the
General Assembly in this sphere.
The draft resolution clearly emphasizes the need
for more dialogue and greater understanding among
cultures and civilizations. It expresses concern at the rise
in abductions and the use of modern communications
technologies to promote terrorist activities. It is relevant
to mention here the harmful practice of certain States
in funding, supporting and promoting, by means of the
Internet, radio or television, messages of intolerance
and hatred against other peoples, cultures or political
systems, in violation of the most elementary principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law.
Cuba believes that impunity and double standards
are unacceptable in the fight against terrorism.
Terrorism must be rejected in all circumstances. There
must be closer cooperation among States to combat
the scourge, on the basis of respect for sovereignty
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
Selectivity and the petty desires of the eternally
powerful to seize land to satisfy their insatiable appetite
for strategic resources must cease.
Finally, we reiterate the firm and unshakeable
resolve of the Government and people of Cuba to
cooperate in multilateral endeavours to put an end to
all terrorist acts, methods and practices in all their
forms and manifestations. My country commits itself
to combating terrorism, and expresses its willingness
to cooperate with all States in that fight.
Mr. Shinotsuka (Japan): On behalf of the
Government of Japan, I would like to express
my appreciation for the President’s leadership in
preparing the third review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I also extend our
sincere gratitude to Mr. Rishchynski, Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Canada, for his great
contribution and efforts to facilitate the consultations on
the draft resolution on the review of the implementation
of the Strategy (A/66/L.53).
Japan welcomes the positive and substantive
discussion during the Secretary-General’s Symposium
on International Counter-Terrorism Cooperation held
last September, as well as the comprehensive report
of the Secretary-General on the activities undertaken
by the United Nations system in implementing the
Strategy (A/66/762).

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

The concerted efforts of the Member States and the
international community to fight terrorism have yielded
remarkable results and mark an important step forward
in counter-terrorism. However, acts of terrorism
continue to be committed, and the actors and methods
of terrorism are becoming more diverse. For example,
we have observed the emergence of regional terrorist
organizations, the use of the Internet and other new
information and communications technology to incite
terrorism, and the increase of so-called home-grown
terrorists. Terrorism remains a grave threat and
challenge to the international community, and our
continuing and comprehensive efforts are necessary to
tackle it.
Since the adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006 (resolution 60/288),
the efforts of Member States towards its implementation
have steadily progressed. The Strategy continues to be
an important, holistic and comprehensive instrument
for counter-terrorism. We should therefore take the
opportunity of this biennial review to examine the
progress made by all Member States to implement the
Strategy in an effort to prevent and fight terrorism,
and to reaffirm our commitment to enhancing our
counter-terrorism cooperation under the Strategy.
It is also necessary that coordination and
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
and multilateral counter-terrorism frameworks, such as
the Global Counterterrorism Forum, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation forum and the Asia-Europe
Meeting, be continued.
With
regard
to
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to appoint a United Nations Counter­
Terrorism coordinator, Japan recognizes the necessity
of establishing this position in order to promote better
coordination among the related United Nations entities.
Japan also welcomes the establishment of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and appreciates
the initiative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Since
all international counter-terrorism efforts should
be concerted and integrated to maximize their
effectiveness, Japan hopes that these recent initiatives
will promote further close coordination and cooperation
while avoiding duplication of tasks.
Coherence within the United Nations system
is underlined in the Strategy. In this regard, Japan
highly appreciates the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force on integrated assistance for

countering terrorism, resulting in effective coordination
among its entities to address the capacity-building
needs of Member States, which is one of the four pillars
of the Strategy.
Japan has been implementing the Strategy and
extending cooperation to many countries, focusing
on poverty reduction, sustainable growth, addressing
global issues and peacebuilding. We believe that these
efforts contribute to addressing the conditions that are
conducive to the spread of terrorism, while recognizing
that none of these conditions ever justifies acts of
terrorism.
In this regard, Japan has been continuously
providing assistance to Afghanistan in order to
ensure its sustainable development and to eliminate
the conditions that allow for the spread of terrorism
in the country. Japan has been making contributions
to strengthen the legal regime and the capabilities
of law enforcement entities in fighting terrorism in
Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries through
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. As
our Foreign Minister, Mr. Gemba, stated clearly at
the meeting on Afghanistan held on the occasion
of the NATO summit held in May in Chicago, Japan
intends to continue providing appropriate assistance
to the Afghan National Security Forces beyond 2014.
Furthermore, to address Afghanistan’s development
needs, Japan will host the Tokyo conference on
Afghanistan on 8 July, together with the Government
of Afghanistan, inviting approximately 70 countries
and international organizations in order to pave the
way towards achieving the sustainable development of
Afghanistan, starting now and into the transformation
decade beyond 2014.
Japan emphasizes regional cooperation on
counter-terrorism. Having particularly close ties with
South-East Asian countries, Japan attributes great
importance to cooperation in that region. Japan holds
the ASEAN-Japan Counter-Terrorism Dialogue every
year and has been extending assistance to ASEAN
countries for counter-terrorism capacity-building
programmes.
We also underline the importance of ensuring the
protection of human rights and the rule of law while
fighting terrorism. Japan intends to cooperate with the
international community’s efforts in this area, including
through support for victims of terrorism.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm Japan’s resolve
to implement the Strategy and its strong commitment

12-3930117

A/66/PV.118

to continuing its efforts and cooperation at the national,
regional and international levels to eradicate terrorism.
Hoping to see more effective coordination within
the United Nations and its relevant entities for the
implementation of the Strategy, Japan is ready to make
an active contribution towards that endeavour.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Canada for his efforts in facilitating the consultations
on the draft resolution on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/66/L.53).
Egypt also aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
(spoke in English)
The third review comes six years after the General
Assembly’s adoption of resolution 60/288 by consensus,
which established the Strategy as the governing
framework of the United Nations efforts in combating
terrorism. Despite the Secretariat’s continued efforts
to implement the Strategy, there is a need for a more
balanced implementation of the four pillars, especially
pillars I and IV, which address the conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism and respect for human rights,
respectively. We welcome the fact that the third review’s
draft resolution outlines the importance of a balanced
implementation of all pillars of the Strategy. We hope
that all relevant organs and bodies of the United Nations
working in the field of counter-terrorism shall take this
carefully into account.
The principal responsibility for implementing the
Strategy lies with Member States. The Secretariat
should assist Member States in developing national
strategies to counter terrorism by identifying their
needs and building their capacities. In this context, we
call for an enhanced engagement of Member States with
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, including by participating in the elaboration
of programmes and activities carried out by the Task
Force and its working groups. We look forward to
receiving the periodic work plan of the activities of the
Task Force in accordance with the draft resolution and
to thoroughly discussing it.
The establishment of the United Nations Centre for
Counter-Terrorism within the Task Force in November
2011 was an important development. It will definitely
contribute to the implementation of the Strategy and
strengthen the role of the General Assembly in this
18

regard. We call on the secretariat of the Centre to
finalize its logistical arrangements and to start its
operational activities in accordance with the strategic
priorities set out by the Centre’s Advisory Board at
its second meeting, held in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, on
3 June. We also look forward to an enhanced role of the
General Assembly in the fight against terrorism.
Egypt supports efforts aimed at enhancing
overall coordination and avoiding duplication in the
work of organs and bodies of the United Nations in
the fight against terrorism. In this regard, we look
forward to receiving greater detail concerning the
Secretary-General’s proposal on the creation of the
post of United Nations Counter-Terrorism coordinator,
as contained in his recent report (A/66/762). That will
allow us to have an informed discussion on this issue in
future and take an appropriate decision in that respect.
We emphasize that such a position, if created, should
not affect the existing mandates of United Nations
organs, especially the General Assembly’s central role
in countering terrorism.
Egypt has repeatedly reiterated that the adoption
of a security perspective alone to address terrorism
will not achieve the desired results. The international
community should work actively to address the root
causes of terrorism and adopt objective measures aimed
at tackling the political, economic and social conditions
that lead to its spread. Most important among such
measures should be putting an end to foreign occupation,
together with the recognition of the legitimate right of
peoples to self-determination — in addition, of course,
to achieving justice and the rule of law, and working
for the economic and social development of all peoples
and countries.
Continuing to focus only on security measures in
the fight against terrorism without addressing its root
causes, promoting dialogue and understanding, and
countering incitement to terrorism would leave room
for terrorists to spread their ideas and attract more
individuals to help them achieve their devastating aims.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Egypt’s firm
commitment to implementing the Strategy, as well as
its support for international efforts to counter terrorism.
We stand ready to contribute actively to such efforts
by providing expertise and sharing the lessons that
we have learned as a result of our efforts over the past
decades at the national and regional levels to resolutely
combat terrorism.

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

Mr. Vandoren (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium aligns itself with the statement made on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
Belgium is determined to contribute, together with
its EU partners, to galvanizing the implementation on the
ground of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, including all of its components and with the
involvement of all stakeholders, including the private
sector, civil society and the media.
Belgium thanks the Secretary-General for his latest
report (A/66/762) and supports the recommendations
made therein. We also thank the Canadian delegation
for having facilitated the negotiations on the draft
resolution (A/66/L.53) that is before the Assembly.
Belgium attaches particular importance to the
strengthening of capacities to prevent and combat
terrorism. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre must make a significant contribution to that
goal. Belgium is prepared to share its good practices
and lessons learned, in particular in the framework of
the Centre.
I should like to outline, in three points, the specific
actions taken by Belgium in the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
of the EU strategy, with particular focus on the efforts
aimed at enhancing the quality of information and of
the structures in place for the exchange thereof.
The Coordinating Body for Threat Analysis
(OCAM), of which I am the head, was born of
Belgium’s resolve to enhance synergies among all of
the national entities involved in the combat against
terrorism, extremism and radicalism. The goal was
the development of a common, integrated approach
to analysing the terrorist and extremist threat for the
benefit of the national authorities and foreign partners.
In the context of Belgium’s counter-terrorist
architecture, OCAM was accorded a central position that
was legally strengthened, in an unprecedented manner,
through the imposition of criminal penalties on those
partner services that had been deliberately omitted to
provide OCAM with the relevant information.
As an international capital that is host to European
and international institutions as well as many
multinational companies’ coordination centres, the city
of Brussels requires heightened vigilance on the part of
all our services in assessing the terrorist threat resulting
from that status.

By dint of long experience in that respect, the
Belgian authorities have always been mindful of
optimizing the information and resources available in
order to provide adequate protection for the institutions
that Belgium hosts. That is one of the numerous
tasks carried out daily by OCAM, which is working
assiduously in that respect, in cooperation with its
partner services, including the Government’s crisis
centre.
It was when Dutch filmmaker Theo Van Gogh was
assassinated that Belgium became aware of the extent
of the threat posed by extremism and radicalization.
In that respect, the Belgian Government’s radicalism
action plan, known as plan “R”, is one of the key
elements of the national capacity to counter those
phenomena. The plan is aimed at detecting early signs
of radicalization and responding appropriately, while
working to prevent a radical polarization among the
various sectors of society.
The recent events in Toulouse and in Brussels were
a reminder of the fact that a great deal remains to be
done in this area. My country is currently looking at
options aimed at complementing existing measures.
Finally, Belgium’s architecture for combating
terrorism reflects the implementation of a legal and
institutional framework that is based on its international
commitments. Its goal is both to prevent acts of
terrorism and to bring suspects to justice.
A recent law now governs the data-collection
methods used by the intelligence and security services,
and the use thereof. The more intrusive the method
used, the higher the level of monitoring by independent
authorities. The system promotes information
exchange, through a jurisdictional filter, between the
intelligence community and the judicial community.
The admissibility of evidence, as determined by a judge,
is therefore strengthened further by the system, which
represents an important step forward in protecting
fundamental human rights.
Although many legislative initiatives have been the
subject of debate in our society regarding their impact
on fundamental freedoms and liberties, Belgium has no
special system of measures for individuals suspected or
found guilty of acts of terrorism.
There is no doubt that violations of fundamental
rights and freedoms create an environment that is a
breeding ground for terrorist activities; the rigorous

12-3930119

A/66/PV.118

protection of those rights therefore remains the key
element of Belgium’s strategy in countering terrorism.

States with the CTITF and the Centre, guided by their
individual needs.

Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I join others in
congratulating the Permanent Representative of Canada
on his outstanding efforts in facilitating consultations
and achieving a consensus draft resolution (A/66/L.53)
on the third review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to be adopted later today
at the conclusion of this debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report contained in document
A/66/762 on the activities and efforts of the United
Nations system in implementing the Strategy.

With a view to further enhancing transparency
and synergies in the United Nations counter-terrorism
architecture, we support the Secretary-General’s
proposal concerning the appointment of a
Counter-Terrorism coordinator and look forward to
further consideration of the idea in a timely manner.

Terrorism is a global scourge. It continues to be a
pervasive and insidious threat not only to international
peace and security, but also to the core values of the
United Nations. It is our firm conviction that no belief,
rationalization, political cause or argument can be used
to justify acts of terrorism. We condemn terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, irrespective of its
motivations, as criminal and unjustifiable and therefore
reiterate that no cause, no matter how seemingly just,
can excuse it.
The adoption of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006 (resolution 60/288)
was a landmark in the fight against terrorism. The
Strategy is a unique and universally agreed strategic
framework to counter terrorism and is intended to
play a pivotal role in guiding counter-terrorism efforts
undertaken at the global, regional, subregional and
national levels. We support the implementation of the
Strategy in a comprehensive and integrated manner in
all its four pillars.
The institutionalization of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) in 2009 and
the establishment in 2011 of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre within the CTITF are
important steps towards strengthening United Nations
efforts to counter terrorism by providing an umbrella
under which different United Nations entities can
effectively support the implementation of the Strategy
in a coordinated and coherent manner at the global,
regional and subregional levels. We are confident that
those steps will be helpful in streamlining the overall
work of the United Nations system in countering
terrorism. As the principal responsibility for the
implementation of the Strategy rests with Member
States, we hope that those steps will also provide a
useful platform for practical engagement by Member

20

My own country, India, has faced the scourge of
terrorism for over two-and-a-half decades. Indeed,
our entire region, South Asia, has been wracked
by the activities of the biggest terrorist actors in the
world, be they Al-Qaida, elements of the Taliban
or Lashkar-e-Toiba, Jamaat-ud-Dawa and others.
Speaking at the general debate of the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly (see A/66/PV.22),
our Prime Minister, Mr. Manmohan Singh, said that
the fight against terrorism must be unrelenting and
fought across all fronts, with no selective approaches
in dealing with terrorist groups or the infrastructure
of terrorism. Effectively combating this global scourge
requires the political will of Member States and
greater international and regional cooperation. It is
imperative that terrorists and their supporters know
that the international community is absolutely firm in
its resolve to counter terrorism.
I should like to recall that, on the tenth anniversary
of the establishment of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, a special meeting of the
Committee was held on 28 September 2011 in New
York. The outcome document adopted by the Committee
approved a zero-tolerance approach towards terrorism
that is now part of the United Nations counter-terrorism
lexicon. While combating terrorism, we need to adopt
a holistic approach that ensures zero-tolerance towards
terrorism. It goes without saying, and in fact it is
absolutely essential, that measures taken by States to
combat terrorism comply with all their obligations
under international law, in particular international
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law.
We need to impart greater momentum to efforts
made to bolster the ability of Member States to confront
the global menace through greater international and
regional cooperation and capacity-building efforts.
India strongly supports all efforts, especially within
the purview of the United Nations, that strengthen
international and regional cooperation in the fight

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

against terrorism, including efforts aimed at supporting
the implementation of the Strategy. I am happy to note
that that has been the focus of the third review of the
Strategy.
We must also continue to strengthen the normative
framework at the United Nations. The time has come
for the adoption of the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism that has been pending for a long
time. The comprehensive implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be enhanced with the
conclusion of the convention. The convention would also
plug loopholes in the international legal framework that
the United Nations has developed to counter terrorism.
As committed in the Strategy, Member States should
make every effort to reach an agreement on the text and
adopt the convention in order to unite behind the global
counter-terrorism efforts.
In conclusion, I wish to reassure the General
Assembly that India will continue to effectively
contribute to United Nations efforts in countering
terrorism and in supporting the implementation of the
Strategy at the international, regional, subregional and
national levels.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): In
expressing my support for the statement made on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
having organized today’s meeting on the third review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I
would also like to express my appreciation for the work
done by Mr. Rishchynski, Permanent Representative
of Canada, and his team to enable the adoption by
consensus of the draft resolution (A/66/L.53) at the end
of the third review.
The draft resolution has strengthened the positions
we had arrived at in our two previous reviews
concerning the important role of the General Assembly
in renewing and implementing the Strategy, interactions
among Member States and the Working Group in
the implementation of the Strategy, and ongoing
capacity-building to ensure the effective and balanced
expression of the four pillars of the Strategy.
For the first time, Member States have been able
to request programmes for the victims of terrorism and
to refer to the modern means of communication and
information used by terrorists, to terrorist abductions
and hostage-taking for ransom, and political concessions
to terrorists.

The third review provides an opportunity to assess
the progress made in the implementation of the three
pillars of the strategy and to exchange views on ways
and means to achieve progress commensurate with the
threats posed by terrorism to international peace and
security, which are intense, multiple and varied.
Morocco supports the conclusions of the
Secretary-General regarding the work of the United
Nations in the context of the implementation of the
Strategy and the good progress made in that respect.
However, we must redouble our efforts to combat the
increasing threat of terrorism, which is taking on many
new, concrete forms, at the national, regional and
international levels.
While we acknowledge the responsibility of States
in the implementation of the Strategy, we believe that
the United Nations represents the appropriate legal
and international framework for crafting adequate
responses to terrorism, strengthening coordination
and the harmonization of the implementation efforts of
States at the national, regional and international levels,
and lending assistance to Member States.
In that respect, the Working Group of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force plays
a pivotal role in the attainment of those objectives, in
cooperation with the the relevant organs of the United
Nations and other organizations.
The capacity of the United Nations has been
strengthened by the creation of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, and we trust that the legal
and international framework will be perfected so as
to enable the Centre to undertake its work. Member
States have great hopes for the Centre, despite the
fact that it has just been established, as do national
and international organizations and the governmental
and non-governmental organizations involved in the
combat against terrorism.
Morocco has from the very beginning taken
up a very clear, firm and principled position on the
combat against terrorism. In 1996 in the General
Assembly, Morocco stated that it would cooperate
at the international level in the combat against that
scourge and has shared its experience internationally
by means of the elaboration of a multidimensional and
comprehensive strategy that is in accordance with the
framework established by the United Nations.

12-3930121

A/66/PV.118

The Moroccan strategy takes into account the
initiatives undertaken to address political, social and
cultural factors that can strengthen extremist terrorist
ideology. Morocco strongly supports the tolerant
principles of Islam, the culture of dialogue, respect for
human rights, democracy and openness to civil society
in the implementation of its strategy. That approach is
in keeping with our firm belief that combating terrorism
at the national level must not end with the efforts of
Governments alone; civil society must participate also
and citizens must have an effective role to play in this
approach.
National endeavours, whatever they may be and
however effective they may prove, will never suffice
to counter terrorist activities at the international level,
particularly if account is taken of the conditions that
prevail at the regional and subregional conditions,
which can contribute to promoting terrorist activities,
given the profits that can be made from such organized
crime.
Here we wish to voice our concern at the upsurge
in terrorist activity in the Sahel region, in West Africa
and the Horn of Africa, and at the emergence of armed
separatist movements, trafficking in drugs, small
arms and human beings. Those conditions require
a comprehensive and resolute approach based on
solidarity, constructive dialogue and awareness of the
fact that security must be approached as an integrated
whole and with mutual responsibilities for all parties.
Efforts must be coordinated at the regional
level, and there must be intensive and unconditional
cooperation among the countries of the region so as to
devise a collective response on the part of all of the
region’s capacities, without exception or discrimination.
This must be done in cooperation with international
organizations and governmental and non-governmental
organizations that are responsible for combating
terrorism.
Morocco continues to intensify its efforts to
support international, regional and subregional
initiatives to promote cooperation and the exchange of
counter-terrorism expertise. In that respect, I should
like to underline Morocco’s effective participation
in the Global Counterterrorism Forum and in its five
working groups. We welcome the Forum’s adoption of
the Rabat declaration on best practices in the area of
criminal justice and on the establishment of national
penal systems that are based on the primacy of law as

22

concerns the extradition of criminals and mutual legal
assistance.
In the framework of cooperation in the area of
criminal justice, I welcome the convention on legal
cooperation among African francophone countries,
adopted at the fifth meting of the Ministers of Justice
of those countries.
At the regional level, we continue to support
initiatives aimed at strengthening the capacities of
African countries to combat security and terrorist
threats, as well as the cooperation being provided by
the Saharan and Sahel countries — which involves
28 African States – and welcome the meeting held in
Rabat this month aimed at the reorganization of that
cooperation to encompass the security and policy areas.
Morocco will soon host the second ministerial
meeting on border security in the countries of the Arab
Maghreb and the Sahel.
In conclusion, let me stress here that terrorism
knows no borders. It cannot be associated with
a particular civilization, ethnic group, culture or
religion, and that is why it is incumbent on us all to
strengthen our commitment and our cooperation in
order resolutely to combat the culture of extremism and
violence, whatever its origin and by whomsoever such
acts may be committed.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, and the facilitator of the discussions on the
draft resolution (A/66/L.53), Ambassador Guillermo
Rishchynski, Permanent Representative of Canada, on
the successful conclusion of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy review. We welcome the
draft resolution as a positive effort on the part of the
United Nations in the fight against terrorism. The
draft reaffirms the importance of the Strategy and its
four pillars as well as the central role of the General
Assembly in addressing the issue. Brazil played an
active role during the negotiations on the Strategy. I
would like to briefly comment on some of the aspects
of the present draft resolution.
While affirming the importance of an integrated,
balanced and comprehensive approach to the
implementation of the Strategy as a whole, Brazil
emphasized during the negotiations the importance
of redoubling efforts for a more balanced focus on the
implementation of pillars I and IV of the Strategy.

12-39301

A/66/PV.118

Brazil reaffirms its commitment to a coordinated
and multidimensional response to the challenges posed
by terrorism. The United Nations should be at the
forefront of those efforts. Addressing the root causes of
that scourge is of the essence. We believe that dealing
with the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism,
as stated in pillar I, is the best means to prevent the
recurrence of that phenomenon in the long term. As we
have emphasized on a number of occasions, prevention
is always the best policy.
It is our understanding that giving priority to
preventive aspects means tackling the underlying causes
of terrorist acts, many of which are fueled by situations
of social exclusion and injustice. It is also necessary to
promote democratic values and tolerance — political,
ethnic and religious — along with cooperation for
social and economic development.
Ensuring respect for human rights for all and the
rule of law, as stated in pillar IV, is crucial and must be
the basis of the fight against terrorism. In that context,
I would like to recall what Mr. Ben Emmerson, Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism, said last September during the Symposium on
International Counter-Terrorism Cooperation promoted
by the Secretary-General:
“What makes this area so complex, and so difficult,
is the ever-present danger that some States, including
States with a proud record of respect for the rule of
law, have been willing at times to abandon those
core values on the pretext of defending them.”
We recognize the need to enhance the role the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force plays
in the fight against terrorism, and we supported the
creation of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre. The Centre, established under the aegis of
the United Nations, has the potential to strengthen
the efforts to counter terrorism through increased
cooperation among Member States.
Brazil favoured the inclusion of a paragraph that
highlights the need to support the victims of terrorism.
The paragraph approved as consensual language is a
positive and action-oriented approach in that regard. We
are also pleased that the draft resolution reaffirms the
principal responsibility of Member States to implement
the Strategy. It recognizes the role that the United

Nations plays in that context and acknowledges the
importance of coordination and coherence with other
international, regional and subregional organizations at
all levels.
Brazil shares the view that the regional and
subregional dimensions are also essential in the fight
against terrorism. At the regional level, the Southern
Cone Common Market has established a specialized
forum on terrorism in the context of the meetings of
the Ministers of the Interior. The forum evaluates and
proposes joint intelligence and operational activities
against terrorism. In our hemisphere, within the
Organization of American States, Brazil played an active
role in the negotiations that resulted in the adoption of
the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism in
June 2002. Moreover, Brazil takes part in the activities
of the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism.
Brazil stands ready to engage in a dialogue with
other regions and subregions to share experiences and
challenges in the fight against terrorism. Furthermore,
Brazil shares the firm belief that an effective fight
against terrorism depends on cooperation among States
in the promotion of policies aiming at prevention and
repression.
The draft resolution aptly calls upon all States
to make every effort to conclude a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. We believe that
it would be to the benefit of all to complement existing
instruments and ensure that, in tackling the terrorism
threat, a strengthened and comprehensive international
legal framework is put in place.
The third biennial review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is an opportunity
for us to reiterate that there are no excuses for terrorist
acts. Brazil has historically condemned terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. We are party to
all relevant international conventions and protocols
against terrorism and pledge once more to fully
support the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Repudiation of terrorism is enshrined in the
Brazilian Constitution as a fundamental principle of
our international relations.
We also believe that this review provides us with
a great opportunity to enhance our understanding of
the phenomenon of terrorism in all its complexity. We
should not lose sight of the fact that our main purpose
when fighting terrorism is to save innocent lives from

12-3930123

A/66/PV.118

that terrible scourge. If we invested our resources in
obtaining a deeper comprehension of its origins, we
would be able to make the world a safer place. We are
hopeful that the third biennial review of the Global

24

Strategy will seize the opportunity to shed light on
those important elements.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

12-39301
