UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/7
10 February 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3335th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 February 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The situation in
Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II)
(S/1994/100) submitted pursuant to resolution 890 (1993) of
15 December 1993.
"The Council commends the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the Chief Military Observer on their efforts to bring to
a successful conclusion the talks between the Government of Angola and
UNITA, currently taking place in Lusaka, with a view to reaching an
effective and sustainable settlement of the conflict, within the framework
of the "Acordos de Paz" and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. The Council also commends the efforts of the three observer
States to the Angolan peace process and those of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and of neighbouring States in support of the Lusaka
talks, and encourages them to continue these efforts.
"The Council notes the progress made to date in the Lusaka talks, in
particular the adoption of the general and specific principles, as well as
the modalities, relating to all the military and police issues on the
agenda. The Council calls upon the parties to renew their commitment to a
peaceful settlement. It demands that they redouble their efforts in the
Lusaka talks, with the aim of urgently attaining an effective and
sustainable cease-fire and completing work on the remaining points on the
agenda and concluding a peaceful settlement without procrastination.
"The Council is deeply concerned at the intensification of hostilities
and, in particular, at the recent outbreak of serious military activity at
several locations in Angola, particularly at Kuito-Bie. It deplores the
great loss of life and destruction of property.

94-07524 (E)

100294

/...

S/PRST/1994/7
English
Page 2

"The Council stresses that the only way to achieve an effective,
verifiable and sustainable cease-fire is for the parties to conclude and
sign a comprehensive peace agreement. It calls upon them to honour the
commitments they have already voluntarily agreed to in Lusaka, to exercise
maximum restraint, to stop immediately all offensive military actions, and
to commit themselves to the urgent conclusion of the Lusaka talks.
"The Council welcomes the improvement in the delivery of humanitarian
relief assistance to the affected population in Angola, while acknowledging
that the overall situation remains serious. It urges the parties to
continue to cooperate with the United Nations agencies and the
non-governmental organizations in ensuring the unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian relief supplies and the necessary security for its efficient
distribution. It calls upon the international community to contribute
generously to humanitarian aid efforts in Angola.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep it
informed on a timely basis of developments in the Lusaka peace talks. It
reaffirms its readiness to consider promptly any recommendations from the
Secretary-General once an agreement has been concluded between the parties.
It also reaffirms its readiness to consider further action in accordance
with its previous resolutions.
"The Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
