S/PV.7898

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7898th meeting

Wednesday, 15 March 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mrs. Hambisa
Ms. Rossignol
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Ms. Abylkassymova
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Regnér
Mr. Kyslytsya
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations: forced labour, slavery and other
similar practices
Letter dated 7 March 2017 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2017/198)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-06630 (E)
*1706630*

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations:
forced labour, slavery and other similar practices
Letter dated 7 March 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/198)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council Chamber.
Their presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion. I would particularly
like to thank the Secretary-General, all our briefers,
all of our Ministers and all other speakers for their
flexibility as we had to move the debate from yesterday
to today because of the snowstorm. I am also extremely
grateful to the Secretariat and to my own team for their
innovative planning.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Colombia, Côte D’Ivoire,
the Czech Republic, Djibouti, Estonia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, South Africa,
Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey,
Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; Ms. Ilwad Elman, of the
Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre; and Mr. Kevin
Hyland, Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner of
the United Kingdom.
2/78

15/03/2017

Mr. Fedotov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Vienna, and Ms. Elman is joining
via video-teleconference from Mogadishu.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations; Ms. Urmila Bhoola, United Nations
Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Slavery,
including its Causes and Consequences; Her Excellency
Ms. Madina Jarbussynova, Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Representative
and Coordinator for Combating Trafficking in Human
Beings; His Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations; Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special
Representative of the INTERPOL to the United
Nations; Mr. Houtan Homayounpour, Senior Forced
Labour Specialist, International Labour Organization;
and Mr. Ashraf El Nour, Director, of the International
Maritime Organization Office to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/198, which contains a letter dated
7 March 2017 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I thank the United
Kingdom for convening this meeting, which builds
on last December’s adoption of the far-reaching
resolution 2331 (2016), targeting human trafficking
in conflict situations. Allow me to start with a short
personal reflection.
I come from a country that, for centuries, engaged
in the cruel trade in human beings. It is part of our
history that we will never allowed to be forgotten. Of
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7898

course, Portugal ultimately outlawed slavery in the
nineteenth century, and a global norm against it has
now long been in place. Indeed, the very conscience
of the United Nations was shaped by that disgraceful
violation of human dignity.

labour trafficking. Terrorists and violent extremists
use sexual enslavement as a tool for recruitment. Drug
traffickers use kidnapping and ransom to finance their
operations, and criminal gangs force unaccompanied
children into a life of petty crime.

I wish that I could say that human trafficking is a
thing of the past. Unfortunately, that is not the case.
Trafficking networks have gone global. According
to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), victims can be found in 106 countries.
The International Labour Organization (ILO) reports
that 21 million people around the world are victims of
forced labour and extreme exploitation. Annual profits
are estimated to be $150 billion. Beyond these numbers
is the human toll: the lives cut short, the families and
societies torn apart, and the gross violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law.

Moreover, impunity prevails. According to the
UNODC December 2016 Global Report on Trafficking
in Persons, there are hardly any convictions for crimes
related to human trafficking in conflict situations
or elsewhere. The lack of aggressive investigations
and prosecutions only adds to the injustice, allows
perpetrators to function without fear, fuels corruption
and creates widespread disillusion. Allow me to make
another personal reflection in that regard.

Human trafficking takes many forms. Women and
girls in particular are targeted again and again and
again. We see brutal sexual exploitation, including
forced prostitution, forced marriage and sexual slavery.
We see the appalling trade in human organs. Let us also
remember that modern manifestations of servitude may
touch and even implicate us all. Global supply chains
have transformed many lives for the better, but not
always without cost. In some situations, clothes, food,
smartphones, jewelry and other consumer goods may
bear, wittingly or unwittingly, the traces of exploitation.
Gleaming new skyscrapers may owe some of their shine
to the sweat of bonded laborers.

I remember that when I worked in Government,
I never expected my two children to be victims of
trafficking, but I always was afraid of the impact
of drugs on their lives. I think that is the same with
most political leaders around the world. Most political
leaders around are afraid of the impact of drugs on
their families, but they do not think it likely that their
families will be impact by human trafficking. That
is probably why we have seen much greater priority
given to fighting drug traffickers than to fighting the
traffickers of human beings. Of course, drug trafficking
is an awful crime, but to traffic in human beings is, I
must, much worse. I believe that it is our duty to really
commit ourselves to doing everything we can to make
this a clear priority for all Governments and in all forms
of international cooperation.

Human trafficking thrives where the rule of law
is weak or non-existent. Situations of armed conflict
are especially virulent breeding grounds for human
trafficking. In some of today’s conflicts, we are
confronted by armed groups that not only openly engage
in enslavement and forced labour, but actually argue that
it is legal. In Syria, Da’esh has organized slave markets
and even published manuals instructing its fighters on
how to capture, control and trade enslaved women and
girls. The leaders of Boko Haram have also argued that
slavery is legal. In other conflicts, other groups force
men, women and children under their control to labour
in unsafe mines, as porters and domestic servants, and
on the frontlines.

There is much that we can do both to punish human
trafficking and to prevent it in the first place. A solid
legal and normative framework is in place, including
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol against Trafficking in
Persons, which includes the first internationally agreed
definition of the crime of trafficking in persons and
provides a framework for effectively preventing and
combatting it. ILO conventions and the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons complement
the Protocol, and are further key parts of the picture. All
of these build on the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Under the under the Rome Statue, enslavement
can constitute a crime against humanity.

Fleeing these threats, refugees and displaced people
confront new ones. As people take to the road, predators
take advantage. Smugglers often coerce and manipulate
individuals for profit and make them victims of sex or

United Nations military and civilian personnel
must also be held accountable to these standards. I
continue to take steps to strengthen our efforts to
prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and abuse

17-066303/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

committed under the United Nations flag. Since human
trafficking does not respect borders, Member States
need to strengthen cooperation on law enforcement,
investigations and intelligence-sharing. We also need
to strengthen coordination among Member States,
civil society, the business community and United
Nations entities, including through the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group Against Trafficking in Persons.
At the same time, we need to get at the underlying
vulnerabilities that fuel this phenomenon, for example
by empowering girls through education, by respecting
the rights of minorities and by establishing safe and
legal channels of migration.
The 2030 Agenda for sustainable Development can
also help us break the chains of exploitation. Three
of the goals explicitly address human trafficking,
including sex trafficking, forced labour, child labour
and the recruitment and use of child soldiers. As we
engage the private sector as a key partner in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals, we need to ensure
it takes greater responsibility when sourcing from
conflict areas. Better data will be crucial. Funding
is critical. The United Nations is also committed
not only to supporting victims, but to incorporating
their voices and views as we develop and implement
anti-trafficking interventions.
Finally, at a time of divisions in so many areas,
this should be an issue that can unite us. Let us
come together around the key issues of prosecution,
protection and prevention, and thereby build a future
without human trafficking.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his powerful briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: My thanks go to the Security
Council and to the United Kingdom presidency for their
unflagging attention to the crime of human trafficking
in conflict situations.
We continue to witness criminals and terrorists
exploiting instability and vulnerability. As the
Secretary-General has just observed, human trafficking
thrives where the rule of law is weak or non-existent.
Armed groups are engaging in human trafficking,
capturing and coercing young girls and boys into sexual
slavery or to be used as child soldiers. Organized-crime
networks are preying on the many thousands of people
on the move.
4/78

15/03/2017

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) 2016 Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons confirms that migrants from countries with a
high level of organized crime, or that are affected by
conflicts, are more vulnerable to trafficking, as well
as violence, abuse and other forms of exploitation. As
conflict displaces countless people, as the rule of law
breaks down and as cooperation between countries
falters, criminals see a clear business opportunity. For
organized crime networks, human trafficking is a lowrisk, high-reward criminal business — a perception
that is reinforced by the inexcusably low conviction
rates still reported around the world. States can, and
must, do more to prevent people from falling victim
to traffickers. To protect those exploited, and to hold
criminals to account, they could take some concrete,
immediate steps.
First, there is a clear need to make the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocol against Trafficking in Persons more
operational. That means developing comprehensive
legal frameworks to encourage and facilitate crossborder cooperation and responses to human trafficking
and the organized crime that perpetuates it. It also
means putting in place a mechanism that would allow
for a review of the implementation of the Convention
and its Protocols.
Secondly, some countries’ national laws may
apply to the actions of their citizens abroad, including
in conflict zones, which could be used to bring
perpetrators to justice.
Thirdly, anti-trafficking laws should not only
criminalize trafficking but also provide for the
protection and support of victims.
Fourthly, countries must devote more resources
to identifying and assisting victims, tailored to the
challenges of conflict zones and large movements of
refugees and migrants.
Fifthly, we must continue building capacities
to improve criminal justice responses and action to
detect, investigate and successfully prosecute cases of
human trafficking.
In October, Member States will appraise the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
which the Secretary-General mentioned and which
the General Assembly adopted in 2010 to support
the implementation of the Protocol and to coordinate
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

national responses. That event offers a chance to
discuss and advance efforts against trafficking in
conflict situations, and I hope members will take
advantage of that opportunity. I also hope that Member
States, the private sector and all those concerned will
help us provide a much higher level of direct assistance
through the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, a facility that was established under the
Global Plan of Action.
As always, UNODC remains engaged in supporting
members to improve responses to human trafficking.
We are assisting with the identification and protection
of trafficking victims among refugees and displaced
persons. We are helping to build capacities to disrupt
organized crime and terrorist groups, including
through intelligence sharing, financial investigations
and coordination within and across borders. We are
working with our United Nations partners, including
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to
mainstream responses to human trafficking in efforts
to address the conflict cycle. Furthermore, UNODC
is seeking to strengthen United Nations coordination
through the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons. UNODC and its partners will
hold a Group briefing to Member States in New York on
Friday, which I hope members will attend.
Clearly, international responses to human
trafficking continue to fall short, and we cannot accept
the status quo. The best way we can swiftly improve
action against trafficking and protect the vulnerable is
to fully implement and make use of the frameworks we
have worked so hard to build and more effectively deploy
the tools we have painstakingly crafted to confront
human trafficking in all its forms. As the SecretaryGeneral has so eloquently said, this is an issue that can,
and should, unite us. The Security Council’s continued
support for our work is essential.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Elman.
Ms. Elman: The scale of human trafficking in
Somalia is devastating. What is even more disturbing
is that, despite the widespread systemic enslavement
of people, it is not constituted as a crime against a
person or a crime against humanity in my country.
Rather, it is normalized by virtue of circumstance.
Forced labour in conflict is rarely viewed as slavery,
and it is the selective understanding of modern slavery

S/PV.7898

is that creates space for this crime to thrive, and why
it continues to remain low on the priority list during
humanitarian crises globally.
The world is facing the largest humanitarian crisis
right now, with more than 20 million people, in four
countries, at risk of starvation, Somalia being one
of them. On the heels of a recent visit to Somalia by
the Secretary-General, who called for urgent and
immediate action to alleviate the situation, we note that
there is a very high probability of a recurrence of the
famine that caused more than 260,000 people to starve
to death across the country in 2011. I am afraid we have
not learned much since then. We did not prepare and we
did not plan. And so here we are again.
In the same way that we were blind to the signs of
a drought and famine unfolding before us, we are still
blind to what undignified contexts of such desperation
do to the affected population. In 2011, the majority
of those whom my organization was assisting were
internally displaced persons (IDPs) living in hovels
in makeshift camps in Mogadishu and its outskirts,
primarily women with children in tow, or child-headed
households — people who had tracked by foot for days
to make it to the capital in order to receive some sort
of humanitarian aid. On arrival and on route, they
were sexually abused, tortured and extorted for what
little they had in their possession. Some of their family
members never made it, as they died along the way.
Within the IDP camps in Mogadishu, sexual abuse
became rampant, and a culture of impunity created
opportunities for it to remain so. Women and girls
were forced into transactional labour, such as sex for
food, sex for medical aid, sex for protection and sex
to pass checkpoints and to reach distribution sites. A
14-year-old refugee from Yemen who ended up in an
IDP camp in Mogadishu, along with her elderly father
and younger siblings, is currently staying at one of our
safe houses after escaping a forced marriage — one that
was offered as a solution to the extreme poverty her
family was living in. Her small dowry, of $20, became
a lifeline for the rest of the family. She did not leave
her family to be a wife, she became a sex slave. The
house became a brothel. For three months, her father
received $20 from the man he gave her to, without any
contact with his daughter. He did not know that the man
was charging other men to have sex with his daughter,
or that the money he was receiving was a product of
her enslavement. The abuse continued for nine months
before she escaped. Human trafficking is severely

17-066305/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

exacerbated in situations of conflict and extremist
groups like Al-Shabaab, Da’esh and Boko Haram
survive off of the forced labour, domestic servitude
and sexual slavery they inflict on the civilians living in
chaos of conflict.
Last month at the General Assembly here in New
York I commemorated the twentieth anniversary of
the children-in-armed conflict mandate. I spoke about
what has been achieved in the past two decades. Last
week I met with a father of one of the children in
our programme with whom we were planning an exit
strategy for his son. His son was forcibly recruited by
Al-Shabaab and, after being apprehended by security
forces on front lines, he was handed over to our care
and placed in our programme for children disassociated
from armed groups. His son has been with us for nearly
a year now. His father begged us to keep his son safe
because, just days prior to our meeting, Al-Shabaab
militants went to his home and demanded that he hand
over his remaining, 10-year-old, son. When the father
appealed to keep his son, he was told that he would
have to either hand over his son, supply them with
arms or pay a monthly fee of $30. What options but to
provide labour to terrorists or criminal organizations
do communities living in the mix of disaster, extreme
poverty, oppression and conflict have? The father is
living in conditions of slavery in which he has been
forced to service the armed group in order to save
his son.
The same children who are forced into armed
groups and manage to escape and surrender to
Government security forces are then forced into labour
again, only to be used as informants by Government
security forces. All parties to the conflict in Somalia
are guilty of forced labour and enslavement in some
way. Through my work with survivors of sexual and
gender based violence, I know that women and girls, as
it relates to human trafficking in conflict, are primarily
viewed as victims — the spoils of war given the forced
temporary marriage, sexual slavery, impregnation by
militants and abandonment or ostracizing from their
communities, which are all too rampant. This has
introduced many gender-specific constraints in the
reintegration process for women and girls when the
conflict subsides.
Another role that women play in human trafficking
that is often overlooked is that of perpetrators,
organizers and mobilizers of trafficking. We have
worked on exposing numerous small organized
6/78

15/03/2017

operations led by women who prey on the most
destitute segments of society — such as those living
in IDP camps — and go to IDP communities with the
promise of employment, food, clothing and anything
else to draw in the desperate. The most worrisome part
of human trafficking in Somalia is that, because of the
conflict, people are not even aware of the real risk and
how to protect themselves and their children from it.
Because of weak governance, the south and central
regions of Somalia are now used as transit routes
for international trafficking, while other parts of the
country are regions of destination, transit and origin
for victims of international human trafficking, as well
as local trafficking between the regions.
Local trafficking and forced labour mostly affect
women and girls in Somalia in the domestic work sector.
The victims are mainly women and young children,
and most are trafficked for domestic work, forced
prostitution and, as recent reports indicate, even organ
removal. Conflict and insecurity breed desperation,
and traffickers present themselves as a ticket out of
all of that. Dismantling the operations of trafficking
networks has been mostly unsuccessful in Somalia,
with the majority of interventions focused on rescue,
negotiations of release and reactionary approaches,
as opposed to prevention. Yet organized networks are
accessible. Their contact persons are traceable, and a
testament to how a 17-year-old boy or a 16-year-old girl
knows exactly who to reach and can find a way to get
out of Somalia through a perilous journey facilitated by
a trafficker who takes them via the sea and to Libya with
the promise of reaching Europe or elsewhere one day.
The information is there but the intent, resources
and the strategy for ending human trafficking
in conflict have not been at an adequate level.
Communities are not informed well enough to know
that traffickers masquerading as employment prospects
are leading them down a fatal path. More often than
not, those who were forced into sexual slavery are left
with false promises of employment abroad and then
further exploited for debt bondage and other forced
labour. Very recently, that has also extended to include
military service.
I urge the Security Council and its members to use
the authority and legitimacy of the Council to denounce
human trafficking in conflict, reinforce global norms
against it, counter the emerging narrative that normalizes
slavery in conflict and promote accountability. I urge the
Security Council and its members to report on efforts to
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

better implement existing mechanisms for countering
trafficking in persons in general, not limiting it only to
conflict. Finally, I conclude by emphasizing the need to
strengthen the capacity of the relevant officials likely to
encounter and identify possible victims of trafficking
in persons, which includes civil society organizations
at the grassroots level.
The President: I thank Ms. Elman for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hyland.
Mr. Hyland: As the United Kingdom’s first
appointed Independent Anti-slavery Commissioner,
my role is to spearhead the United Kingdom’s efforts
to tackle modern slavery, both domestically and
internationally. We are here today in recognition of the
fact that conflict has become a major driver of modern
slavery across the globe. Terrorist organizations
openly advocate slavery as a tactic of war. Da’esh has
targeted minority groups for forced labour and sexual
exploitation. It has established slave markets where
women and children are sold with a price tag attached.
Conflict also produces an environment that enables
modern slavery to flourish. Erosion of the rule of
law enables transnational trafficking networks to act
with impunity. Conflict results in the displacement
of vulnerable people who are then targeted by the
traffickers. The wars in Syria, Afghanistan and
Somalia alone are responsible for more than half the
world’s refugees. The number of displaced people has
risen to 65 million, the largest figure ever recorded.
Men, women and children fleeing conflict are
extremely vulnerable to numerous forms of modern
slavery, including sexual exploitation, forced labour
and even organ trafficking. The European Police
Office has confirmed that traffickers are increasingly
targeting refugees in the European Union. Nearly
half of all refugees are children, many of whom are
unaccompanied, and therefore especially vulnerable.
I met Sarah, a 15-year-old Eritrean girl, at a
reception camp in Lampedusa. Sarah had been
kidnapped and held for three months in Libya in a
so-called connection house, where she was sexually
exploited multiple times every day. In October last year,
the International Organization for Migration reported
that over 70 per cent of all migrants moving from
North Africa to Europe had experienced exploitation
and human trafficking, mainly in Libya. A modern-day
slave trade is now booming in Libya. Political, military

S/PV.7898

and social conditions have created an environment
where traffickers have thrived.
Militias are subjecting migrants to forced labour
and sexual exploitation in detention centres until they
pay off a ransom to allow passage to Europe. Those
centres are forced labour camps, set up to profit from the
organized exploitation of migrants. Long-established
transnational organized crime groups are also using
power vacuums caused by conflict to increase their
trafficking operations. For example, for decades,
transnational traffickers have operated in southern
Nigeria, deceiving victims with false promises of better
lives in Europe. But what was a trickle has now become
a flow. Such criminals are taking advantage of conflict
and instability in the Lake Chad basin and Libya and
have massively scaled up their trafficking operations
by utilizing those now-ungoverned routes.
In 2016, just over 11,000 Nigerian women arrived
in Italy from Libya. That is as an eightfold increase
from the numbers arriving in 2014. The International
Organization for Migration believes that 80 per cent
are trafficking victims destined for brothels across
Europe. I have visited Edo state, the main region where
traffickers source their victims. This trafficking is
especially brutal in nature. Women who insist they will
not work as prostitutes are tied up in a position called
“the crocodile”. Their hands are tied to their feet and
they are left for days without food or water. Some are
left to die as an example to others. The Government
of the United Kingdom recently announced at least
£5 million aimed at work in partnership with Nigeria to
help tackle this trafficking at the source.
Prime Minister Theresa May has committed the
United Kingdom to international leadership in combating
modern slavery. Unless those behind the trade in human
lives are pursued and punished, vulnerable people will
continue to be sourced, used, abused and replaced,
and be treated as mere commodities. I therefore urge
international organizations and Member States, and
in particular the law-enforcement and intelligence
agencies, to prioritize efforts to strengthen crossborder collaboration aimed at investigating, disrupting
and dismantling human-trafficking networks that are
profiting from conflict and human suffering.
We need high-profile convictions of the organizers
of trafficking in order that that can serve as a deterrent to
others. That can be achieved through the increased use of
joint investigation teams, multilateral prosecutions and

17-066307/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

data- and intelligence-sharing. We need to get smarter
at debriefing victims and sensitively sharing that
information with law-enforcement and victim-support
agencies so as to inform efforts aimed at disruption and
protection. All of the Nigerian survivors whom I met
wanted to tell me about the identities, tactics and routes
of the traffickers. Unfortunately, that information is not
being routinely collected, analysed or acted on. Much
more must be done to protect the vulnerable.
I strongly welcome resolution 2331 (2016), which
calls for the systematic integration of proactive responses
against slavery and trafficking into humanitarian
responses to conflicts and related emergencies. This is
urgent. On visits to reception centres I witnessed how
the current absence of integrated protection is resulting
in potential victims not being identified. Traffickers
view refugee camps as a rich source of new victims.
I have seen the positive impact that the deployment
of dedicated experts can have, including cultural
mediators. But, unfortunately, at present that is the
exception rather than the norm. I would also encourage
suitable training for all United Nations peacekeepers,
as they will often be operating across routes known to
be used by traffickers, especially in places such as Mali
and the Sudan.
We need a more strategic and holistic response.
Tackling the traffickers and protecting the vulnerable
will only be achieved by utilizing all of the levers
at the international community’s disposal. That
means deploying the United Nations leverage
through development and humanitarian efforts,
criminal-justice capacity-building, political work and
peacekeeping operations.
The integration of the fight against modern slavery
into the Sustainable Development Goals — and Goal
8.7 in particular — reflects the commitment of Member
States to holistically tackle this crime. I very much
welcome the Secretary-General’s leadership on this
issue, and I know he will be reporting at the end of the
year on the implementation of resolution 2331 (2016).
Until there is a more strategic international
response, there can be no doubt that this modern
slavery crisis, fuelled by global conflict, will only get
worse with each passing day. Working across borders,
traffickers are making huge profits at the expense of
human suffering. The international community must
act now.
The President: I thank Mr. Hyland for his briefing.
8/78

15/03/2017

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council. I remind them that they each have
five minutes to make their statement.
I give the floor the Minister of Families, Children
and Women’s Rights of France.
Ms. Rossignol (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kevin Hyland, Mr. Yury Fedotov and Ms. Ilwad
Elman for their briefings.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
The actions committed by Da’esh in the Middle
East and by Boko Haram in Africa are a dramatic
illustration of the links that exist today between
threats to international peace and security and human
trafficking. At the global level, trafficking in persons
and trafficking in drugs and counterfeit currency are
among the most profitable. Their annual profits are
estimated at $32 billion. It is one of the most extensive
forms of trafficking. Sexual exploitation, forced
labour, servitude, kidnapping for forced prostitution,
rape — the list of atrocities committed in armed
conflict is, unfortunately, long. Deriving profits from
human beings and considering them as merchandise,
the traffickers, as well as consumers and users and
the clients of sexual exploitation, clearly and brutally
violate their victims’ human rights and further stoke
the causes of conflict.
The international community has invested heavily
in this problem since the beginning of this century,
but further efforts are needed in order to address the
scourge of human trafficking. I therefore welcome the
initiative of the United Kingdom during its presidency
of the Security Council and thank that country for
giving us this opportunity to have an exchange on this
very important subject.
For France, the issue of trafficking in human beings
and slavery, especially that of women and children, is
of major importance. The statistics are, unfortunately,
well known, but we must constantly point them out:
80 per cent of the victims of trafficking are women
and children. The challenges are also well known:
the identification of victims is still in its infancy, and
organized mechanisms for fighting this scourge vary
greatly between countries. Despite progress since the
entry into force of the Palermo Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Women and Children, still too few prosecutions have
been initiated in cases involving the crime of human
trafficking. The victims themselves do not always assert
their rights and very often are insufficiently protected.
In that context, international cooperation must be
stepped up so as to increase the geographic coverage
of the legislation providing effective protection against
networks and to improve international cooperation
aimed at dismantling those networks. Prevention,
protection and the fight against impunity are the three
priorities of French diplomacy in the fight against
trafficking in human beings.
Since human trafficking is now an integral part
of the strategy of certain terrorist groups and it fuels
transnational organized crime, the Security Council
has a special responsibility in combating this scourge.
The adoption of resolution 2331 (2016), last December,
at the initiative of Spain, was a major step forward
towards better addressing the link between trafficking
in human beings, sexual violence and terrorism. France
very much looks forward to the report to be prepared by
the Secretary-General by the end of the year.
We have in place a robust international legal
framework and appropriate tools, in particular the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which is doing
sterling work in this field.
On International Women’s Rights Day, the President
of the French Republic also announced that France
would propose an additional protocol to the Convention
for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. That protocol would address violence
against women in order to complement the existing
international framework. But we must ensure that
the obligations arising from that legal framework are
effectively implemented. Our words must now be
translated into action.
Rest assured, Mr President, that France will
continue to play its full part in those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Women and Children’s Affairs of Ethiopia.
Mrs. Hambisa (Ethiopia): Allow me, first of all,
to express my appreciation to the presidency of the
United Kingdom for organizing this high-level debate
on trafficking in persons in conflict situations. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Guterres and the

S/PV.7898

other briefers for their presentations on the theme of
our debate today.
Ethiopia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
It is only appropriate that we are discussing this
important issue at a time when the sixty-first session of
the Commission on the Status of Women is taking place
here at Headquarters. It is indeed women, children and
refugees who are the most vulnerable victims of human
trafficking in conflict situations. As the concept note
(S/2017/198, annex) rightly points out, this scourge is
imposed on women and children through early and
forced marriage, exploitative domestic work, sexual
violence and other similar practices.
Whether it is Boko Haram in Nigeria, Al-Qaida
in the Maghreb or Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da’esh in Syria and Iraq, various criminal
networks and terrorist groups are, without any doubt,
involved in this transnational organized crime. Many
Africans, including women and children escaping
from persecution and/or searching for a better life in
Europe and the Middle East, are falling victims to
those terrorists and criminals. Kidnapping for ransom
has become a typical means of exploitation, and some
of these terrorists and criminals are becoming more
and more adept at using the latest information and
communication technologies, including mobile moneytransfer systems, in order to collect ransoms and
coordinate their criminal activities.
The gruesome stories of the victims and their
trauma, torture and death at the hands of these
terrorists and criminals are a stark reminder to us of
the need to address this challenge individually and
collectively. Putting in place the right policy, legislative
and institutional framework at the national level and
enhancing awareness of human trafficking and victim
protection and assistance is absolutely imperative. It is
in this context that we in Ethiopia have been trying to
take various measures to prevent and fight trafficking
in persons, including by ratifying relevant legal
frameworks, such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children.
Aside from what each of us can and must do at the
national level, however, there is certainly a need to

17-066309/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

15/03/2017

enhance bilateral and multilateral cooperation among
countries of origin, transit and destination regarding
the identification of, assistanceto and the protection,
repatriation and reintegration of victims of human
trafficking. That is why, for instance, instruments such
as the Ouagadougou Action Plan to Combat Trafficking
in Human Beings, Especially Women and Children,
agreed between the African Union and the European
Union, are important. We also take note of the
cooperation at the subregional level, such as through the
Khartoum and Rabat, processes to address trafficking
in human beings and the smuggling of migrants.

the United Kingdom on organizing this ministerial
open debate.

In this regard, what we would like to highlight is the
need to provide increased humanitarian and development
support to refugee-hosting countries, transit countries
and countries of origin in the light of the enormous
challenges they face. Recent reports indicate that
refugees, including unaccompanied minors, continue to
engage in a dangerous secondary movement in search
of a better life in Europe and elsewhere. That increases
the risk of these refugees falling into the hands of
terrorists, armed groups and trafficking networks. That
is why the support of the international community in
strengthening the protection and assistance capacities
of large refugee-hosting countries, particularly in the
area of the livelihoods and self-reliance of encamped
and urban refugees, is critical. The expanded use of
resettlement as a tool for international protection of the
most vulnerable refugees should also be encouraged.

Human trafficking and various forms of slavery
are flourishing. This is due to ongoing conflicts and
massive displacement of civilian populations, such as
the situation in the Lake Chad basin region, which the
Council visited two weeks ago. It flourishes because
there are those ready to cruelly exploit others in
desperate situations. The most effective way to end
human trafficking is to address its root causes. The
root cause is demand. For example, should there be
no persons — the majority of them men — ready to
buy sexual services ,there would be no trafficking for
sexual exploitation.

Finally, the lack of durable solutions to internally
displaced persons and refugees, particularly women
and children, no doubt increases their vulnerability
to trafficking in persons. Therefore, what would
eventually make a big difference in the fight against
trafficking in persons is addressing the root causes of
conflict. It is in this context that the role of the Council
becomes much more relevant and significant.

Today’s debate is important for many reasons. First,
we need to ensure that this issue remains on the global
agenda. Today’s discussion builds on the momentum
created under the Spanish presidency of the Council.
Secondly, we need to move forward with actions in
line with resolution 2331 (2016). Finally, trafficking
in persons is a transnational threat that requires a
transnational response. The United Nations provides a
unique forum for achieving this goal.

Another root cause, of course, is conflict and
displacement. We need to prevent them, as we heard
not least in the excellent briefing on Somalia. We
have to prevent them before they occur, and we have
to invest in equitable sustainable development for
all. These are important measures to combat human
trafficking. Existing international obligations relating
to human trafficking and forced labour must also be
fully implemented.

Ms. Regnér (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with
the statements to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and the representative of Norway, on
behalf of the Nordic countries.

The Council has an important role to play in
prevention, including through the sustaining peace
agenda. In addition, peace operations mandated by
the Council must see the role that organized criminal
groups, as well as terrorist groups, play in perpetuating
the unstable situations and conflicts that lead to human
trafficking, and in human trafficking itself. Working on
the ground to create accountable and effective security
sector institutions can enhance the capacity of Member
States to address these groups.

Combating brutal human rights violations by
trafficking in persons must be a priority for us all. It is
our common responsibility. Sweden remains strongly
committed to eradicating all forms of trafficking
in persons. We would therefore like to congratulate

As the Secretary-General has previously reported,
there is a clear nexus between conflict- and postconflict-related sexual violence and human trafficking,
such as sexual slavery, forced labour and organ
removal. The list is long. I will, however, focus on

The President: I now call on the Minister for
Children, the Elderly and Gender Equality of Sweden.

10/78

17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7898

sexual exploitation predominantly targeting women,
and girls and boys.

experiences and solutions are brought to the table.
Gender equality is about human rights.

The effects of trafficking for the purpose of sexual
exploitation are different from the harm caused by
trafficking for other forms of exploitation. Recognizing
that human trafficking has a clear gender dimension
is therefore essential. All actions against trafficking
should have a gender approach.

The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of the United States to the United
Nations and Member of President Trump’s Cabinet.

Sweden wants to stress the importance of not
creating legal markets for human traffickers. There is
an ongoing discussion within the United Nations and
elsewhere about whether prostitution should be viewed
as a profession. The term “sex worker” is often used in
these discussions. Swedish policy on this issue is clear.
Prostitution can never be regarded as a job; prostitution
is exploitation. Sweden urges more countries to consider
legislation that targets the person who buys sex and
offers support to the person being exploited, thereby
shifting the criminal focus and guilt from the person
being exploited to the exploiter. Knowledge about one’s
own rights, including about sexual and reproductive
health and rights, is crucial.
Another essential element is accountability in
conflict and post-conflict environments. Sweden
strongly supports the implementation of the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse.
As Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, we would also like to stress the
particularly vulnerable situation of children in this
regard, and also highlight the forced or compulsory
recruitment of children for use in armed conflicts as
one of the worst forms of child labour. Target 8.7 of the
Sustainable Development Goals asks us to eliminate
this and we need to keep a strong focus on achieving
this goal. We should also focus on Goal 5, on gender
equality, and on the other relevant Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Sweden is also
proud to be a pathfinder country in the United Nations
Global Partnership to End Violence against Children.
It is a critical initiative, and Sweden would like to urge
more countries to join it.
Finally, we must enable women and girls to make
decisions about their own bodies, lives and futures
in all contexts. We must engage more women both
in peacebuilding activities and in action against
trafficking. By implementing the agenda on women and
peace and security, we can ensure that women’s voices,

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for raising this
important issue, and the Secretary-General, Mr. Hyland,
Mr. Fedotov and Ms. Elman for their briefings and
forceful calls to end all forms of modern slavery. The
United States appreciates all of the work they have done
to help move us towards that goal.
Rama was looking for a better life. A young woman
in war-torn Syria, Rama was working in a café when
a man offered her a restaurant job in Lebanon with a
much higher salary. She jumped at the opportunity,
but instead of taking her to the well-paying job he had
promised, the man took Rama to a run-down brothel in
a slum. Over the next nine months, she was beaten and
forced into prostitution, one of as many as 75 women
caught up in one of Lebanon’s largest sex-trafficking
rings. As Rama told a reporter,
“We slept where we worked ... The windows were
painted black. We couldn’t see the light or breathe
the air outside.”
Describing her captor, the ringleader of the trafficking
operation, she said,
“It’s not that he made us feel like slaves. We were
actual slaves ... He beat me until I surrendered”.
Rama eventually escaped that horror, but she is
physically and emotionally shattered.
And Rama is not alone. Sadly, her experience is far
more common than most of us realize. An estimated
21 million people in more than 106 countries, including
countless children, have been reported trapped in
modern slavery. That is more than the population of
Romania. Those are people living in some of the most
horrifying conditions imaginable. We see children
forced to make bricks in Peru, or disentangle fishing
nets in Ghana, or who are sold into prostitution in SouthEast Asia. We see men held captive on fishing boats off
the coast of Thailand, and women trapped as domestic
workers in the Persian Gulf. No country is immune to
this crisis, and that includes the United States, where,
despite our efforts to combat human trafficking, too
many people are still falling victim to criminals who

17-0663011/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

force them into prostitution or other types of work, with
no pay and no way out.
This is not just an issue of human dignity, it can also
be one of peace and security. The groups responsible for
human trafficking are all too often the same ones that
send weapons and narcotics across our borders, or they
are terrorist organizations that finance their attacks
by smuggling desperate people. According to the
non-governmental organization Human Rights First,
traffickers earn an estimated $150 billion every year.
That is big money, and it is money that frequently ends
up supporting illegal activities that we all want to stop.
And the problem is only getting harder to solve. Today,
criminal gangs take advantage of technology to prey on
people, putting fake job ads online and reaching out on
social media to lure people into trafficking rings. When
criminals want to sell the people they have enslaved,
they can again turn to the Internet to find buyers more
easily and with less risk of detection. Law enforcement
often lacks the resources and training to enable it to
penetrate such online networks and find the people who
need help.
We must do better. Standing up to modern slavery
and forced labour is a core element of foreign policy.
It demonstrates our unwavering commitment to human
rights and to the fact that all people, regardless of
where they come from, have the right to life, liberty
and the pursuit of happiness. That is why, each year, the
United States Department of State produces a dedicated
report on trafficking in persons, along with an annual
human rights report, the latest of which has just been
released. Both reports reflect our ongoing commitment
to advancing human dignity. I would urge everyone
here to read them and act on their recommendations
for helping to promote accountability for violations
and abuses. A few weeks ago, President Trump made it
clear that his Administration will focus on ending the
horrific practice of human trafficking. Our Government
already has many people working on the problem, but
we will be devoting even more resources to the fight.
There are many proposals out there on how we
can help. Our briefers have already discussed several
important initiatives, including some within the United
Nations system, but I want to focus on just one new
effort. In the coming weeks, the Department of State
will launch an open and competitive process to fund
transformational projects aimed at reducing the
prevalence of modern slavery under a new initiative,
the Program to End Modern Slavery, which was
12/78

15/03/2017

recently signed into law, thanks in large part to the
tireless efforts of United States Senator Bob Corker.
The initiative will seek to raise $1.5 billion to help
countries break trafficking rings and support survivors.
The funding will come partly from the United States
Government, but unlike most assistance programmes,
it will seek to raise most of its money from partners
in foreign Governments and the private sector. That
is important, because ending modern slavery must be
a collective effort. The new initiative will also spend
its money on programmes that show results. Groups
that receive funding must set measurable goals and
target a 50 per cent reduction in modern slavery for
the population they will be working with. The United
States will lead in rallying donors to that new effort
and identifying innovative programmes that do the
most good.
We cannot forget that when we help people trapped
in modern slavery, we help restore human potential.
At the State Department, for example, we now have
an advisory council on human trafficking, with 11
members who help advise the federal Government
on improving anti-trafficking policies. Some of them
manage businesses, while others work in law firms
or have founded non-governmental organizations.
But what all 11 of them have in common is that they
themselves are survivors of human trafficking. They
now dedicate their time and energy to keeping others
from suffering. Their stories are a testament to what
every man, woman and child can achieve when they
escape the exploitation of modern slavery. We should
give all who are trapped the chance to live their lives
and live up to their potential. The United States is
determined to join with other Member States in order
to make those efforts successful.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We commend the United
Kingdom for convening today’s debate and keeping the
issue of trafficking in persons in conflict on the Security
Council’s agenda. We would also like to acknowledge
the contribution that the Spanish presidency of the
Security Council for December 2016 has made to the
discussion of the issue.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union,
and I would like to personally align myself with
everything that was said by my Swedish colleague,
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Minister Regnér. I particularly deplore the hypocrisy
and lip service that many Governments display with
regard to the plight of the women and girls who are
major victims of human trafficking. I urge that they
abandon such behaviour and get down to business.
The issue of human trafficking has been on the
radar of the United Nations for decades. However, in
recent years, we have seen a significant evolution in the
forms that trafficking in persons takes, especially in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Like the deadliest
kinds of viruses, some forms of trafficking mutate to
the extent that they become immune to the actions and
mechanisms that are in place but that lag behind the
crimes they are supposed to prevent.
Trafficking for purposes of sexual exploitation is
still the most widespread form of trafficking, and the
majority of its victims are women and girls. That is why
we need to think about a more gender-specific, targeted
approach in all actions against trafficking.
Another aspect of the issue is that persons
displaced by conflict, including refugees, can be
especially vulnerable to all kinds of exploitation. In
that regard, Ukraine fully supports the commitments in
the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants
to combatting human trafficking, including through
targeted measures to identify, protect and assist victims,
and to prevent human trafficking among those affected
by displacement, taking into account the particular
vulnerabilities of women and children.
Trafficking is a transnational threat that requires
a transnational response, including from this Council.
It is encouraging that the Council addressed this
issue in its December 2015 presidential statement
(S/PRST/2015/25) and adopted resolution 2331 (2016)
last December. We must build on that momentum. Both
the presidential statement and the resolution stressed
the need to ensure that trafficked persons are treated
as victims of crime and are not penalized for their
compelled involvement in the unlawful activities of
the perpetrators.
Widespread impunity is unacceptable because the
repetition of such crimes creates a vicious circle of
delinquency. Along with provision of psychological,
social and medical support to victims, we see the fight
against impunity as a key priority area.
Following on the statement of the SecretaryGeneral, I insist that human trafficking should be seen

S/PV.7898

as a threat to international security, at least equal to
trafficking in drugs and arms. For traffickers, human
beings are just a commodity that can be sold for profit.
The channels they use today for human trafficking may
be used tomorrow for arms smuggling or transporting
terrorists, if greater profit is promised The international
community should therefore unite its efforts to eliminate
those channels, treating them as a real danger.
The fight against this horrendous phenomenon
is at the top of the agenda of Ukrainian Government
activities in the field of human rights. In 1998, the
International Organization for Migration launched
the Counter-Trafficking Programme in Ukraine, with
a view to supporting Government and civil society
efforts to combat trafficking in human beings and to
ensure victims’ access to assistance and justice.
Over the past decade, Ukraine has made a number
of important steps towards the establishment of a
viable nationwide counter-trafficking response, setting
up a Government-owned national referral mechanism
to identify, assist and protect victims of trafficking.
Ukraine has acceded to the main international legal
instruments aimed at combating human trafficking and
now has a solid national legal framework to address
that disgraceful and dangerous phenomenon.
Let me note, however, that all of the aforementioned
documents currently cannot be properly implemented
in non-Government-controlled areas of Ukraine. As
Commissioner Hyland stated here today, conflict is the
major driver of modern slavery around the globe. Three
years of Russian aggression against Ukraine have
led to an increased risk of human trafficking in the
affected areas. We have already seen numerous cases
of human trafficking and forced labour — and even
slavery — in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions outside the control of the Government.
But those cases remain largely unaddressed due
to the lack of both safe access and proper attention by
monitoring missions, especially the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, UNICEF and
the International Committee of the Red Cross. It is
therefore important that those international presences
in Ukraine include the relevant activities in their
monitoring work in non-Government-controlled areas.
We also call on those organizations to provide relevant
training to field staff working there and to include all

17-0663013/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

15/03/2017

cases of human rights violations in that area in their
regular reporting.

States, which will enhance the effectiveness of the
response to the current challenges of human trafficking.

The situation is particularly complicated by the
400-kilometre section of the State border with the
Russian Federation that is out of Ukraine’s control
and is widely used for the inflow of weapons,
ammunition and fighters into the zone of conflict. The
victims and perpetrators of trafficking in persons are
also moving across that uncontrolled section of the
border. In that connection, we have to be aware that
Russia does not have comprehensive mechanisms for
effective investigation, prosecution and punishment
of perpetrators in accordance the Council of Europe
Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human
Beings. Today, of all member States of the Council
of Europe, only Russia has neither signed nor ratified
that Convention, which was opened for signature and
ratification 12 years ago.

All countries need to ratify, universalize
and reaffirm their commitment to the landmark
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, as well as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocols; and all other anti-trafficking legal
instruments. Accountability should be an important
benchmark for all Member States.

Trafficking is a blatant violation of human rights,
an offense against the dignity and integrity of a
person. The success of our common fight against that
scourge requires the effort of all concerned. A longterm solution can only emerge from consistent political
commitment and the joint action of the international
community to eradicate human trafficking, to promote
justice and accountability, and to protect victims.

Terrorist groups treat slavery and human trafficking
not just as a means to generate free labour services
and profit, but also as a recruiting tool and a means to
degrade and displace civilians. Hence, we urge States to
mobilize a stronger and more vigilant global response.
We must therefore strengthen the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 70/291, on the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review, so
that we can break the close nexus between trafficking in
persons and terrorism. We need to cut off the sources of
income and financial flows of terrorist groups resulting
from human trafficking.

The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-Minister of National Economy of the Republic
of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Abylkassymova (Kazakhstan): We thank the
British presidency for highlighting the gravity of human
trafficking in conflict situations. We acknowledge with
appreciation the Secretary-General’s stewardship and
moral voice to halt that scourge. We appreciate the
briefings of Executive Director Fedotov, Commissioner
Hyland and social activist Elman. My delegation offers
some remarks for the Security Council’s consideration.
The synergy of expertise of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), as the lead
agency, and other relevant agencies of the United
Nations system must be strengthened. We urge greater
collaboration within the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons (ICAT) and the
sound management of the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. We support
strengthened coordination between ICAT and Member
14/78

At the same time, criminal justice responses, while
essential, are not sufficient alone prevent and address
human trafficking in situations affected by conflict.
Peace and development lay the foundations of a stable
society and human well-being. It is also essential to
increase funding for poverty eradication, education,
employment, and the provision of services in countries
affected by conflict.

The money-laundering channels of organized crime
networks must also be blocked. Therefore, we see the
need for improved data-sharing, especially between law
enforcement and financial sectors, in order to identify,
disrupt and dismantle networks involved in human
trafficking in conflict. It should be mandatory to train all
peacekeeping and other personnel in gender sensitivity
so that they may respond effectively to trafficking in
persons. Preventing sexual exploitation and abuse,
especially when perpetrated by peacekeepers, must be
a priority.
We see a pressing need for strengthening
cooperation among the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the African Union, the League of Arab
States, INTERPOL and other global and regional
organizations. The Central Asian and Commonwealth
of Independent States countries should step up their
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Regional Programme for 2014-2018, as well as the
OSCE Alliance against Trafficking in Persons, of which
Kazakhstan is an active member. My country has also
initiated the Almaty Process on Refugee Protection and
International Migration, which serves as a platform for
nine countries of the region to step up their response
annually and to enhance cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration.
At the national level, we are accelerating the work
of the Interagency Commission, in close interaction
with non-governmental organizations and the relevant
international organizations as part of the fifth cycle of
its national plan.
Kazakhstan, as a member of the Group of Friends
United against Human Trafficking and a sponsor of
resolution 2331 (2016), reaffirms its strong commitment
to reaching visible results in combating trafficking in
human beings.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): As previous
speakers have stated, in December 2016 the Council
considered the issue of human trafficking in conflict
situations (see S/PV.7847) and adopted resolution 2331
(2016), which strongly condemns all forms of human
trafficking in areas of armed conflict.
In October, the General Assembly will hold a
high-level meeting to assist action taken and ongoing
challenges in the framework of the combat against
human trafficking in general. This is a reflection
of the importance that we the States Members of the
United Nations attach to eradicating this appaling
scourge, which, lest we forget, undermines the rule of
law and development, and, above all, is a call on the
universal conscience.
I should like to thank the British presidency for
the timely choice of returning to this issue, this time
placing emphasis on and forced labour, slavery and
other similar practices in conflict situations. I thank also
Secretary-General António Guterres for his important
statement, as well as our briefers today, Mr. Fedotov,
Mr. Hyland and Ms. Elman. Their briefings were
extremely instructive and illuminating with respect to
the gravity and scale of this scourge.
The armed conflicts currently under way throughout
the world unfortunately represent an opportunity
for traffickers, as the impunity resulting from the
breakdown of law and order allows them to operate

S/PV.7898

more easily and on a broader scale. Moreover, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in its 2016 report,
clearly highlights the complex links between human
trafficking and armed conflict. In addition, migrants
are the victims of trafficking and smuggling in conflict
zones, specifically because of those very conflicts.
During armed conflict, the loss and lack of economic
opportunity, discrimination and gender violence are
compounded. Family support networks are weakened
or destroyed, all of which contributes to exacerbating
individual and collective vulnerability to trafficking.
The resurgence of the phenomenon of human
trafficking in armed conflict situations is all the more
troubling since it leads to the forced marriage and
sexual or domestic enslavement of women and girls, and
to men and boys being trafficked into forced labour, if
not enslaved outright or turned into combatants.
Therefore, it is clear that human trafficking can
be described as — to use the term of the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women
and children — an “umbrella concept” for practices
that are all equally inhuman and barbaric in nature.
While certain forms of trafficking result from
exacerbated vulnerability due to conflict, others are
the direct result of the actions of armed groups that
operate in conflict zones. My delegation would like
in particular to reiterate its growing concern at the
involvement of non-State and terrorist armed groups in
human trafficking in situations of conflict, often with
the goal of modifying the composition of a community
or persecuting or humiliating a given ethnic or religious
group. These practices, which, sadly, we have had
difficulty eradicating, are used by extremist groups not
only as terrorist tactics but also as a strategy of war,
with a view to furthering their goals and ideology,
consolidate their power or to increase their sources
of financing.
It is therefore crucial that we conduct an intensive
and determined struggle against all forms of human
trafficking in situations of armed conflict, including
against forced labour, slavery and other, similar
practices. These practices, in addition to constituting
grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and exacerbating instability,
contribute to the fuelling of terrorist groups. We
therefore cannot but reiterate the overriding need to
implement resolution 2195 (2014), on the links between
terrorism and transnational organized crime, as well as

17-0663015/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
In terms of the struggle under way in my country,
allow me to highlight the fact that in addition to
having ratified virtually all international and regional
instruments relative to human trafficking, Senegal also
has adopted legislative and regulatory instruments that
address the issues of migration and human trafficking,
particularly through a specific law on the trafficking of
persons and similar practices and on the protection of
victims, which was adopted in 2005 and complements
the Senegalese penal code. That law criminalizes
the trafficking of persons and similar practices by
placing emphasis on the diverse forms of exploitation
of vulnerable persons and their transnational
organized character.
Furthermore, in order effectively to clamp down
on violations in the field of human trafficking and
in the trafficking of migrants, chapter 3 of that same
law confers to the Senegalese authorities two kinds
of competence, one universal, through article 10, and
the other based on the passive personality principle,
through article 11.

15/03/2017

peace and reconstruction in affected countries. We are
in duty bound to collectively and in a concerted manner
put an end to these repugnant practices.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the United Kingdom to
convene today’s ministerial-level open debate. I
should like also to thank Secretary-General Guterres
and Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings.
China also listened attentively to the briefings by
Commissioner Hyland and Ms. Elman.
Today some parts of the world are ravaged by
incessant armed conflict and the rampant abuses of
armed groups, terrorist organizations and transnational
organized criminal rings, which pose a grave threat
to the safety, health and dignity of local populations.
One of the dire consequences is the growing scourge
of human trafficking in conflict situations. Victims are
often subject to forced labour and slavery and vulnerable
groups, including women and children bear the brunt.
China strongly rejects all forms of human trafficking in
situations of armed conflict and supports international
efforts to tackle this scourge in a concerted manner.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
the need for the international community to focus on
prevention, protection, reintegration and accountability
in the framework of combating all scourges that
threaten humankind, including conflicts and human
trafficking in situations of conflict. In this regard, we
will have to ensure that we can effectively focus on
deterring, detecting and ending human trafficking, in
particular as carried out by violent extremist groups,
as the Council highlighted in its presidential statement
on human trafficking issued on 20 December 2015
(S/PRST/2015/25).

First, we must step up efforts to combat human
trafficking and slavery in conflict situations, as
actors in this phenomenon — armed groups, terrorist
organizations and transnational organized criminal
networks — are highly mobile and can move across
borders and between countries of origin, transit
and destination. On the one hand, the international
community should vigorously support the countries
concerned in combating criminal activities and
provide them with targeted capacity-building support
in the areas of law enforcement, border control and
financial regulation, in line with their own national
conditions and upon their request. On the other hand,
we need to enhance international cooperation with a
focus on law enforcement collaboration and leverage
the role of regional and subregional organizations and
pool all resources available to investigate, disrupt and
dismantle trafficking networks. We need to encourage
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, UNWomen, the International Organization for Migration
and other United Nations agencies and international
organizations to provide conflict-affected countries
with financial, human and technical support, in line
with their respective mandates and expertise.

Human trafficking in situations of armed conflict
constitutes a threat to stability, the maintenance of

Secondly, we need to attach greater importance
to combating terrorism. Terrorist organizations, such

In addition to this legal framework, a set of
structures exists for addressing problems linked
to human trafficking, including a counselling and
guidance centre for children in difficult situations, an
inter-sectoral department for combating child labour
and a national unit to combat trafficking in persons. The
latter has two missions: one to provide early warning,
monitoring, information and communication, and a
scientific mission, which is to formulate proposals for
the modification of legislation on human trafficking
and harmonize them.

16/78

17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, obtain
funding by means such as the trafficking in persons,
forced labor and enslavement and resort to brutal
tactics. The international community should uphold
uniform counter-terrorism standards; take coordinated
and concerted action; exercise zero tolerance against
terrorism and resolutely address crimes of trafficking,
exploitation and enslavement of populations in conflict
situations, in particular women and children; take an
integrated approach that encompasses political and
economic means and stop the financial flow of funds
obtained from enslavement and human trafficking to
terrorist organizations; and dismantle their criminal
networks. We need to take robust and effective measures
to combat the use by terrorist groups of the Internet to
disseminate terrorist audio and visual products in order
to incite individuals to commit acts of terrorism and
for recruitment purposes. We must protect people in
conflict areas from becoming easy prey to terrorist and
extremist ideologies and falling victim to such crimes as
human trafficking. In the meantime, we need to ensure
that victims and survivors of such crimes receive the
assistance they need to facilitate their reintegration.
Thirdly, we must reinforce efforts towards a political
settlement of conflicts. Protracted regional conflicts
provide a breeding ground for human trafficking and
other criminal activities. The international community
should work harder to find political solutions to hotspot
issues with a renewed sense of urgency, assist countries
in conflict in advancing their political process and their
national reconciliation in line with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in
settling their disputes and bridging their differences
by peaceful means, including through dialogue and
consultation. We need to give greater weight to the
prevention of conflicts and help countries to improve
their ability to achieve sustainable development,
consolidate a basis for peace and root out the conditions
and drivers for human trafficking and enslavement in
conflict situations, so as to provide an enabling external
environment for the protection of women and children
in conflict situations.
China will continue to support the international
community in exercising a zero-tolerance policy against
human trafficking in armed conflict and enhancing
the protection of the rights of women and children in
armed conflict. China will work with its partners to
safeguard peace, security, stability and development at
the international and regional levels.

S/PV.7898

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia would like to thank the presidency of the
United Kingdom for having taken the initiative of
holding this debate. First and foremost, we would also
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres; the
Executive Director of United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Fedotov; and Mr. Kevin
Hyland, Independent Anti-slavery Commissioner, for
their respective briefings.
According to the 2016 UNODC Global Report
on Trafficking in Persons, 79 per cent of the victims
of human trafficking are women and children, with a
clear example being the Yazidi women and girls who
were submitted to various kinds of slavery and torture
by the so-called Islamic State. Due to that situation, a
lot of them have had to leave their countries of origin
to find more favourable living conditions. Similarly,
against the backdrop of the sixty-first session of the
Commission on the Status of Women, which is now
under way, we are deeply concerned to note that,
according to the UNODC report I just mentioned, 20 per
cent of the victims of forced labour and 72 per cent of
those of sexual exploitation are women — a situation
that clearly cannot be ignored.
On the one hand, the economic asymmetries
between the North and South that are reflected in the
way in which wealth is concentrated in some countries,
together with the neoliberal economic and financial
system, are some of the structural causes of poverty
and lead to large migration flows. On the other hand,
because of war and armed conflict, many people are
forced to leave their countries of origin and become
displaced persons or refugees. In many cases, those
conflicts and wars are the result of regime-change
policies, which mostly do not lead to peaceful and
democratic transitions, but instead involve deep-seated
structural changes and also result in violence because
of a lack of political stability. The upshot of this is
the forced displacement of tens of millions of people
around the world since the end of 2015, increasing by
6 million as compared to the previous year.
It is undeniable that armed violence and terrorism
are closely linked to human trafficking and associated
crimes. International criminal groups and terrorist
groups, which the Council and all States Members of
the Organization are combating, such as the so-called
Islamic State, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haraam and Al-Qaida,
among others, are those that benefit from human
trafficking and use those economic gains to finance

17-0663017/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

their terrorist activities. It is clear that terrorism and the
threat of violence, the crisis of capitalism, repression
and poverty have reduced the freedom and civil and
political rights of millions of citizens around the world.
In that connection, the responsibility of the countries of
all Members of the United Nations is to first recognize
a historic debt towards those people who are suffering
because of actions often perpetrated through conflicts
that were initiated, promoted and led by certain military
and economic Powers.
That is why we believe that as some countries close
their borders, build walls, criminalize immigration and
deny access to refugees they are not only promoting
human trafficking, but they are also promoting
xenophobia, discrimination and racism. That is also
serving to fuel the rhetoric of terrorist groups that we
all want to fight, including intolerance to different
religious beliefs and the terrible way in which this is
becoming associated with terrorism. In that regard,
there is no justification for violating the basic principles
of human rights. The international community cannot
turn its back on this reality.
It is also important to mention the economic benefits
resulting from human trafficking. They form part of the
global financial system through money laundering and
tax havens, which tend to diminish or eliminate the
regulations, especially in the area of investment of the
service industry. These things are used by organized
crime to legitimize their profits. In that regard, it would
be important to look into access to these tax havens by
terrorist or criminal groups.
In my own region of Latin America and the
Caribbean, we are no strangers to the evils of human
trafficking. My country, too, is a victim of such crimes,
in particular sexual exploitation and forced labour. In
that regard, it is important to call for the establishment
of various mechanisms at the regional level to reinforce
the fight at the regional as well as national levels. In
Bolivia, since 2002, there has been a comprehensive
law against trafficking in persons the aim of is to fight
that scourge. Moreover, the State is also providing
the necessary resources to ensure the effectiveness of
that campaign.
On the other hand, through this forum, as President
Evo Morales Ayma proposed, I would like to point out
that Bolivia has proposed that we work together on
the concept of universal citizenship, thereby making
it possible for everyone wherever they are to be able
18/78

15/03/2017

to move freely, which would contribute to eliminate
trafficking in persons. As a result of that proposal, the
World Conference of the Peoples for a World without
Walls towards universal citizenship will be held in
Bolivia on 20 and 21 June, with representatives from
all continents attending. We invite not only States but
fundamentally social organizations to participate in
that summit.
I reiterate clearly for the benefit of the Security
Council that while human trafficking is a problem that
we have only taken on recently, it is relevant to the
principles governing this organ with regard to dealing
with international peace and security. It is therefore
essential that we combat that scourge, which affects
human rights and life itself.
I will end my statement by recalling what Stephen
O’Brien told us a few days ago in the Council (see
S/PV.7897). At the beginning of the year, we were
facing the greatest humanitarian crisis since the
founding of the United Nations, but at the same time I
believe that it is important to remember that the world’s
population is living in a time that is witnessing the
greatest level of inequality in its history. Those two
facts — the humanitarian crisis and that inequality — are
not unrelated or inseparable.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan appreciates the United
Kingdom’s initiative in convening this open debate. I
also thank the briefers for their valuable input.
As Da’esh uses sexual exploitation as a means
for their terrorist activities, many terrorist groups,
transnational criminal organizations and armed groups
use trafficking in persons as a method for fundraising
and recruitment. That is totally unacceptable.
Regrettably, the trafficking children and exploiting
them as combatants in armed conflicts are also taking
place in various parts of the world. Those examples
show how violations of human rights and dignity also
become threats to international peace and security. The
Security Council must therefore proactively address
that issue.
Resolution 2231 (2016), which was adopted in
December 2016, calls upon Member States to fully
implement the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. The Convention and
the Protocol are universal legal frameworks to combat
trafficking in persons, and their full implementation
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and related technical assistance by the relevant United
Nations agencies are key. Japan therefore attaches
great importance to the assistance provided by the
United Nations United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and is stepping up its support to that
Office. In that regard, Japan has pledged approximately
$23 million to the UNODC, which should be disbursed
by the end of this month. That contribution is aimed at
bolstering terrorism prevention and building capacity
for law enforcement, mainly targeting countries
in Africa.
The global number of refugees, migrants and
internally displaced persons has reached a new
record since the Second World War. Among the many
vulnerable groups in the world, displaced populations
are increasingly targeted by human traffickers. Based
on the concept of human security, which is a humancentred approach that places the interests of individuals
as a priority, Japan attaches importance to identifying,
protecting and providing assistance to victims. In that
regard, Japan has been contributing to the International
Organization for Migration’s programmes against
trafficking in persons in countries such as Somalia
and Djibouti, among others. I am confident that such
efforts will help combat the root causes of trafficking in
persons and lead to the promotion of international peace
and security. Furthermore, the cooperation of all actors
who are engaged in peace and security, development,
humanitarian affairs and human rights both within and
outside the United Nations is crucial.
To conclude, I reaffirm Japan’s commitment to
combatting trafficking in persons. The issue should
be addressed in various forums inside and outside the
Security Council. The high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to discuss the implementation of the Global
Plan of Action on Trafficking in Persons, to take place
in October, will be an important opportunity to assess
achievements, gaps and challenges. We look forward to
intensifying efforts towards and discussions about that
meeting and beyond.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s debate.
In the past, even as a non-Council member, Italy
has stressed the need for the Security Council to be
engaged in human trafficking and the related serious
violations of human rights, and to that end, two years
ago, promoted resolution 2240 (2015), on countering the
business model of traffickers off the coast of Libya in

S/PV.7898

the Mediterranean. As a Council member, we support
treating the issue as a priority.
Italy aligns it itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union (EU). In my national
capacity, I would like to add the following remarks.
First, it is essential, we believe, to follow up on
resolution 2331 (2016), which was introduced by Spain.
Its adoption represented a big step forward, in particular
by highlighting the links between transnational
organized crime, terrorism and trafficking networks.
Transnational organized crime and terrorist groups
make use of human trafficking as a weapon to control
territories and as a major source of funding. We
therefore strongly support the Secretary-General in
following up on resolution 2331 (2016) by systematizing
the action of subsidiary organs involved in counterterrorism and sanctions, specialized agencies and the
Special Rapporteur entrusted with preparing a detailed
study on the difficulties of establishing guilt and/or
responsibilities with regard to crimes of sexual violence
and the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially in women and children. Italy looks forward
to the Secretary-General’s report on resolution 2331
(2016), to be submitted at the end of the year, which we
believe will further enhance the United Nations and the
Council’s capacity to address that growing threat.
Secondly, human trafficking requires a comprehensive
approach at the national and international levels. At
the international level, we need a concerted response
grounded on the implementation of international rules
and encompassing the aspects of prevention, law
enforcement and accountability. In that respect, Italy
looks forward to the high-level debate on the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, also known as the Palermo Convention, to be
held in the General Assembly in June. At the same time,
national jurisdictions bear the primary responsibility to
criminalize such offenses and ensure the accountability
of the criminals. We stress the importance that all
States ratify, fully transpose and implement the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children at the national level as they provide the main
internationally agreed legal framework to prevent and
combat human trafficking. In that regard, we praise the
UNODC-EU initiative, the Global Action to Prevent
and Address Trafficking in Persons and Smuggling

17-0663019/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

of Migrants, to assist the development of national
comprehensive strategies to counter trafficking.
Thirdly, the available statistics urgently indicate
that we must take more victim-centred, gender-specific
and children-sensitive actions. Women account for
more than half of all victims of trafficking at the global
level. Children are especially exposed to exploitation
as they are increasingly compelled to leave their
homes alone. In 2016 alone, approximately 26,000
unaccompanied or separated minors reached Italy by
sea, thereby more than doubling the numbers recorded
in 2015. Empowering women and enhancing their role in
peacebuilding is crucial. We are launching the creation
of a network of women mediators in the Mediterranean
aimed at fostering stability, security and respect for
human rights in the Mediterranean, which we think
will contribute to combating human trafficking and all
forms of slavery and related abuses. As a first step, we
are organizing with the United Kingdom presidency an
Arria formula meeting on the subject on 27 March.
Fourthly, we think that legal and safe ways to ensure
the movement of people fleeing from conflicts serve an
important instrument in the fight against trafficking.
The Italian Government is carrying out a project
called “humanitarian corridors”, which allows safe and
legal entry into Italy to people fleeing from conflict,
especially in Syria. It is an act of solidarity and a model
that other States, such as France, are following. It is
also a means to combat trafficking and the exploitation
of the trafficked. In the same spirit, we also welcome
the call on the part of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to end statelessness,
including through the enhancement and digitalization
of a civil registry in the countries of origin, because the
lack of documents is one of the main factors that can
induce modern slavery.
Large movements of people can facilitate human
trafficking and modern enslavement. Being a migrant
is itself a vulnerability that can favour the exploitation
of people on the move. Let me, in conclusion, reiterate
the pillars of Italy’s approach: sharing responsibilities
and raising awareness at the regional and global levels;
saving lives at sea; addressing the socioeconomic and
political root causes of conflict; disrupting the business
model of traffickers and smugglers; and upholding
the rights of migrants and refugees and international
humanitarian law.
20/78

15/03/2017

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their participation in today’s meeting. The
problem of human trafficking in conflict situations and
terrorism was discussed by the Council in December last
year (see S/PV.7847). The victims of human trafficking,
including women and children, annually run into the
hundreds of thousands. The Security Council has
repeatedly condemned the depredations of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and
other terrorist groups, whose victims comprise the least
protected sections of the population.
Human trafficking today remains a serious
challenge in various parts of the world. It is particularly
dangerous when those activities cross over into
businesses controlled by organized crime. The proceeds
of human trafficking are used as sources of financing
for terrorism, compounding the threat to international
peace and security. Crimes in that sphere are often
accompanied by equally deleterious phenomena such
as abduction, sexual violence and the proliferation
of narcotics.
The exploitation of the victims of human
trafficking take various forms, including forced labour
and slavery. Today’s meeting takes place on the eve of
the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade. It offers
a good opportunity to once again recall the tragic
consequences of that centuries-old disgraceful practice,
which, even today, stands as one of the root causes of a
number of contemporary conflicts.
As to the modern forms of human trafficking,
we must address the root causes and take consistent
measures against criminal groups. In that context, a not
inconsiderable role is played by the demand for black
market labour and the legalization of the sex industry in
consumer countries. Effective results can be achieved
only by adopting a comprehensive approach, including
prevention and assistance to victims and the prosecution
of criminals with the appropriate level of international
cooperation, including in the sphere of legal assistance.
Coordinating action within that sphere, both within and
among States, should involve law-enforcement bodies,
social services and non-governmental organizations
that provide assistance to victims.
One of the natural partners of States should be the
institution of the family. As an important instrument
for sustainable development and social integration, the
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

family reduces vulnerabilities to various challenges
and threats, including those linked to the root causes of
human trafficking. By strengthening the institution of
the family States can minimize those risks.
Combating human trafficking is a sphere where we
very much need to draw on the potential for partnering
with the business community. Right now, together
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe’s Special Representative and Coordinator
for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings, we are
making preparations to host in Moscow in 2017 a
conference devoted to that very theme.
Responsibility for combating human trafficking
and modern forms of slavery lies, above all, with the
States themselves. They must independently define
national policies and methods for eradicating the
phenomenon and investigate crimes and pursue and
bring to justice the perpetrators. We support initiatives
aimed at consolidating efforts on the part of States,
bodies of the United Nations and other international
and regional organizations geared towards combating
human trafficking. We participate in the financing of
those activities.
We note the work of the United Nations, particularly
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
providing specialized assistance to States upon their
request. We believe that such assistance must strike a
balance between the needs of the countries of origin
and the countries of destination alike. Today, the
international community has created an entire series
of mechanisms aimed at fundamentally improving
cooperation among all stakeholders in combating
human trafficking. One of the most important initiatives
was the creation of the Group of Friends United against
Human Trafficking, in which our delegation takes an
active part. We welcome the holding in October of a
high-level meeting of the General Assembly to assess
progress in implementing the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which
is a key yardstick for States in that domain.
As for the role of the Security Council, it must be
limited only to consideration of the issue of human
trafficking in conjunction with the situations on its
agenda, in particular in the context of fighting terrorism,
including its financing. We need to recall that in and of
itself, outside of those circumstances, phenomena such
as human trafficking, forced labour or slavery — as
dangerous and repugnant as they are — are not directly

S/PV.7898

related to the work of the Council, which bears
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The Council is already dealing with a number of
similar cross-cutting issues, such as children and armed
conflict, sexual violence in armed conflict, and women
and peace and security. Overall, we need to ensure
that the work of the existing structures is as effective
and complementary as possible, while respecting their
purviews and the distribution of tasks among them.
In conclusion, and in response to the Ukrainian
statement and its unfounded accusations against Russia,
the theme of this meeting is highly relevant to that
country. It would seem, by the looks of things, that they
are treating people like slaves who have no rights and
cannot, for instance, claim to have a national identity
or use their native language. That is the attitude taken
by Kyiv towards the people living in eatern Ukraine. It
has tried to respond by clamping down with violence,
the way slave rebellions were handled in ancient times.
When that failed and despite thousands being wounded
and killed as a result of the use of force by the Kyiv
authorities, they then tried to stifle the residents of
Donbas, using any available means, such as imposing
an economic and transport blockade and stopping
social-services payments, among others.
Today, the Ukrainian authorities have adopted a
similar decision to fully cease transport communications
with Donbas. It is no secret that after achieving
independence, Ukraine has traditionally been one of
the countries with the worst records in terms of human
trafficking and forced labour. Now in times of conflict,
such criminal activity has acquired a particularly
repugnant form, manifesting itself in the exploitation
of the vulnerability and lack of protection of internally
displaced persons.
It is our hope that the Ukrainian authorities will
address those problems by other means than attempting
to place the blame on Russia, as they usually do.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to congratulate you
on convening today’s important debate. I would also like
to thank the briefers for their invaluable contributions.
Egypt attaches great importance to the issue of
human trafficking. Egypt has always been and will
always be a pioneer in fighting all forms of slavery
and similar practices, such as indentured servitude,

17-0663021/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

recruitment by armed groups and forced labour. Egypt
believes that human trafficking is a criminal practice
that runs counter to recognized human values.
Egypt stresses that trafficking in humans follows
extremely diverse patterns which have becom
increasingly complex due to a growing number of
elements, including developments in information
and communications technology and the tactics used
by criminal groups to form organized networks that
traffick in humans. In addition, the lack of accurate and
reliable data and statistics allow for these crimes to be
committed in the dark, giving rise to billions of dollars
of profit.
Under Egyptian law, human trafficking is a hybrid
crime involving transnational organized crime networks
that commit other criminal acts such as terrorism,
drug trafficking, money-laundering, migrant- and
refugee-smuggling and the arms trade, all of which are
a constant threat to international peace and security.
In this regard, Egypt has ratified all regional and
international conventions and instruments related to
the subject. The national laws of Egypt include severe
punishments for crimes related to the different forms
of this practice. The national strategy to combat and
prevent human trafficking was launched in 2016 and
is the framework for transparent cooperation among
Government bodies and civil society in accordance
with the imperatives of national security.
Last December’s adoption by the Security Council
of resolution 2331 (2016), on human trafficking in armed
conflict, was an important landmark in the history of
the Council (see S/PV.7847). In this respect, we would
like to stress the following points. First, the Council
should address all forms of human trafficking equally
since, under the Palermo Protocol, they have equal
legal impacts. Secondly, the United Nations Convention
on Transnational Organized Crime and the Palermo
Protocol should serve as the basis of States’ obligations
in relation to fighting human trafficking. The main
pillar of the Convention, related to exploitation, should
be implemented. Thirdly, the international community
should redouble its efforts to stop funding all terrorist
groups, including by stopping human trafficking, and
all international tools should be used in this respect.
Fourthly, human trafficking, particular the trafficking
in women and girls, should not be linked to religion,
nationality or civilization. Religious and traditional
leaders should play an important role in denouncing the
link between them that is being promoted by extremists.
22/78

15/03/2017

Fifthly, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
plays a major role in the General Assembly — and
should play an even greater role — on the issue of
human trafficking. All financial resources should be
made available to the Office in order to enable it to
discharge its task.
Egypt stresses its full support for the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, which is the
governing framework for international cooperation in
this regard, not only for States but also for civil society
and the private sector. Egypt is looking forward to a
robust outcome document from the second review of the
Plan of Action next October. The Egyptian delegation
will actively engage in this review process.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like first of all to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for convening this debate. I am also
grateful to Secretary-General António Guterres, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, Mr. Kevin Hyland
and Ms. Ilwad Elman, for their comprehensive briefings.
I would like to highlight four points in my statement:
first, the time frame and the geographic area where
human trafficking, forced labour, slavery and other
similar practices take place; secondly, the root causes
of these problems; thirdly, what can be done to combat
them; and fourthly, the importance of victim support.
First, with regard to the time frame and the
geographic area, human trafficking, forced labour
and so-called modern slavery are social and political
aberrations that we see in a very great number of
countries, and in many cases in countries where
supposedly there is social peace. Unfortunately, the
absence of conflict is no guarantee of the absence of
these scourges. However, when these practices are
carried out in situations of conflict or weakness, the
victims find themselves in a situation of even greater
vulnerability in the face of the actions of terrorists
and criminal networks. It is necessary to bear in mind
that the geographic areas in which these practices
are generally carried out transcends those where the
conflict is unfolding, including neighbouring countries
and even distant countries. In addition, the time frame
goes well beyond the duration of conflicts, and the
consequences of these practices are suffered by the
victims for the rest of their lives.
It is fundamental that the international community
expressed its full-throated condemnation of human
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

trafficking when we unanimously adopted resolution
2331 (2016) last December, on the occasion of the
open debate organized by the delegation of Spain (see
S/PV.7847). Human trafficking is an aberrant practice
in all its forms and manifestations and whatever its
purpose. Trafficking in persons represents a serious
abuse of human rights that denigrates its victims,
stripping them of their human condition to the detriment
of the interests of the criminal and terrorist networks
operating throughout the world. Uruguay welcomes the
growing link between the work of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Secretary-General
and the Security Council, and we would highlight
coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission
in order to prevent areas that are in a post-conflict
situation from becoming a fertile ground for the actions
of criminal organizations.
Secondly, we need to address the structural causes
that lead to conflicts. The absence of State authority,
the lack of guarantees, poverty, inequality in all its
aspects, and the lack of access to education or political
participation, generate vacuums that are filled by
terrorist organizations and human trafficking. Not only
do these organizations take advantage of the absence
or instability of a State that cannot fulfil its primary
responsibility for protecting its inhabitants, but they
also play on the desperation of the population affected.
Thirdly, in dealing with trafficking in persons
in the context of armed conflict, we must remember
that many of these scenarios are taking place in areas
where peacekeeping operations are deployed. We
therefore note the importance and appropriateness of
these operations having adequate mandates to identify,
protect and assist the victims of human trafficking, to
monitor and report on such situations, and to support
authorities in developing their capacities. It is also
important for States to comply with the provisions of
the relevant international instruments.
The adoption of the Palermo Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, was a particularly important step
in understanding the issue and in making States aware
of their responsibilities to address the problem in a
comprehensive manner, both in terms of the prevention
and protection of victims and in investigating and
punishing traffickers. We call on all those countries that
have not done so to accede to the Protocol and ratify the
conventions of the International Labour Organization

S/PV.7898

on forced labour and the abolition of forced labour in
order to prevent the proliferation of such practices.
States must also adopt the national measures
necessary to monitor and hold the perpetrators
accountable. We must keep in mind that, according
to estimates of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), some 60 per cent of trafficking
victims identified throughout the world are foreign
to the country where they have been identified.
Such data confirm that no country is exempt from
the responsibility to identify and eventually punish
those responsible.
Fourthly and finally, in relation to the situation
of victims, Uruguay wishes to highlight the need for
comprehensive assistance for victims of trafficking. The
focus should be on their recovery and reintegation into
society. Victims should receive legal and psychosocial
assistance and protection that address their specific
needs. The rights of victims of trafficking should be
at the centre of the entire enderavour to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons. The traffic in people
affects all sectors of the population, but there are certain
social groups that suffer disproportionately. In this
context, and as reported by Unodc, almost one-third of
victims are children and more than 70 per cent are girls
and women.
In conclusion, I wish to highlight the importance
of cooperation among States in combatting
trafficking in persons and in judging and condemning
those responsible.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I should like to begin by thanking all four of our
excellent briefers and by paying particular tribute to our
civil society briefer, Ilwad Elman, for bringing home to
us the devastating impact of trafficking and slavery in
conflict. She gave voice to the 46 million men, women
and children caught up in that tragedy across the world.
I am glad that so many ministers are here today to hear
that testimony, and I am grateful to them and to all
Council members for their statements.
The fullest response of each and every Member
of the United Nations is needed, and I look forward
to hearing the views of countries outside the Security
Council shortly because, as we have heard so clearly,
modern slavery is a global problem that extends far
beyond the 15 countries represented at this table.

17-0663023/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

It exists in nearly all societies, including my own. It
does not respect borders or jurisdictions. It does not
recognize the dignity or worth of the human person. It
just sees opportunities to exploit and lives to destroy.
If we could hear the millions who are being coerced
and exploited today, their unwavering message to us
would be that we have simply not done enough and that
we have shut our eyes and dulled our senses to a crime
we hoped had been consigned to history. That is why
the United Kingdom called this open debate. It is why
my Prime Minister, Theresa May, first raised this issue
before the General Assembly last year (see A/71/PV.8)
and plans to do so again later this year. It is also why we
are taking such strong action in our own country and
across the world so that, together, we can eradicate it.
We know the root causes. Poverty, conflict and
instability lie at the heart of the suffering of so many
victims. When a State’s authorities is eroded and its
responsibility to its people is unfulfilled, organized
criminal networks thrive, partnering with armed
groupds and terrorists to prey on the vulnerable — to
prey on those who have already suffered far too much.
We know what follows: sexual exploitation and sexual
slavery, forced labour and child labour, human rights in
tatters, conflict exploited and conflict sustained.
This should be a familiar tale to the Council.
We heard it ourselves in north-eastern Nigeria only
last week. We saw it in the hands in the air when we
asked the women there whether they had lost a child
to Boko Haram. We saw it in their tears as they spoke
of abducted daughters, of mass rapes, of grandchildren
being born only to be enslaved. In response, we need a
more forceful and unified United Nations approach to
human trafficking, modern slavery and forced labour.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s report in
November on exactly that, and we encourage him to
focus on making existing structures, including the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons, work effectively.
We also need to combine our efforts across the
mandates entrusted to us. We in the Council have a
responsibility — no, a duty — to maintain international
peace and security, to end the instability in which
modern slavery thrives. As United Nations Members, we
have frameworks for action, including the commitment
under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
ending trafficking, modern slavery and forced labour,
24/78

15/03/2017

and the General Assembly’s Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons.
But we also need to take responsibility as individual
Member States. That means doing more to disrupt and
disband serious organized criminal networks engaged
in people trafficking. It means all of us ratifying the
1956 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of
Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices
Similar to Slavery, and the Protocol to the International
Labour Organization Convention Concerning Forced
or Compulsory Labour. And it means taking real steps
to strengthen our own national systems to identify,
investigate and prosecute those committing these
abhorrent crimes.
If we take these steps, at home and here in the
United Nations, we will have begun to turn the page.
But if we are to truly consign this terrible tragedy to the
history books, we will need sustained commitment that
endures long after this meeting is over. Modern slavery
must become a recurring theme for the Council and
other parts of the United Nations to return to, including
at this year’s session of the General Assembly, so that
we can accelerate our efforts to end this abhorrent
practice once and for all.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with statements longer than that are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version, within the time limit, when
speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Argentina.
Ms. Tuñez (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing this debate. We emphasize the fact that this
debate is being held at the same time as the ongoing
session of the Women’s Legal and Social Commission.
Argentina considers that the fight against trafficking
in persons and forced labor must be comprehensive,
since it includes a multiplicity of actors at various levels,
and that it must be waged within the framework of the
defence and promotion of human rights. We therefore
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

believe it appropriate for such topics to be addressed as
a matter of priority by the General Assembly.
In that context, Argentina maintains a strong
commitment to the fight against human trafficking as
the most extreme form of violence. We are committed
at the multilateral level and promote national policies
to eliminate this scourge. At the national level, in 2013
we established the Executive Committee for Combating
Trafficking and Exploitation of Persons and for the
Protection and Assistance of Victims. Also, in July
2016 we convened for the first time the Federal Council
for Combating Trafficking, which I have the honor
of coordinating, with the aim of designing a federal
strategy to eradicate human trafficking and the sexual
exploitation of women in prostitution.
These concrete actions demonstrate the political
will of the State to address the various dimensions of
the scourge of human trafficking. Based on the new
international consensus reached in September 2015
with the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its 17 Goals and corresponding
targets, all States pledged under Goal 8.7 to
“[t]ake immediate and effective measures to
eradicate forced labour, end modern slavery and
human trafficking and secure the prohibition and
elimination of the worst forms of child labour”.
With regard to forced labour, Argentina supports
the initiative of Alliance 8.7, promoted by the United
Kingdom, and is among those countries that have
been part of it since its inception. Argentina is also a
member of the Group of Friends of Decent Work for
Sustainable Development, created in 2014. Child labour
is strongly linked to forced labour, according to data
from the International Labour Organization. Of the
21 million annual victims of forced labour, 5.5 million
are children, in flagrant violation of article 32 of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In line with Argentina’s historic commitment to
combating child labour, next November, along with the
International Labour Organization, Argentina will host
the fourth Global Conference on Child Labour, whose
theme will be eliminating child labour and forced
labour and the generation of quality jobs for youth.
Finally, with regard to the relationship between
trafficking in persons and forced labour and terrorism,
Argentina had the honor of co-facilitating, along with
Iceland, General Assembly resolution 70/291, entitled

S/PV.7898

“The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review”, which expresses concern that in
some regions terrorists may benefit from transnational
organized crime, including trafficking in persons.
Argentina reiterates its renewed commitment to
combating trafficking in persons, forced labour and
all forms of slavery in every situation, as well as the
need for this issue to continue to be addressed at the
General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Women, Minister for Employment and Minister
Assisting the Prime Minister for Public Services.
Ms. Cash (Australia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Canada, New Zealand
and my own country, Australia. We thank the United
Kingdom for convening this debate.
Every country in the world is affected by the
scourge of modern slavery, either through local
exploitation or as a point of origin, transit or destination
for trafficking victims. Eradicating slavery and sexual
violence, in particular in conflict situations, is an
essential precondition for achieving the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and must be addressed as
a matter of urgency. We have a shared responsibility
to disrupt this evil trade and address its root causes.
No single State or organization can do that alone. Our
individual efforts are important; however, regional and
global cooperation will be the key to success.
We know that conflict and instability and the
resulting economic desperation amplify the risk of
forced labour for vulnerable people. In Australia, I
recently established the Migrant Worker Task Force,
which will develop strategies and make improvements
to stamp out the exploitation of vulnerable workers.
We have also launched an inquiry into whether
Australia should follow the United Kingdom’s lead
and adopt legislation to combat modern slavery. And
Australia’s bid for membership in the Human Rights
Council for the period 2018-2020 reflects our strong
commitment to the promotion and protection of human
rights internationally.
Canada has taken a strong stance on the prevention
of all forms of exploitation and violence against women
and girls in situations of conflict. In particular, Canada
will welcome approximately 1,200 vulnerable Yazidi
women and children who have been subjected to the
most heinous forms of sexual exploitation.

17-0663025/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

New Zealand has secured a landmark trafficking
conviction, which resulted in a substantial sentence
and an order to pay reparations. New Zealand is also
currently planning to expand and update its national
plan of action to combat trafficking, in order to
incorporate slavery and forced labour.
The International Labour Organization estimates
that 21 million people worldwide are subject to forced
labour. More than 56 per cent of them are in the AsiaPacific region. Australia and New Zealand are working
with countries in the region to stamp out those barbaric
and criminal practices. We work in partnership with
civil society and regional forums to eliminate the
drivers of vulnerability, build the capacity of local
authorities and assist victims of those terrible crimes.
That includes addressing transnational crime and
corruption and strengthening governance frameworks
and criminal justice systems.
A key element in that effort is the Bali Process. The
Bali Declaration recognizes the critical need to engage
with the private sector, including by promoting and
implementing humane, non-abusive labour practices
throughout supply chains. Later this year, the Bali
Process Business Forum will bring together Ministers
and private-sector leaders from the 45 member countries
of the Bali process to discuss policy approaches to
tackling human trafficking and slavery and to share
experiences on best practices.
We need a global anti-trafficking strategy and better
coordination of data and funding. We must encourage
and support United Nations efforts to strengthen
coordination and develop a more strategic and
coherent international response. Alliance 8.7 provides
an important platform to advance our international
cooperation and programmes. It will assist all States
Members of the United Nations to eradicate forced
labour, modern slavery, human trafficking and all
forms of child labour. Australia and Canada are proud
to be part of the Group of Friends of Decent Work for
Sustainable Development, and I encourage all Members
to join.

15/03/2017

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Equal Opportunities of Luxembourg.
Ms. Mutsch (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I thank the United Kingdom presidency for taking
the initiative to hold this open debate, which accords
the fight against human trafficking the importance it
deserves. This morning’s briefings rightly underlined
the need to redouble efforts to combat this scourge,
which affects millions of people.
Luxembourg fully supports the intervention to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
Luxembourg is aware of its responsibilities as a
country of transit and destination. No country can
claim to be spared from the scourge of trafficking in
human beings.
The overwhelming testimony of survivors of
the slave trade shows how much the latter is the very
negation of humanity. Let us recall here the words
(see S/PV.7685) of Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha,
who exposed the sexual slavery perpetrated by Da’esh
against civilian populations, in particular Yazidis in
Iraq. It is mainly women and children who are targeted,
and the international community must assume its
responsibility to protect these populations.
Displaced
persons
regardless
of
their
status — whether internally displaced persons, migrants
or refugees — are particularly vulnerable. That should
be borne in mind at the time of the adoption, in 2018,
of the draft global compact on refugees and the draft
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration.
In the European context, Luxembourg is committed
to trafficking that affects migrants and refugees. My
country is therefore stepping up its participation in
Operation SOPHIA by providing a second maritime
surveillance aircraft. The objective of this European
Union operation, authorized by the Security Council,
is to dismantle the economic model of the networks of
human smugglers and traffickers in the Mediterranean
Sea. It has already saved thousands of lives.

We should also ensure that the 2017 review of the
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
makes a practical contribution.

Also at European level, we participated in the Dutch
initiative “Team Work!” to strengthen cooperation
against trafficking in human beings for the purpose of
exploitation through labour.

Every country in the world is affected by the blight
of modern slavery. We must be focused, committed and
coordinated in stamping it out.

Luxembourg made the fight against trafficking
in human beings a priority of its presidency of the
Benelux Union in 2016. We have renewed cooperation

26/78

17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

between our three countries and brought together
actors on the ground, including non-governmental
organizations, in order to provide better assistance to
victims of trafficking.
At the national level, our policy to combat
trafficking in persons employs a horizontal approach
that involves all stakeholders. In 2009, we set up an
inter-ministerial monitoring committee, whose work
has led in particular to the adoption by the Government
of a national action plan agaomst trafficking in
persons, in December 2016. In my role as Minister
of Equal Opportunities, I presented, along with the
Minister of Justice, a strategy to regulate prostitution,
which provides for the strengthening of the legislative
framework. A draft law that aims to punish the clients of
victims of trafficking in persons for sexual exploitation
is being considered by Parliament. Finally, a national
awareness campaign was launched at the initiative of
the monitoring committee to better detect and counter
the trafficking in persons in all its forms.
The perpetrators of human trafficking must be held
accountable for their actions, whether at the national or
international level. Here too, the International Criminal
Court has a role to play. The Rome Statute identifies
trafficking in persons, women and children in particular,
as a crime against humanity when committed as part
of a widespread or systematic attack directed against
any civilian population and with knowledge of the
attack. Justice, by its punitive and dissuasive nature, is
indispensable to our collective action.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of Health, Social Services and Equality of Spain.
Ms. Montserrat (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank everyone for their insightful contributions
and their commitment to combating the trafficking in
persons. Putting an end to the trafficking in persons
in general and in conflict situations in particular goes
beyond the efforts of one specific region or country.
It requires the efforts of all. As the President of the
Government of Spain stated here at the Security Council
in December 2016 (see S/PV.7847), the trafficking in
persons is the commercialization of the bodies and
the dignity of the human being and a reincarnation of
slavery in the midst of the twenty-first century.
When Spain convened an open debate on this very
topic last December and put forward the first Security
Council resolution on the trafficking of persons in
conflict situations (resolution 2331 (2016)), it did so

S/PV.7898

on the basis that national justice systems can crumble
in conflict situations, making action by the Security
Council necessary in such circumstances. With today’s
debate, we are contributing to the development of a
counter narrative to oppose those criminal networks,
armed groups and terrorist groups that use trafficking
in persons in conflict situations as a form of financing
and as a recruitment tool or forced labour, which
prolong conflicts.
Resolution 2331 (2016), put forward by Spain here at
the Security Council, strengthens the legal framework
in various areas, including with regard to sanctions,
accountability, financial flows, and protection and
assistance to victims, paying special attention to
women and girls, especially when trafficked for sexual
exploitation — and without forgetting that men and
boys are also victims of trafficking.
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations has
sparked immense media interest, particularly when it is
used by terrorists groups such as Da’esh, Boko Haram
or Al-Shabaab. Nonetheless, civil society has reiterated
on numerous occasions that the response of the United
Nations remains fragmented. That is why I would like
to highlight the fact that our States are gathered today
because an open debate was convened by the United
Kingdom as President of the Security Council. I would
therefore like to thank the United Kingdom for the
opportunity to address a subject of this magnitude. In
that regard, I would like to congratulate our neighbours,
the United Kingdom, for the recent establishment of
the Group of Friends on Modern-day Slavery, which
will surely continue to contribute to the joint efforts of
all countries.
Let me now focus on three specific issues.
First, more information and coordination are
required with regard to the use of trafficking in persons
by armed groups in conflict situations. We must work
together with all stakeholders. In that way, we could
paint as detailed a picture as possible of the routes
or hotspots of a conflict in which there are signs of
trafficking in persons in all its forms. The findings
would set out the road map of practical measures that
should be adopted.
Secondly, above and beyond the Security Council,
all Member States must respond to trafficking in
persons in conflict situations in a coordinated and
consistent manner, both through cooperation among
our intelligence, police and justice units, and with the

17-0663027/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

private sector and civil society, as well as within the
United Nations framework. It is crucial to pay special
attention to the source of financing for trafficking. A
good way to address the scourge in all its complexity
is through national plans and legislation. At the end
of 2015, Spain adopted a comprehensive national plan
to combat trafficking in persons, which strengthens
coordination in all areas. Spain is committed to the
fight against trafficking in persons and sexual slavery.
Thirdly and lastly, I would like to highlight
the fact that victims must be the focus of any policy
we develop to combat the trafficking in persons in
conflict situations, in terms of both assistance and
accountability. In that regard, Spain will support any
initiative that promotes the preservation of the proof
that would make accountability possible.
The next five years is a historic opportunity for
the fight against one of the worst forms of exploitation
and slavery to be at the centre of the priorities of the
United Nations. Spain is committed, and every one of
us here is aware of the path and the direction that we
must take. All that is left for us to do is to agree on
the effective practical measures to be taken, and that is
within everyone’s reach. Let us work together.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Women Empowerment and Child Protection
of Indonesia.
Mrs. Yembise (Indonesia): Let me first thank the
United Kingdom for convening today’s open debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers.

15/03/2017

succeed. Indonesia is co-chair, with Australia, of the
Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime,. It has more
than 48 members, including international organizations.
The Bali Process recently established a Working Group
on Disruption of Criminal Networks Involved in People
Smuggling and Trafficking in Persons. During its
initial Joint Period of Action, eight countries conducted
separate but coordinated law enforcement operations
against criminal syndicates.
Indonesia is also in the process of ratifying the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Convention
Against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children. Indonesia believes that coordination and
cooperation across the whole region is essential in the
handling of human trafficking.
We acknowledge the need for robust mechanisms
that promote international cooperation, including law
enforcement cooperation, mutual legal assistance and
extradition. We encourage further law enforcement
capacity-building to combat people smugglers and
human traffickers. Indonesia fully supports every
effort to stop the perpetrators of human trafficking,
especially parties that exploit the vulnerabilities of
populations affected by conflict.
The best way to narrow the chances of armed
groups, terrorists and transnational criminal networks
to exploit the vulnerabilities of civilians caught in
conflict is to de-escalate or prevent the conflict and
human trafficking.

Governments nowadays face increasing challenges
as the movement of people becomes more and more
prevalent and complex in nature. Conflicts, wars
and social unrest in many parts of the world have
exacerbated the complexity and have forced people to
leave their homes. The trafficking of vulnerable people,
especially women and children, who should be protected
in conflict situations, is a dreadful crime. Trafficking
in persons is a serious violation of human rights that
must continue to be condemned in the strongest sense
possible. There is an immediate obligation to identify
and provide safety and protection to victims of human
trafficking while addressing the needs of vulnerable
groups, including women and children, and taking into
account prevailing national laws and circumstances.

Given the nexus between conflict-prevention
and sustaining peace, it is important to have a
comprehensive approach whereby socioeconomic
development and security challenges are addressed
simultaneously. Peacekeeping efforts should be geared
towards building trust and confidence among all parties.
Recognizing and responding to human trafficking
should be part of the training activities of humanitarian
personnel and peacekeepers. All those to be deployed
in conflict and post-conflict zones need to be trained
on the gender perspective and conflict-related crimes.
On our part, the Indonesian National Armed Forces
Peacekeeping Mission Centre at Sentul, Indonesia,
has developed and implemented an integrated gender
perspective in predeployment training for Indonesian
and regional peacekeepers.

The problem of trafficking is cross-border in nature
and only a cross-border response and cooperation can

In conclusion, let us spare no effort in fighting
human trafficking. Indonesia, as a candidate for a

28/78

17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

non-permanent membership of the Security Council
in 2019-2020, remains committed to working with
the international community to put an end to human
trafficking and to the misery it has caused.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of Labour and Social Justice of Romania.
Mrs. Vasilescu (Romania) (spoke in French): I
would like to commend the United Kingdom presidency
of the Security Council for having convened this open
debate. This is a timely discussion of a crucial issue
with global repercussions. No State Member of the
United Nations can escape the contemportary scourge
of trafficking in the most precious commodities: dignity
and human life.
Romania supports the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and I express
our firm commitment to the Union’s efforts to combat
human trafficking, modern slavery and other forms
of exploitation linked to trafficking. Resolution 2331
(2016), adopted last December, provides an excellent
framework to continue to make progress in this area.
We need to consider this in further depth in order to
address together the causes and effects of trafficking in
persons in conflict situations.
We must make full use of all existing mechanisms
for fighting money-laundering and financing of
terrorism in order to expose traffickers, prosecute
them, freeze their assets and to stop these illegal flows.
The response to human trafficking must be robust and
occur on several levels: security, law enforcement,
the protection of persons and accountability. Human
trafficking in conflict situations undermines the rule
of law and leads to the development of other forms of
organized crime. It therefore has the potential to further
increase insecurity in the region.
The fight against the activities of non-State actors
using legal and institutional mechanisms is becoming
difficult. Therefore, with respect to terrorist groups,
we must adapt our tools and mechanisms against the
traffic to their versatile and flexible structures. The
United Nations process under way currently, including
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals, could help to target our common response to
the object of our debate today. The General Assembly’s
high-level review of the Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons in October will be a
good opportunity in that regard. The same applies
to the upcoming negotiations on the global compact

S/PV.7898

for safe, orderly and regular migration, dealing with
trafficking in migrants and contemporary forms of
slavery. Romania will contribute fully to the thematic
sessions and to negotiations on the Global Compact,
given the need for a comprehensive and cross-cutting
approach to all forms of human mobility, without losing
sight of the potential for abuses.
In all issues related to trafficking, prevention
plays a key role. Romania, too, has confronted human
trafficking networks for many years, although they
are not necessarily linked to conflict situations. Our
anti-trafficking agency, the main institution at the
national level, pays particular attention to prevention
campaigns, protection and assistance to victims. We
are also focusing on helping victims of trafficking
recover and their reintegration into normal life.
Romania remains firmly committed to every effort to
fight human trafficking in all situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Human Rights, Equal Opportunities and Legislation
of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Chvojka (Czech Republic): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for organizing this open debate
on trafficking in persons in conflict situations. Human
trafficking remains one of the most common violations
of human rights worldwide. Unfortunately, the Czech
Republic is no exception.
We are a target and transit country for women and
children subjected to sex trafficking and for men and
women subjected to forced labour. According to our
annual Trafficking in Human Beings Report, 50 victims
of human trafficking were identified in the Czech
Republic, mainly from Ukraine, Nigeria, Romania
or Hungary. In 2016, the Czech Government adopted
a new national strategy to combat trafficking in
human beings. The strategy emphasizes the need for a
coordinated approach in prosecuting human trafficking
and pays increased attention to assistance rendered
to victims. Its priorities are the prevention of forced
labour and trafficking in children. Gender equality and
respect for the special needs of more vulnerable victims
are its basic principles.
The main framework for practical assistance to
victims is the Government programme on support
for and protection of victims of trafficking in human
beings. Annually, more than 50 victims of various
forms of human trafficking enter the programme. The
programme represents a very effective tool of victim

17-0663029/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

support and very often leads to increased chances of the
successful prosecution of perpetrators.
To keep the programme functional, we must apply
wider preventive and educational measures. Every year,
the Czech Government provides financial resources to
non-governmental organizations focusing on preventive
and informative activities on human trafficking. One
such preventive activity is social counselling aimed at
the potential victims of trafficking, provided through
low-threshold counselling centres run by specialized
non-governmental organizations.
I would like to thank the Council for the opportunity
to discuss this crucial issue. We need to send a clear
message to all of the victims of human trafficking.
We insist on their dignity and human rights, and we
are ready to use every chance to finally make human
trafficking a thing of the past.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Family and Social Policies of Turkey.
Ms. Kaya (Turkey): We thank the United Kingdom
for organizing today’s debate and the Secretary-General
and the distinguished briefers for their statements. We
find this open debate timely and relevant, following
the adoption of the first Security Council resolution
on this topic (resolution 2331 (2016)), which Turkey
co-sponsored in December 2016.
Human trafficking constitutes a violation of human
rights and an offence to the dignity and integrity of
human beings. It is rightly described as modern-day
slavery. It is also a serious transnational organized crime,
which has immense costs on the social and economic
fabric of our societies. Due to its geographical location,
Turkey has been adversely affected by the rising trends
in human trafficking and related criminal practices. In
the crises in our region, criminal and terrorist networks
resort to different forms of exploitation of human
beings and commit gender-based sexual violence and
the forced recruitment of adults and children to fund
and sustain their operations.
Speakers before me have recalled how terrorist
organizations such as Da’esh, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab resort to human trafficking for forced labour
and enslavement. It is also important to emphasize that
the terrorist organization of the Kurdistan Workers’
Party and the Democratic Union Party (PKK/PYD)
also widely employs methods that exploit human
beings, particularly through the forced recruitment
30/78

15/03/2017

of children and young women. Turkey is actively
combating terrorist organizations such as Da’esh and
the PKK/PYD, and we support our partners in similar
efforts. In doing so, we recognize that we must address
the vulnerabilities of victims trapped in conflicts and
ensure accountability for the perpetrators.
Turkey remains strongly committed to eradicating
human trafficking through a progressive approach. In
that regard, we have introduced administrative and
legal measures that aim to combat the problem through
prevention, protection, prosecution, and cooperation.
At the international level, Turkey is a party to the
United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized
Crime and its relevant supplementary protocols. At the
regional level, since February 2016 Turkey has been
party to the Council of Europe Convention on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings. We participate
in the related activities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and engage bilaterally with
States in Eurasia.
At the domestic level, our efforts are focused
on strengthening our legislation and improving the
implementation of our obligations. In 2002, we formed a
national task force for combating human trafficking and
since then have developed and implemented two national
action plans, designed to implement international
standards in the fight against human trafficking,
eradicate that scourge in Turkey and strengthen our
institutions. More recently, in March 2016, we issued
a regulation on combating human trafficking and
protecting its victims, for which we have established
a Department for the Protection of Victims of Human
Trafficking, tasked with its effective implementation.
The Department is responsible for conducting projects
with a diverse group of stakeholders. In that regard,
we have put in place initiatives such as a multilingual
157 helpline and programmes for victim support and
voluntary safe return.
Human trafficking cannot be prevented by
Governments acting individually. We should
recalibrate and coordinate our ongoing efforts in line
with the commitments that we agreed to under the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (General
Assembly resolution 71/1). As the country hosting the
largest number of refugees in the world, including
more than 3.2 million Syrians and Iraqis, Turkey will
continue to take measures necessary to prevent the
human trafficking, forced labour and enslavement of
those who have already fled the horrors of conflict.
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
would like to thank Great Britain for organizing today’s
open debate on the problem of combating human
trafficking. This issue has recently become firmly
established on the Security Council’s agenda. However,
we would like to emphasize that by its nature, the
problem of human trafficking should not be dealt with
through the Security Council, whose mandate is not
appropriate to the topic. It will lead to duplication of the
functions of the main organs of the United Nations and
an expanded interpretation of the Council’s mandate.
Crimes such as human trafficking are transnational in
nature, and all States should take part in tackling it.
We believe firmly that the most appropriate forum for
coordinating efforts on the issue should continue to be
the General Assembly, since it represents all States,
without exception.
The President of the General Assembly recently
appointed the Permanent Representatives of Greece
and Qatar as coordinators of the negotiation process
to prepare for a high-level meeting of the Assembly
to review the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action to Combating Trafficking in Persons. The first
consultations have already been held, and it is now up to
us to see this effort through. In that connection, we urge
all States to take a serious and constructive approach to
preparing and conducting the review of the Global Plan
of Action in order to evaluate the existing problems and
develop further action to combat human trafficking.
Unfortunately, the main problem in combating
the evil of human trafficking consists in what it looks
like and what to call it. In the year since the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
United Nations has been concerned with the issue of
what to call human trafficking in the modern world.
Today, however, it is clear that in our quest for the
correct name, we have missed the most important
thing, without which it will essentially be impossible
to overcome human trafficking, which is that we have
not been able to unite our efforts — the efforts of the
countries of destination, transit and supply of this
living commodity. Every State has a different potential
and different capacities in the fight against human
trafficking; some have the resources for it, some have
less and some none at all. It is evident to us today that
we have to establish a dialogue of engagement between
developed and developing States, and that the place

S/PV.7898

for that dialogue should definitely not be the Security
Council, which States hardly associate with a place for
dialogue.
If we continue to ignore each other, to launch
competing initiatives on trafficking and to exploit
positions of privilege, including membership of the
Security Council, human trafficking will continue to
flourish. In that regard, we urge all interested States to
coordinate their efforts in an open and predictable forum
in which all States, without exception, can participate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Bokhari (Norway): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden, and my own
country, Norway.
Trafficking in persons, including forced labour
and slavery, is a grave violation and abuse of human
rights. It also constitutes a serious form of organized
crime, sometimes supported by State actors and often
conducted with impunity. Such criminal networks
exploit displaced persons and have a catalytic effect
on migration. Billions of dollars are generated each
year, fuelling conflict and terrorism and hampering
development. Women and children are particularly
exposed to trafficking, often in the form of sexual slavery
and forced labour or recruitment as child soldiers.
For terrorist groups such as Da’esh, Boko Haram
and Al-Qaida, trafficking and slavery do lasting
harm to individuals and are tools used to humiliate
and terrorize populations, as well as to raise money
for their operations. Children in armed conflict also
need to be protected from trafficking and exploitation.
International law has to be respected, and parties to a
conflict must take responsibility and act to protect and
address violations and abuses. The Secretary-General’s
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361)
confirms the existence of an evolving criminal
infrastructure designed to exploit refugees and migrants
through human trafficking, and sexual slavery.
We must make better and more effective use of
international organizations and instruments such as
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime to ensure effective international
cooperation across borders and regions. As trafficking
in persons and armed conflicts converge and become
global security challenges, we need to develop combined

17-0663031/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

tools from the security and development communities.
Those threats are both causes and effects of conflict.
We need to improve conflict analysis and
cooperation through data sharing and monitoring
between countries and across United Nations entities.
We welcome Secretary-General Guterres’ initiative
to strengthen the United Nations conflict and threat
analysis in that regard.
We also need better gender-disaggregated data and
documentation in order to develop effective responses
and services for female and male victims of sexual
exploitation. Trafficking has a clear gender dimension,
which is also recognized in Security Council resolution
2331 (2016).
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
gives us an important platform to tackle trafficking
in a more holistic manner. Sustainable Development
Goal 16, on peaceful societies, specifically calls for the
end of abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of
violence against and torture of children. Implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda brings
women’s voices and experience to the table. Again, the
peace, security and development architecture needs to
be coherent and mutually supportive.
The Nordic countries are strongly committed to
tackling all forms of trafficking and organized crime.
We are already deeply engaged in anti-trafficking
programs, in partnership with developing countries
and regional organizations. We believe it is important
to further strengthen multilateral cooperation and
partnerships. In line with Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), we also need to engage
more women and young people in both peacebuilding
activities and actions to combat human trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I welcome the Security Council presidency
of the United Kingdom and thank it for having
convened this open debate and for the presidential note
(S/PRST/2015/25), which deals with what is perhaps
one of the most tragic topics: the trafficking of persons
in armed conflicts.
The statements we have heard this morning paint
a picture of the horror that millions of people suffer
due to trafficking of persons in armed conflicts and the
challenges that the international community confronts
32/78

15/03/2017

in effectively addressing that phenomenon, which
especially afflicts women and children. The trafficking
of persons is the slavery of our times. It is not only
an abomination of the past; millions of people today
live in conditions of slavery. Most trafficking victims
are vulnerable women and children, almost always
tricked or abducted and forced to live a life of suffering,
exploitation, torture or servitude. That cruel practice
has become a global industry, and it must be decisively
combated by all.
In September 2015, through the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, Member States committed
to adopting measures relating to the trafficking of
persons. As the Secretary-General himself expressed
in his statement this morning, the Agenda is a valuable
tool for all States, in keeping with our commitments, to
contribute to the eradication of that scourge.
The figures are disheartening, and Colombia is no
stranger to this issue. That is why I wish to reiterate
the unswerving commitment of the Government to the
fight against that phenomenon, which has a nature and
effects that lead to human rights abuses. Consequently,
we believe it is essential for our efforts to be able to
bolster countries’ capabilities to more comprehensively
combat this kind of crime.
Between 2012 and 2016, the Government of
Colombia assisted 199 citizens who were victims of
human trafficking, and in 2016 alone, we provided
immediate assistance to 37 victims of reported cases of
human trafficking. Similarly, in 2016 there were 28,052
undocumented — and often exploited — migrants in
Colombia, most coming from countries of our region
and other parts of the world that use this transit route to
countries in the North.
That is why, among other legal and governmental
measures, we joined the initiative of the Global Action
to Prevent and Address Trafficking in Persons and the
Smuggling of Migrants, which the Government will
support with a view to assisting and protecting victims
and vulnerable people, as well as advancing prevention,
investigation and prosecution efforts.
Echoing the appeals of the Secretary-General and
the President this morning, only together can we tackle
this scourge and in that way seek to free our countries
from the transnational organized crime that profits
from it.
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Marcelino (Portugal): I would like to
thank the United Kingdom presidency of the Security
Council for convening this ministerial open debate on
trafficking in human beings and for following up on the
debate organized last year by Spain. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres,
the United Kingdom’s Independent Anti-Slavery
Commissioner, Mr. Kevin Hyland, and Ms. Ilwad
Elman for their comprehensive briefings.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
Trafficking in human beings is an offence to
the dignity and integrity of the human being and is
one of the most serious violations of human rights.
Every year, millions of men, women and children are
victims of being trafficked for various kinds of abuses
and exploitation.
It is a complex reality, often involving transnational
organized criminal networks that prey on the
vulnerabilities and weaknesses of trafficked persons.
Trafficking in human beings is often exacerbated
in situations of conflict and humanitarian crisis
and isaggravated by factors such as poverty, gender
inequality, unemployment, weak rule of law and
poor governance. All that renders those caught in the
crossfire disproportionately vulnerable to trafficking.
We note with concern the increasing trend of
trafficking in persons, particularly women and girls, in
situations of conflict-related sexual violence used as a
tactic of war by violent extremist groups.
To be effective, any intervention must be based
on common and well-coordinated efforts. Bilateral,
regional and international comprehensive cooperation
among countries of origin, transit and destination,
including effective information-sharing, is crucial to
addressing human trafficking resulting from conflict.
This is a global issue that demands collective action.
The crime of trafficking in persons is generally
under-recorded and under-reported. We must fight the
culture of impunity for those who commit those crimes;
the responsible must be held accountable and brought
to justice. Portugal urges all States that have not yet
done so to accede to and ratify the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United

S/PV.7898

Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. My delegation looks forward to the high-level
review of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons, later this year.
Portugal has made significant efforts to prevent
and combat trafficking in human beings through
the implementation of several national plans on
human trafficking, developed with cross-sectoral
involvement including the private sector and civil
society organizations.
In 2008, Portugal created the Trafficking in
Human Beings Observatory to collect and analyse
data on trafficking. The third national plan against
trafficking in human beings (2014-2017), currently
being implemented, contains 53 policy measures. The
third national plan against trafficking in human beings
reflects my country’s commitments, in particular within
the framework of the United Nations, the Council of
Europe, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.
The efforts made by Portugal in combating
trafficking in human beings have been recognized
in several international forums, most recently by the
Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in
Human Beings of the Council of Europe.
To conclude, in brief, trafficking in human beings
is one of the most heinous crimes against human
dignity. Preventing it and punishing the perpetrators
and all those involved is critical to ensuring dignity
and freedom for all, in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and with our collective
efforts towards the consolidation of peace and security.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): Human trafficking
and slavery in all their forms are among the most
despicable crimes known to humanity, as they affect
those most vulnerable, such as migrants and internally
displaced persons, especially women and girls. When
committed in conflict situations, such acts might even
amount to war crimes or crimes against humanity. The
victims of these crimes are often subjected to organ
harvesting, sexual exploitation, forced labour or forced
marriage. Brazil supports efforts aimed at helping
victims recover their dignity and ensuring that they
have access to justice.
Displaced communities are particularly vulnerable
to trafficking and enslavement by criminal groups and
terrorist organizations. Long-term solutions can arise

17-0663033/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

only from multilateral approaches to peace and security
that address the underlying causes of conflicts and
firmly set dialogue and mediation as priorities. More
often than not, military intervention leads to increased
civilian suffering and vulnerability. The expansion of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant into Libyan
territory is a reminder of the destabilization that may
result from military action.
The international community can do more to
combat this scourge. Little regard and few resources
have been given to sustain peace in crisis or in postconflict situations. Closer cooperation among States
and international agencies can help rescue victims and
bring traffickers to justice. Advancing the universality
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
would contribute to ensuring accountability for those
responsible for such crimes, when committed in the
context of an armed conflict.
Terrorism and transnational organized crime are
different problems that require different remedies.
The interrelationship between them may, obviously,
arise under specific circumstances, but should in
no way be deemed universal or predetermined. It is
important to pay attention to the forum in which these
issues should be primarily discussed. Terrorism, as a
threat to international peace and security, should be
addressed in the Council. Organized crime, in turn,
remains primarily a domestic public-security issue. It is
more appropriately addressed as a matter of enhanced
international cooperation than as an issue pertaining to
collective security.
While human trafficking and slavery occur in
scenarios plagued by armed conflict, there are no
automatic linkages between these phenomena. They
also take place in situations that do not threaten
international peace and security. For these issues to
be effectively addressed by the United Nations in all
their forms, the Security Council should be mindful
of the mandate and technical expertise of the General
Assembly and of the Human Rights Council, as well
as of the crucial role of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in this realm.
Migration itself should not be criminalized or
confused with the criminalization of trafficking in
persons. Our actions should aim at protecting the rights of
and providing assistance to those people who are forced
to leave their homes and fall prey to human traffickers.
The international community has a responsibility to act
34/78

15/03/2017

to find a solution of the refugee crisis. It is not coherent
to make a case for the responsibility to protect and the
protection of civilians while turning our backs on those
fleeing conflict and persecution.
As my country’s experience in granting humanitarian
visas to Haitians since 2012 has shown, one of the
most effective means of dismantling criminal humantrafficking networks is to provide regular and safe ways
of entry for those forced to move.
Let us all work together to ensure that human
trafficking and slavery in all their forms can be brought
to a definitive end and that its victims can resume their
lives with dignity and, above all, with hope.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the African Union.
Mr. António: Allow me to start by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on having assumed the presidency
of the Security Council, as well as on the priority
your presidency has wisely chosen to give to the issue
of conflict prevention in Africa during this month. I
wish to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his inspiring remarks this morning. I also thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov; the United
Kingdom Independent Anti-Slavery Commissioner,
Mr. Kevin Hyland; and Ms. Ilwad Elman, of the
Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre, for their
respective briefings.
Today’s open debate is all the more fitting and
timely given that it is taking place this month, during
which we mark the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave
Trade. The annual observance of this Day offers an
opportunity not only to honour the memory of the
victims of that dark chapter of our history, but also to
raise awareness about the dangers of what is commonly
referred to as modern slavery. It is indeed extremely
disturbing that two centuries after the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade, slavery still exists today in
many different forms and continues to claim millions
of victims every day. According to the International
Labour Organization, there are over 21 million children,
women and men living in modern slavery, of whom
approximately 3.7 million are to be found in Africa.
These figures tell a devastating story of modern slavery
that should serve as a wake-up call for the members of
the international community to urgently work together
to prevent and eradicate this scourge. This sense of
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

urgency has been rightfully captured in the recent
resolution 2331 (2016), which urges decisive action to
end human trafficking, including against terrorist and
all armed groups.
If we are to make a tangible contribution to solving
this complex problem, we must go beyond general
statements on the need to address its various root causes
and take concrete steps in this area. Our efforts should
focus also on eradicating the different enablers of
these horrific crimes, which notably include protracted
armed conflicts as well as the spread of terrorism and
organized crime. Equally important is the need to
acknowledge the fact that the scope and severity of its
causes have been aggravated by the ongoing migration
crisis. Many recently published reports point out that
criminal networks are taking advantage of the current
migration crisis to force more people into bonded labour
and other types of slavery. The devastating effects on
refugees and asylum-seekers, who are among the most
vulnerable people, cannot be overemphasized.
What is needed most is decisive action at the
national, regional and international levels to uphold
human dignity and strengthen the fight against these
shameful practices that are unworthy of humankind.
Against that background, in order to foster the
implementation of the international legal framework
on trafficking in persons, the African Union has
adopted a range of policy instruments to prevent and
combat human trafficking, namely, the Ouagadougou
Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings,
Especially Women and Children; the Migration
Policy Framework for Africa; and the African Union
Commission Initiative Against Trafficking. Those
instruments have provided the required push for
action, and the number of countries that have enacted
anti-trafficking legislation has more than doubled in
recent years. Consequently, more and more convictions
of traffickers have been made possible and, hopefully,
an increasing number of victims are being rescued
and protected.
Despite those efforts, human trafficking and
the smuggling of migrants have remained a constant
challenge on the African continent. We have an
estimated 3.7 million African men, women and children
still trapped in forced labour and working under extreme
coercion, largely in the informal economy. The African
continent needs to step up its efforts, in coordination
with the international community, to combat and

S/PV.7898

eradicate all of those criminal forms of exploitation of
human beings.
The President: I now give the floor to the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
slavery, including its causes and consequences.
Ms. Bhoola: It is an honour for me to brief the
Council today in my capacity as the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery,
including its causes and consequences. I thank the
Government of the United Kingdom for convening this
open debate and for the invitation to participate, as well
as for its leadership in combating modern slavery.
My predecessor in the mandate and I have conducted
numerous country visits to meet with a broad range
of Government and civil-society organizations and
survivors to assess the prevalence of slavery and related
practices in contravention of the Slavery Convention
of 1926 and the Supplementary Convention on the
Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions
and Practices Similar to Slavery of 1956. Member States
have a duty to uphold the universal protection against
slavery and the slave trade and to bring perpetrators
who violate this norm to justice. Nevertheless, as we
have heard this morning, slavery and related practices
continue to occur on an unprecedented scale, affecting
millions of men, women and children. In conflict
situations, terrorists and non-State armed groups have
reverted to the most extreme forms of slavery, in which
young girls and women are owned, exploited, sold
and traded in markets and on the Internet. Boys have
been forced to carry arms and commit acts of violence
against their own communities.
One year ago, I and the Special Rapporteur on the
right to health and Special Rapporteur on the human
rights aspects of the victims of trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, conducted a joint
country mission to Nigeria, where we met with young
men who had been forced by Boko Haram to carry
arms, engage in combat, destroy their own villages
and perform forced labour in the form of cleaning and
construction work during captivity. We met girls in
internally displaced persons camps, barely children
themselves, who have had babies as a result of forced
marriage and sexual slavery. Many of them said they
were unable to return to their communities, as they
were ostracized for being the wives of Boko Haram and
their children were despised for being of bad blood.
Despite significant Government and civil-society

17-0663035/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

efforts, they continue to be affected by gaps in physical
and psychological health care, food security, education,
livelihood support and access to justice. Those gaps
can fuel an increasing cycle of violence, in which girls
are vulnerable to being forced into transactional sex
in order to earn a living or, even worse, to conduct
suicide bombings.
What can the Security Council do? First, the
Council and member States can ensure that the multiple
ways in which slavery, forced labour and trafficking
all intersect in conflict receive a coherent global
multifaceted response, with strong leadership within
the United Nations system through continued attention
to those issues and oversight on the part of the United
Nations and through its Member States’ responses.
In that regard, I would urge Member States to engage
with target 8.7 of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) on a multistakeholder partnership aimed
at implementing that target and which calls for the
eradication of child labour, forced labour, modern
slavery and human trafficking. Achieving Sustainable
Development Goal target 8.7 is a precondition for
achieving many of the other SDGs, especially those on
gender equality and economic empowerment and the
right to health in peaceful, just and inclusive societies.
Secondly, the Council can strengthen the
normative framework for ending slavery, forced
labour and human trafficking by promoting increased
ratifications of international human rights norms and
standards, including the Protocol to the Forced Labour
Convention, 1930 (No.29) of the International Labour
Organization. Member States should be reminded
to ensure that dedicated legislation to ensure the
implementation of international standards is backed
up with robust national action plans. In addition, the
1956 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of
Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices
Similar to Slavery requires ratifying States to inform
the Secretary-General of laws they have adopted to
prohibit slavery and criminalize enslavement, and I
would encourage Security Council members to support
him in upholding that role.
Thirdly, the Council can ensure the strengthening
of humanitarian responses, as well as adopting the
strongest financial and economic measures, to stem the
transnational corruption and crime that fuels conflict.
Lastly, the Security Council can promote national
and international criminal justice to bring criminals
36/78

15/03/2017

to account, including for enslavement, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
Access to justice remains a remote prospect for
the millions subjected to trafficking, forced labour and
slavery in conflict. Prevention, protection and support
for survivors are also prerequisites for the restoration
of peace and security. In that regard, I would urge
Member States to provide funding for the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms
of Slavery, which prioritizes projects that provide
specialized assistance to women and children subjected
to slavery in conflict and humanitarian crises.
The President: I now give the floor to the Special
Representative and Coordinator for Combating
Trafficking in Human Beings of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Ms. Jarbussynova: I wish to express my deep
gratitude to the United Kingdom’s presidency of the
Security Council for convening this timely highlevel debate.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), as a comprehensive Euro-Atlantic
and Eurasian regional organization, sets the promotion
and protection of human rights at the core of any viable
security strategy. The OSCE pays considerable attention
to the perilous links between crisis situations and the
risks of trafficking. I wish, therefore, to concentrate
today on the nexus between emergencies and human
exploitation in the OSCE region and on much needed
risk-mitigation and counter-trafficking programmes.
In 2016, my Office compiled a survey of selected
aspects of the OSCE action plan against trafficking in
persons, so as to better understand developments and
challenges in their implementation. Although the data
show some progress across the areas of prevention,
prosecution and protection, they also reveal that
considerable work remains to be done. That becomes
all the more urgent if one considers the latest trends in
the trafficking in human beings.
As immigration policies tighten, migration routes
become longer and more hazardous. People on the move,
especially women and children, are particularly at risk
of falling into the hands of human traffickers. Very
often what begins as a humanitarian crisis swiftly grows
into a security crisis. The task facing us is formidable.
Of the more than 1 million irregular migrants who
surged into Europe in 2015, more than 90 per cent used
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

services provided by 40,000 individuals operating in
loose criminal networks and who continue to often
exploit irregular migrants after arrival. Since 2014,
more than 1.7 million internally displaced persons in
Ukraine have been forced to leave their homes. How
can we counteract that and meaningfully address the
magnitude of those transnational challenges? How can
we remedy the fact that, all too often, criminal networks
flourish, perpetrators go unpunished, the level of
convictions remains low worldwide and victims fail to
be compensated for their material and moral damages?
I believe that national efforts, however effective, cannot
fully tackle the complexity of this crime. In the spirit
in which Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations was forged, it is imperative that diverse actors
and first responders engage in multidisciplinary, crosssectoral and transnational efforts, wherein inclusion,
collaboration and the sharing of best practices
become watchwords in our combined endeavours
towards ensuring more effective investigations, timely
prosecutions and the prompt identification of victims.
Given the leverage of the OSCE and its
multidimensional approach, my team and I have
striven, since the onset of both the migration crisis and,
indeed, the deterioration of the situation in Ukraine, to
counter the accompanying exploitation of human life
by traffickers. It therefore gives me great pride to have
piloted the OSCE project entitled Combating Human
Trafficking along Migration Routes, in which we are
training law-enforcement officials, prosecutors, labour
inspectors, financial investigators and civil society
representatives in an intensive simulation exercise. In
that endeavour, I am extremely proud of our efficient
cooperation with the United Nations family, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Organization for Migration, as well as the
European Police Office and INTERPOL. Likewise, I
remain committed to imparting best practices to the staff
of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
on how to monitor and report trafficking-related trends
in the context of a conflict situation. Such action is
imperative given that, despite the seriousness of those
crimes, human trafficking in the context of crisisdriven situations continues to go largely unnoticed by
both governmental and non-governmental actors.
I sincerely hope that we at the OSCE can capitalize
on those achievements in the upcoming regional
consultations for a global compact for safe, orderly and

S/PV.7898

regular migration, thereby ensuring a human rightscentred approach.
Further guiding our work is the conviction that it
is important to investigate the link between terrorism
and trafficking. To that end, we are supporting a group
of experts who are addressing that issue with a special
focus on youth trafficked for terrorism.
We also recognize that it is important to take
advantage of the collective purchasing power of
Governments to eliminate the market for goods and
services produced by trafficking labour. The second
of our flagship projects in that regard seeks to prevent
trafficking in human beings in supply chains through
Government procurement and measures. To that end,
I commend the Government of the United Kingdom
for supporting our efforts in encouraging consumers,
campaigners and investors to scrutinize businesses so
as to end modern-day slavery.
Finally, given that children and unaccompanied
minors are particularly vulnerable to violence and
exploitation, next month’s seventeenth high-level
Conference of the Alliance against Trafficking in
Persons, to be held in Vienna, will focus on child
trafficking. Given that almost one in five trafficking
victims across the OSCE region is a child, the aim of
the two-day conference is to enhance the coherence of
international efforts and to develop more integrated,
effective and expert recommendations to adequately
respond to child trafficking in a manner that respects
human rights.
We owe that to children, but also to men and
women everywhere, regardless of age, status, origin or,
indeed, whether they are fleeing crisis or not. Despite
the scale and breadth of the challenges that we face, I
am convinced that close cooperation with international
and local partners will allow us to make a significant
contribution to highlighting and mitigating the scourge
of human trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson: I thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hyland, Ms. Elman and Mr. Fedotov for
their briefings.
I speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia

17-0663037/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
We would like to congratulate the United Kingdom
for convening this open debate and to commend its
keen commitment to addressing the issue of trafficking
in human beings and forced labour in conflict during
its presidency of the Security Council. We have built
on the momentum generated by previous presidencies
to address this issue, and we look forward to the
continuous commitment of the international community
to addressing this scourge.
Trafficking in human beings is a grave violation or
abuse of human rights and a serious form of organized
crime. The prohibition on trafficking in human beings
and forced labour is expressly set forth in Article 5 of
the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union. Furthermore, in its new Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy, the EU has recognized the
need to counter the spillover of insecurity that might
originate from conflicts, ranging from trafficking and
smuggling to terrorism.
We reiterate that we stand behind the commitments
in the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants
to combat human trafficking, including through targeted
measures to identify, protect and assist victims, as well
as to prevent human trafficking among those affected
by displacement, while taking into account the fact
that women and children are in particularly vulnerable
situations. We believe that it is important to strengthen
multilateral cooperation and partnerships, and, in
line with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), we
also need to engage more women and young people
in both peacebuilding activities and actions against
human trafficking.
We welcome the report (S/2106/949) submitted
by the Secretary-General in November 2016 on the
implementation of measures to counter trafficking in
persons. We note with attention the nexus between
conflict and trafficking in human beings, which can
take, in that context, many despicable forms. We
particularly note the links between conflict, trafficking
in human beings and other forms of crime. Trafficking
is gender-specific. The most recent EU data show
that trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation
continues to be the most widespread form encountered
38/78

15/03/2017

by authorities, and the majority of its victims are
women and girls. Moreover, according to the same EU
data, trafficking for the purpose of labour exploitation
affects primarily men and boys. In that respect, we call
for a more gender-specific, targeted approach in all
actions against trafficking in human beings.
We recall the need to focus on the prevention
of trafficking in human beings in all its forms.
Any other approach comes too late for the victims
of that deplorable crime. In that respect, ensuring
accountability for the perpetrators is essential as a
deterrent. We must follow the financial trails and use
all the available investigative tools and techniques to
prosecute and bring to justice the perpetrators. By
upholding and promoting international standards, as
enshrined in the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, and
other international legal instruments, we contribute
to ensuring strong foundations for the rule of law. We
need to renew and invigorate our efforts to implement
the existing legal architecture.
The EU has built an ambitious, gender-specific,
child-sensitive and comprehensive legal and policy
framework to combat trafficking in human beings.
Anti-trafficking actions also form a key part of our
external policies and funding, and the EU continues to
cooperate with and support United Nations agencies.
We recognize that instability creates an ideal
environment for the criminal activities of traffickers.
We are therefore actively supporting all United
Nations-led efforts to end the political and security
crises in Syria and Libya. We are also prioritizing
activity in connection with counter-terrorism, working
with partners throughout the world to address threats
from all terrorist organizations, including those like
Da’esh and Boko Haram, which have clearly and quite
publicly exploited and trafficked women and girls for
their own objectives. We need to understand further the
links between terrorist organizations and the organized
criminal groups that carry out the trafficking of people
and other illicit commodities. We need to actively
pursue an agenda to increase women’s participation in
peace processes and in encountering violent extremism
so as to ensure effective measures and solutions. We
must work together to do all we can to stop this multiple
scourge on our societies.
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

I have a much longer statement, but in the interest of
time I will stop here. The full version of our statement
has been distributed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): We thank the United
Kingdom for this opportunity to speak on human
trafficking in conflict and on modern slavery. The
prohibition of slavery is one of the very rare norms of
international law applicable at all times in all places
to all actors. States are under legal obligation to
criminalize, investigate, prosecute and punish slavery
wherever it occurs. Over 90 per cent of countries have
legislation in place criminalizing human trafficking.
Yet estimates suggest that 46 million people have fallen
victim to modern slavery and human trafficking, and
convictions for those crimes amount to a mere fraction
of the total number of perpetrators. The impunity gap
is glaring, in spite of the strong universal legal norm.
Resolution 2331 (2016) on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations, adopted last December, was the
first-ever Council resolution on the issue. It identified
a correlation between human trafficking, sexual
violence, armed conflict, terrorism and transnational
organized crime. It also highlighted the gender-specific
implications of human trafficking in conflict.
Over 70 per cent of trafficking victims are
women and girls. This is why it is particularly
important to explore the gender dimensions of modern
slavery — which was the main topic of a ministerial-level
side event organized jointly by the United Kingdom,
Nigeria and Liechtenstein this past Monday. We
hope to take from that event concrete actions that the
international community can implement in its efforts
to end and prevent slavery, particularly as it pertains to
female victims.
Last June, Liechtenstein organized a two-day
workshop, together with the United Kingdom Mission
and the United Nations University, on ways the Security
Council can address and tackle human trafficking in
conflict. The resulting report identified 10 ideas for
action on the part of the Security Council, some of
which were reflected in both the report of the SecretaryGeneral on trafficking in persons (S/2016/949) and
resolution 2331 (2016).
One of the central conclusions was the need for
a paradigm shift, meaning recognition that national

S/PV.7898

criminal justice responses may need to be supported by
other forms of Security Council leverage — normative,
financial and technological — and the need for
innovative approaches in the fight against modern
slavery. Businesses using forced labour currently
generate estimated annual profits of $150 billion. One
obvious innovative approach is to involve financial
institutions in detecting and disrupting financial
flows associated with human trafficking — to “follow
the money”.
To further explore that avenue, we are organizing a
two-day workshop with the United Nations University
at the end of the month. It will bring together leaders
from the financial sector, including financial regulators,
investigators and prosecutors, and representatives of
Member States and of civil society. We will discuss
the nature of the financial sector’s exposure to
modern slavery, human trafficking and forced labour,
risks associated with that exposure and measures the
financial sector can take to combat those crimes, as well
as the role of different actors in protecting the financial
sector against involvement in modern slavery, human
trafficking and forced labour. The outcome of the
workshop will be a limited set of concrete, actionable
ideas and recommendations to assist the financial
sector, regulators and other stakeholders in the fight
against modern slavery and human trafficking.
While the Council has underscored that acts or
offences associated with human trafficking in conflict
may constitute war crimes, it has failed to acknowledge
that they may also amount to crimes against humanity.
The full potential of international criminal justice
needs to be exhausted if we are to be serious about
eradicating slavery.
In her briefing before the Security Council in
November 2016 (see S/PV.7806), International Criminal
Court Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda indicated that her
Office would probe the trafficking of migrants out of
Libya for evidence of war crimes and/or crimes against
humanity. Hundreds of thousands of migrants are being
smuggled from Libya into Europe. The International
Organization for Migration estimates that up to 76 per
cent of them have fallen victim to practices amounting
to human trafficking. Women and children usually bear
the brunt of those crimes. We look forward to receiving
the results of that probe and hope it will provide us
with a better understanding of how and when human
trafficking may amount to atrocity crimes and ways we
can use the relevant tools available to us.

17-0663039/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

The upcoming report by the Secretary-General
is an opportunity to broaden the approach to both
the issue itself and its associated terminology. It is a
cross-cutting issue relevant to all of the pillars of the
United Nations and an integral part of the commitments
made by Member States, such as the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We hope that the Council
will remain seized of this important issue, and we look
forward to presenting the results from our efforts to
combat modern slavery and human trafficking at the
next open debate on the matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to convey my thanks to the United
Kingdom for organizing this open debate, and to the
Secretary-General and the briefers for their inputs.
I align myself with the statement to be made by
the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The nexus between conflict-related situations
and human trafficking, sexual exploitation, forced
labour, slavery and other similar practices and their
cross-border dynamics have been well recognized and
acknowledged by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2016/949) as a global challenge. But we all know
that the global and growing phenomenon and challenge,
with its acute humanitarian emergencies, is not the
cause; it is just a symptom.
Underlying
factors
contributing
to
the
phenomenon — particularly foreign aggression and
intervention, occupation, war and protracted conflicts,
political instability, terrorism, genocide and ethnic
cleansing — create conditions under which millions
of people become displaced in their own countries, or
migrate or seek refuge overseas in a quest for safety,
stability and opportunity, at the risk of becoming more
vulnerable to crimes such as human trafficking, forced
labour or contemporary forms of slavery. Dealing with
those underlying causes is the primary responsibility of
this Council, and if the Council chooses to ignore them
and instead to focus on the symptoms in its debates and
deliberations, it will certainly fail to address them in a
proper manner.
Complex conflicts created in the Middle East and
North Africa have led to the formation of many armed
groups, terrorists and powerful international criminal
40/78

15/03/2017

networks and the upsurge in the exploitation of people
through trafficking. Such exploitation takes many
forms, including forced labour, slavery and recruitment
by armed groups. Exploitation in those situations can
occur because of the increased vulnerability of people
fleeing conflict as a result of widespread human,
material and economic losses and general erosion of the
rule of law in the affected territories.
Under those circumstances, civilian populations
are viewed by some armed groups as a resource or
commodity to be trafficked. They are subjected to
widespread targeting and killing of ethnic and religious
minorities, abductions and cross-border trafficking of
women and children, internally displaced and refugee
women and girls, as well as forced marriages to fighters
or wealthy foreigners, as in cases involving Da’esh,
Boko Haram and similar terrorist and extremist groups.
Those cases can emerge as genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
First and foremost, we need full respect for Article
4 of the Charter of the United Nations, to deal with the
underlying causes of the mass influx of persons. The
next step would be to reaffirm the responsibility of
all Governments to safeguard and protect the rights of
refugees and migrants in accordance with international
and domestic laws, reinforcing existing laws against all
related illegal or violent acts.
The United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons is a basic document
endorsed by the General Assembly. It should be fully
and effectively implemented. The upcoming review of
the Plan of Action later this year is a unique opportunity
to analyse and evaluate that document at this critical
juncture and to improve shared international efforts in
and responsibility for combating trafficking in persons
by all States Members of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening today’s open debate and
for its leadership and commitment with respect to this
important issue.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
In recent years, the problem of human trafficking in
conflict situations has become more exacerbated, both
in scope and nature. We are witnessing an increasing
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

number of conflicts, and, unfortunately, human
trafficking has become a regular feature and by-product
of armed conflicts. Trafficking in persons in conflict
situations has therefore reached an unprecedented scale.
In order to address the problem of human trafficking
in conflict situations, the international community
needs to focus simultaneously on prevention, protection
and prosecution.
First, preventing violent conflict from occurring
in the first place is the best guarantee to avert human
trafficking from happening. That is one of the many
reasons why Estonia fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s emphasis on shifting from reaction to
prevention. We commend his efforts to improve the
United Nations capacity to take early action to prevent
violent conflict and link the reform of the United
Nations peace and security architecture with the
reform of the United Nations development system. The
United Nations needs to fulfil its core functions more
effectively and in a more coherent manner.
Secondly, the international community needs to
scale up protection efforts to ensure that those affected
by conflict situations, especially women and girls,
do not become vulnerable to traffickers. To achieve
this, Estonia calls for better coordination among
stakeholders and institutions. The Security Council
could lead this process and foster greater normative,
operational and strategic coherence across the United
Nations system on the topic by engaging directly with
relevant United Nations mandate holders, including the
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, and the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and
its consequences, the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
for Children and Armed Conflict, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
relevant agencies.
Thirdly, there must be no room for impunity, and
all perpetrators must be held accountable. While the
problem of trafficking is international in nature and
therefore requires an international response, we must
not forget that the primary responsibility for bringing
those responsible to justice lies with the States. National
policy and action programmes, including efforts to train
immigration authorities, police forces, prosecutors and
judges, are crucial to eradicating human trafficking.

S/PV.7898

While most countries have adopted legislation
criminalizing human trafficking, attention still needs
to be directed to enforcement. Accordingly, the States
themselves and the international community must
take action to prevent the culture of impunity from
spreading. Furthermore, victims must have access to
adequate assistance, support and effective remedies.
It is important for the international community to
continue its efforts aimed at tackling and preventing
the activities of armed groups, terrorist groups and
transnational organized crime groups that are involved
in human trafficking, forced labour and modern slavery.
Estonia believes that trafficking in persons in conflict
situations must and can be eradicated. But to reach
this goal, the fight needs to be stepped up. We remain
ready to actively participate in future discussions to
shape the international community’s response to this
global threat.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): First of all, I would like
to thank the United Kingdom for organizing this very
important open debate here at the Security Council.
Modern slavery is a crime of the twenty-first
century. It is adaptive, cynical, sophisticated and
extremely complex, and, as such, it is a crime that
can be fought only by applying modern, innovative,
adaptable approaches that utilize the findings of new
research and the latest technology. Our actions need to
be tailored to the specific case at hand. Moreover, our
response has to be gender- and age-sensitive, as well as
specific to the type of exploitation in question.
I would like to emphasize the need for the United
Nations to play a leadership role in the fight against
all forms of modern slavery. Today, we are discussing
a topic that is complex. Numerous United Nations
entities — not only the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, but also the International Labour
Organization (ILO), the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the International
Organization for Migration, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UN Women
and UNICEF — are mandated to work on specific
aspects of this challenge.
Unfortunately, duplication of efforts is frequent,
and we can even find competition, and that helps
no one. The complexity of the problem requires a

17-0663041/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

strengthened, better coordinated and coherent United
Nations response, and it is also the very minimum
that the millions of victims deserve. Moreover, this is
exactly what the leaders of 193 States Members of the
United Nations called for when they adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and what the
Security Council requested in resolution 2331 (2016).
Taking all the foregoing into account, we encourage
the Secretary-General to place this issue high on his
agenda, align it with the prevention-focused reform
efforts and play a proactive role in fostering better
coordination and deepening cooperation, in particular
within but also beyond the United Nations. Appointing
a special envoy tasked with facilitating coordination,
strengthening the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons and/or convening a task
force to guide how the United Nations response should
be further strengthened are just some options.
I wish to announce that later this year, Hungary
will host the regional consultations of the ILO-launched
Alliance 8.7 initiative, the very purpose of which is
to strengthen cooperation and coordination among
United Nations entities and other key stakeholders.
Hungary is looking forward to the 2017 review process
of the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, and we are ready to participate actively in
future discussions.
I truly believe that we have to raise awareness and
make this crime as visible as we can throughout the
world — through the media, through artistic expression,
with journalists and artists working together. We have
to make everybody aware of and understand this crime.
Further, while we encourage the broadest possible
ratification of the Palermo Protocol and the Protocol
of 2014 to the ILO Forced Labour Convention, we wish
to emphasize that effective implementation of these
international instruments is also essential.
Ensuring accountability is a must. States should
step up their efforts to find the perpetrators and bring
them to justice. Given the transboundary nature of these
crimes, international judicial and law enforcement
cooperation is fundamental. In this context, I would
also like to highlight the potential of the mechanism
currently being established to assist in the investigation
and prosecution of those responsible for the most
serious crimes committed in Syria, including those that
fall within the theme of today’s open debate. Hungary
42/78

15/03/2017

has offered its voluntary contribution to the mechanism,
and we encourage others to do the same.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mrs. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation wishes to
thank the United Kingdom presidency for convening
today’s debate, which derives added importance now,
given the current annual session of the Commission
on the Status of Women. According to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 79 per cent, almost
80 per cent, of the victims of trafficking are women and
children, which is why combating that menace is both
urgent and critical.
The scourge of slavery is an abomination, for it
perpetuates the domination and degradation of human
life. Modern slavery, unlike its traditional form, does
not seek to own people. Rather, it aims to control them
by exploiting their lives or the fruits of their labour.
Sexual slavery in conflict situations, the trafficking of
women and girls, and bonded and forced labour are all
manifestations of that evil.
Transnational organized criminal gangs have
become the primary purveyors of that human misery,
which they perpetuate for financial gain. Their growing
nexus with terrorists is a cause for global concern, not
least because it has a direct bearing on international
peace and security. Conflict situations, through their
confluence of circumstance and opportunities, provide
an ideal environment for such unholy alliances.
Heinous crimes such as the enslavement of women and
children, their sexual exploitation and their recruitment
in armed groups are an outrage, not only to all norms
of international law, but also to humankind itself. We
must work together to find an end to that perversion.
Resolution 2331 (2016) of December 2016 was
significant, not only as an unequivocal affirmation by the
international community of its commitment to confront
that menace, but also as a call for immediate action
aimed at preventing, criminalizing and prosecuting
those engaged in the trafficking in persons. While the
eradication of contemporary forms of slavery is an end
in itself, the interdiction of trafficking-based financial
flows to terrorist groups must also be addressed.
The United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women
and Children have served as a centrepiece of the
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

existing global framework aimed at combating
transnational organized crime. They, in turn, have also
inspired and informed domestic policies. As a party
to the Convention, my country, Pakistan, has taken
a number of legislative and administrative steps to
address human trafficking.
The international community is currently
witnessing human displacement on a historic and
unprecedented scale. A pervasive sense of despondency
and lack of prospects, induced by protracted conflict and
insecurity, lies at the core of that phenomenon — one
of the greatest tragedies of our times and a defining
challenge of our era. Large sections of the respective
populations, especially women and children, remain
especially vulnerable. As the international community
seeks to evolve cohesive and coordinated strategies to
manage those movements, the interest and well-being
of the most vulnerable must remain paramount in our
policy responses. We must, in particular, ensure that
the victims of such circumstance do not, in their quest
to find safety and protection beyond their borders,
become fresh prey to trafficking and abuse.
In Pakistan, we have lived this ideal by generously
hosting our Afghan brothers and sisters for almost four
decades and ensuring their safety in their temporary
home. There is an urgent imperative to evolve a
better and more coordinated global response. Close
collaboration between States must underpin the success
of that approach. Going forward, a fundamental
challenge for the international community would be to
strike the right balance between human rights and the
law-enforcement aspects of anti-trafficking policies.
Victims of trafficking must be protected, not penalized.
Concerted efforts should also be made to address the
underlying root causes. Unless we resolutely put out
the fires of wars and conflicts that breed and fuel
such phenomena, our efforts will at best be spasmodic
and insufficient.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See thanks
the presidency of the United Kingdom for raising today’s
topic to the level of open debate in this Chamber.
In his words and actions, Pope Francis has made
it very clear from his very first days as Pope that the
fight against trafficking in persons would be one of the
defining priorities of his papacy. He has not hesitated

S/PV.7898

in defining it as a form of slavery, a crime against
humanity, a shameful and grave violation of human
rights, an atrocious scourge that is present throughout
the world on a broad scale, including as it relates
to tourism.
The flood of trafficking victims is the result of
many tributaries. Among them are extreme poverty,
underdevelopment and exclusion, especially when
combined with a lack of access to education or
scarce, even non-existent, employment opportunities.
Human traffickers have no qualms about exploiting
very vulnerable people escaping economic privation
and natural disasters. In our day, however, wars and
conflicts have become the prime driver of trafficking
in persons. They provide an enabling environment
in which traffickers can operate, as persons fleeing
persecutions and conflicts are particularly vulnerable
to being trafficked. Conflicts have created conditions
in which terrorists, armed groups and transnational
organized-crime networks can thrive by exploiting
individuals and populations reduced to extreme
vulnerability through persecution and multiple forms
of violence.
In that context, my delegation once again expresses
profound concern for the ancient Christian communities,
the Yazidis and other religious and ethnic minority
groups in Mesopotamia, who have been enslaved, sold,
killed, trafficked and subjected to extreme forms of
humiliation. The apparent lack of serious efforts to bring
to justice the perpetrators of such acts of genocide and
massive violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law leaves many people perplexed and
wondering how many more atrocities can be tolerated
before the victims obtain rescue, protection and justice.
Once more, the Holy See would like to underline
its constant and firm condemnation of the relative ease
with which arms, even weapons of mass destruction,
get into the hands of terrorists and armed groups, giving
them the means to continue, with equal ease, to traffic
and enslave individuals and even entire communities.
The proliferation of arms, whether they are weapons of
mass destruction or merely conventional, facilitates and
prolongs violent conflicts that make people extremely
vulnerable to traffickers and smugglers. As long as
wars and conflicts rage, the trafficking in persons for
sexual exploitation, forced labour and similar crimes
will continue to flourish.

17-0663043/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Holy See therefore strongly appeals to States
not to supply arms to groups or regimes that would most
likely use them against their very own people, but to
implement arms-related treaties strictly and to use the
full force of the law in the fight against arms trafficking.
Moreover, the criminalization of undocumented and
irregular migrants exacerbates their vulnerabilities,
drives them closer to the embrace of traffickers and to
more extreme forms of exploitation, and renders them
less likely to collaborate with the law-enforcement
authorities to catch and punish the traffickers.
The challenge that trafficking in persons poses is
immense and requires a commensurate response. Today,
unfortunately, that response is still far from being equal
to the challenge. As Pope Francis has noted several
times, even though the international community has
adopted numerous agreements and individual countries
have adopted laws aimed at ending slavery in all its
forms, even though various strategies to combat that
phenomenon have been launched at both the national
and the international levels, much more still needs
to be done on the level of raising public awareness
and effecting a better coordination of efforts by
Governments, the judiciary, law-enforcement officials
and social workers to save the millions of children,
women and men who are still deprived of freedom and
are forced to live in slave-like conditions.
In a special way, the Holy See urges the Security
Council to play a greater and more active role in the
fight against the scourge of trafficking in persons,
primarily through its responsibility to prevent and end
armed conflicts and to help in the consolidation of
peace and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom for
maintaining the momentum created in the previous
debate on the topic (see S/PV.7847), held last December
at the initiative of Spain.
Armed conflicts, terrorism and humanitarian crises
have exposed individuals to increased risks of being
trafficked in conflict zones and beyond. Women and
children are particularly vulnerable to this risk; they
make up, in fact, 79 per cent of all detected trafficking
44/78

15/03/2017

victims. In response to the scourge of trafficking,
we must find answers, which will be as multifaceted
as the terrible crime itself. At the international level,
we need to aim for universal ratification of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols, in particular the Protocol
against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air, and ensure that we collect the data needed to fully
understand the challenges, for instance by developing a
comprehensive data-collection system.
We must follow a comprehensive, multidisciplinary
and cross-border approach. We must increase synergies
among United Nations agencies and develop a
comprehensive joint United Nations response that
includes the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and on Children
and Armed Conflict. The United Nations Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons is
one important instrument for such coordination.
We should apprise the Security Council of the
link between human trafficking and human rights
violations, and support the Council’s ability to look into
the connections of such trafficking with transnational
organized crime and terrorism. Furthermore, we
should use the upcoming review process of the Global
Plan of Action on Trafficking and its high-level
meeting in October to define appropriate responses to
current challenges and discuss measures to implement
trafficking-related Sustainable Development Goals. In
addition, we must go after the proceeds from human
trafficking and ensure accountability.
At the national level, Germany has taken additional
steps to address the growing challenges resulting from
the recent large movements of refugees and migrants.
We know that resettlement and relocation programmes
can reduce the risk of vulnerable persons falling victim
to greedy traffickers. With that in mind, we have
adopted new legal measures to provide trafficking
victims with residence permits. As one example, I
would like to mention our programme through which
over 1,000 Yazidi refugees have reached Germany,
including Ms. Nadia Murad Basee Taha, the United
Nations Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of
Survivors of Human Trafficking.
We also started an initiative with the United Nations
Children’s Fund and multiple national partners to protect
those staying in refugee accommodations — in particular
women and children — from violence, including
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

trafficking. As part of that initiative, minimum standards
for protection were published in 2016. Specially trained
coordinators will help implement those standards in up
to 100 refugee accommodations until the end of 2017.
On a more general note, in 2016, we passed
legislation to strengthen the protection of women and
children. Among other measures, we adopted new
criminal-law provisions.
To conclude my statement, I would like to reiterate
how important it is for us all to work together and step up
our efforts to address conflict and instability, because
they represent the key push factors for migration and
human trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): Let me first thank the
United Kingdom presidency for convening this timely
and pertinent open debate.
Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
Conflict and post-conflict settings often create
the kind of conditions in which civilians are more
exposed to the risk of becoming victims of trafficking.
People fleeing from violence might become victims of
trafficking along their migration route or after their
arrival in their destination countries. Armed groups are
also actively engaged in the trafficking of persons in
the territories in which they operate.
There is much evidence that the smuggling of
migrants, including from conflict and post-conflict
settings, is increasingly intertwined with trafficking
in persons. Well-managed regular migration and
addressing the root causes of irregular migration
are imperative to efforts to prevent the smuggling of
migrants and trafficking in persons along migration
routes. In that regard, we are also looking forward
to the informal thematic session on the smuggling of
migrants, trafficking in persons and contemporary
forms of slavery, including appropriate identification,
protection and assistance to migrants and trafficking
victims, in Vienna later this year. The event will take
place in the framework of the preparatory process
leading to the adoption of the global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration.
As a transit and destination country for the
increased migration movements we see in Europe,

S/PV.7898

Austria has scaled up training for immigration and
asylum officers and the staff of reception centres,
putting a special focus on identifying victims of human
trafficking. At the same time, international cooperation
in investigations into trafficking in persons and the
smuggling of migrants has been intensified, inter alia,
by establishing a Joint Operational Office against
Human Smuggling Networks in Vienna as a regional
platform and contact point for investigators from the
countries of origin, transit and destination.
Trafficking, as many have pointed out, remains in
large parts gender-specific. That has been confirmed by
the findings of the 2016 United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime Global Report on Trafficking in Persons.
Trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation still
constitutes more than half of all trafficking cases,
and women and girls are overwhelmingly affected
by it. Violence against women, sexual exploitation
and forced marriage — as often displayed in conflict
settings — illustrate that gender inequality forms part
of the overall problem.
Children are particularly vulnerable to becoming
the victims of trafficking. The overall proportion
of child victims of trafficking stands at 28 per cent.
Thousands of children have been recruited by armed
groups and are used as child soldiers. Girls are also
forced into marriages and used for domestic work
and sexual slavery. Boys — apart from being used in
combat — are also exploited through forced labour, for
example in the exploitation of natural resources.
In armed conflict situations, trafficking in
persons is also used as a strategy to target ethnic and
religious minorities. Austria continues to advocate for
a victim-centred approach, with a focus on preventing
trafficking in persons and protecting victims of
trafficking or other serious forms of exploitation. It is
also clear that States have the primary responsibility
for bringing perpetrators to justice and for ending
the climate of impunity. In post-conflict settings,
accountability and transitional-justice mechanisms,
including at the international level, are key elements
for sustainable peace.
It is important to recognize the links that exist
between conflict, trafficking in persons and other forms
of transnational organized crime. Understanding the
correlations better will help us to improve our response
aimed at preventing and combating trafficking.

17-0663045/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

With its portfolio of technical assistance
programmes, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime has been and continues to be a central partner
for assisting Member States in implementing practical
measures to combat trafficking in persons. At this
point, we would also like to acknowledge the valuable
expertise and contribution of non-governmental
organizations in the framework of the coordinated
efforts on the national, regional and international
levels. I am also very glad that we had the chance
to hear from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe’s Special Representative and
Co-ordinator for Combating Trafficking in Human
Beings, which provided a good example of what the
regional organizations can contribute.
We reiterate the importance of the Palermo
Protocol, which provides the internationally agreed
definition of the crime of trafficking in persons, and
focuses on the prevention of trafficking, the protection
of victims and the prosecution of perpetrators. We
invite all States to ratify it without delay and to ensure
its effective implementation.
Finally, the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Victims of Human Trafficking has facilitated direct
assistance to approximately 2,500 trafficking victims
each year. That covers only a fraction of all the victims,
and many projects are waiting for the necessary funds.
Yet it is still an immensely important contribution.
We therefore encourage all States to contribute to
the Trust Fund in order to ensure financing for many
worthwhile programmes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to discuss
an issue of such significant impact and importance in
today’s world, namely, trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. We also wish the United Kingdom every
success during its presidency of the Security Council
for the remainder of the month.
As everyone will recall, just three months ago, we
met in this same Chamber and adopted resolution 2331
(2016). My delegation sponsored it because we believed
that it contributes to rendering more visible the horror
in which thousands of men, women and children live
as victims of forced labour, slavery and other similar
46/78

15/03/2017

practices, committed by terrorist organizations that are
linked in networks of transnational organized crime.
As part of the priority given by the Government
of Peru to combating this scourge, on 6 January the
Peruvian Congress enacted a law incorporating in
our Criminal Code the crimes of sexual exploitation
and slavery and other forms of exploitation, with
sentences of 10 to 15 years imprisonment. The crime
of forced labour will be subject to a sentence of 6
to 12 years in prison. That is a major effort that has
been complemented by the establishment of a national
policy against trafficking in persons and other forms
of exploitation.
Peru, which respects human rights and fundamental
freedoms, believes it is essential that we combat
trafficking in persons with an integrated, comprehensive
and coordinated crime strategy. By integrated, we mean
that there should be a holistic approach to prevention,
to the prosecution of those responsible and to assistance
to their victims, particularly the most vulnerable, such
as children, adolescents and women.
By comprehensive, we mean that we should consider
trafficking in persons as a crime related to others
such as drug trafficking and trafficking in migrants,
which also require effective action in line with the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto, to which
we encourage adherence.
By coordinated, we mean coordination among
the national agencies concerned, which also involves
strengthening bilateral, regional and global cooperation
at the international level. In that regard, I would
like to highlight Peru’s initiative of legal protective
zones, which seeks to establish a bloc of bilateral
agreements that the Peruvian Foreign Ministry is
already implementing with neighbouring countries. So
far we have already signed agreements with Colombia,
Bolivia and Ecuador, and negotiations are under way
with Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Paraguay.
We welcome the work of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons, and
we trust that we can continue to rely on the assistance
and steady support of the United Nations, especially the
Office on Drugs and Crime. I would like to reaffirm
Peru’s energetic condemnation of human trafficking
in conflict or any other circumstances, as well as of
forced labour, especially for children, and to assure the
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council of my country’s strong support in dealing with
this serious problem.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I would like
to thank the presidency of the United Kingdom for
convening today’s ministerial-level open debate. We
appreciate the insights that have been shared by the
Secretary-General and the briefers.
Trafficking in persons represents a heart of darkness
in our midst. The unholy nexus between terrorists and
organized criminal groups in conflict situations has
further aggravated that scenario. The Security Council,
through its resolution 2331 (2016), unequivocally
condemned all instances of trafficking in persons. In
view of the request to the Secretary-General to make
recommendations for implementing the resolution, we
take this opportunity to consider five issues.
First, the Secretary-General may consider
designating a high-level focal point for coordinating
and monitoring the system-wide efforts of the United
Nations against trafficking in persons. The principal
organs of the United Nations and their subsidiary bodies
should continue to explore ways to further reinforce
and complement one another’s work, pursuant to their
respective mandates. The lessons learned from the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, as well as its regional and
national variants, could prove useful in charting a way
forward. The offices of the relevant mandate holders,
especially those on sexual violence in armed conflict,
children and armed conflict, and migration, can make
meaningful contributions.
Secondly, the victims of trafficking in persons and
related crimes, including in conflict situations, must
remain at the forefront of the United Nations countertrafficking agenda. The United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons
needs to be supported in a sustained and predictable
manner. In view of the added vulnerabilities of
refugees and displaced persons, the United Nations and
its Member States should remain seized of efforts to
address cross-border trafficking flows as part of mixed
migratory movements. My delegation underscores
the importance of addressing this issue adequately in
the forthcoming global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration, and we look forward to the relevant
thematic consultations.

S/PV.7898

Thirdly, despite significant gains in the legal
sphere, the rate of prosecution and conviction of human
traffickers around the world is still relatively low. United
Nations support can be instrumental to national and
international investigative mechanisms for gathering
evidence of crimes in a timely and systematic manner.
Such evidence can serve as an important building block
in efforts to hold perpetrators accountable and provide
justice and redress to the victims. The Security Council
may consider having recourse to the range of tools at
its disposal for fighting impunity for those responsible
for trafficking in persons and other related crimes in
conflict situations.
Fourthly, in most obvious cases, the proceeds
from trafficking in persons, slavery and forced labour
contribute directly to the financing of terrorism. The
United Nations should continue its advocacy and
support for compliance with the relevant international
legal instruments and obligations, as well as Financial
Action Task Force standards, in order to deal with any
weak links in combating the financing of terrorism. We
urge Member States to work on developing effective
intelligence networks, at regional and international
levels, in order to monitor, intercept and prosecute illicit
financial flows connected to trafficking in persons and
other related crimes.
Fifthly, the overarching priority of the United
Nations, which is the prevention of conflict, should
have a corollary effect on addressing the underlying
vulnerability factors of trafficking in persons and
other related crimes. Certain root causes of conflict
also create an environment conducive to the rise of
terrorism and violent extremism, as well as trafficking
in persons and forced labour. The Security Council and
the other relevant United Nations entities should remain
engaged with those causes as part of their respective
contributions to the goal and process of sustaining
peace, drawing on one another’s competencies.
As a country of origin, transit and destination,
Bangladesh has positioned itself at the forefront of
the global and regional counter-trafficking initiatives.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s personal commitment
to combating this scourge has been translated into a
series of legal, policy and administrative measures at
the national level.
In conclusion, in response to the Secretary-General’s
call this morning, we reaffirm our commitment to
joining hands with fellow Member States in further

17-0663047/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

strengthening the coordinated United Nations response
to and action against trafficking in persons, slavery and
forced labour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on the
important topic of trafficking in persons in conflict
situations, forced labour and slavery. We listened
carefully to the briefers’ compelling presentations,
which were a reminder of the work we have ahead of us.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union (EU), but I
would like to add some remarks in my national capacity.
According to International Labour Organization
(ILO) data, today almost 21 million people are victims
of forced labour. Of those exploited by individuals or
enterprises, 4.5 million are victims of forced sexual
exploitation. And the most horrifying number is the
approximately 5.5 million children around the world
whose lives are damaged by trafficking and forced
labour under the threat of violence. This deplorable and
dangerous phenomenon, which exists on every continent,
is increasing in scale, and it calls for global attention
and action on the part of the international community.
Contemporary forms of slavery are linked to
discrimination, social exclusion, gender inequality and
poverty. Their implications for peace and security are
especially visible in countries affected by conflict, and
they can also undermine peacebuilding efforts in postconflict situations.
Poland remains determined to fight human
trafficking and forced labour and is involved in
combating the problem at national, regional and
international levels. The Polish criminal code defines
and criminalizes slavery and human trafficking. At
the regional level, Poland implements anti-trafficking
policies, a subject that I believe was largely covered
in the EU statement. In the framework of the United
Nations, Poland was one of the initiators of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. We have also ratified all the major ILO
conventions related to forced labour, including the
Forced Labour Convention of 1930. In December 2016
we contributed to the Security Council’s open debate
on trafficking in persons (see S/PV.7848), held under
48/78

15/03/2017

the Spanish presidency, and we co-sponsored resolution
2331 (2016), on the topic.
In Geneva last year, Poland supported the renewal
by the Human Rights Council of the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery.
We also support the work of the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children.
In that regard, we urge the international community
to strengthen activities aimed at protecting children
in conflict, and we highlight the role that national
ombudspersons for children can play in that area.
Last but not least, we fully support target 8.7 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
seeks to ensure that immediate and effective measures
are taken to eradicate forced labour and end modern
slavery and human trafficking, including by ending
child labour in all its forms by 2025.
In our view, when addressing modern forms of
slavery, three issues are of the utmost importance: first,
rising awareness and enhancing prevention; secondly,
proper identification, investigation and prosecution
of those crimes; and thirdly, protection and support
for the victims. Those goals all require the enhanced
attention and common efforts of the Government,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector,
survivors, community and religious leaders. With
better tailored strategies we will be able to reach at-risk
populations, weaken international criminal networks
and, ultimately, strengthen the rule of law and peace
and security.
In closing, I wish to underline that it is our common
responsibility to counter the dehumanizing effects of
modern slavery and to ensure that the voices of the
victims are heard. That is why I wish to once again
thank the United Kingdom for the opportunity to speak
on this particular and very important topic.
The President: I now give the floor to the Special
Representative of INTERPOL to the United Nations.
Mr. Roux (spoke in French): I would like to start
by thanking the United Kingdom for organizing this
important meeting on such an essential, serious and
far-reaching subject.
INTERPOL, the world’s only police cooperation
organization, is fully committed to assisting its 190
Member States in the fight against this widespread
form of crime. Our support is always consistent with
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7898

article 3 of our Constitution, which prohibits any action
in the political, racial, military or religious spheres.

law enforcement agents to all these tools, including at
border crossings via our secure network, I-24/7.

The phenomenon of trafficking in human beings
always has two components: a humanitarian and a
criminal. That is the framework INTERPOL uses to
orient its work and play an essential role through its
partnership with United Nations bodies, such as the
International Organization for Migration or the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), to respond
to operational and enforcement challenges — with a
constant emphasis on its humanitarian aspect.

Finally, coordination operations, such as the
recent border reinforcement operation launched by
INTERPOL, named Adwenpa 2, focused on West
Africa and set up in conjunction with UNODC, which
recently led to the arrest of human traffickers and the
seizure of drugs, stolen cars, cash in large quantities
and counterfeit goods — clearly indicative of organized
crime. Seven children between the ages of 11 and 16
were placed under protection, while those responsible
for the trafficking were arrested. As that example
shows, only an integrated approach can provide a
useful and effective response to trafficking in human
beings, trafficking in children and networks of slavery
and forced labour — not to mention an increase, as
was mentioned this morning, in the rate of arrests
and prosecution.

What services do we provide Member States?
First of all, there is our entire Vulnerable
Communities Unit, which focuses on the trafficking of
human beings, in all its forms, and forced labour. Our
cooperative efforts run the gamut from prevention to
protection, through a systematic partnership approach
that is placed at the service of our member countries.
Supporting that Lyon-based Unit in France are our
seven regional offices, each of which hosts an officer
specializing in the subject. In that way, INTERPOL can
assist State police, during its tactical deployment, to
dismantle criminal networks behind the trafficking of
human beings, which are particularly active in areas of
conflict, as we see today. By way of illustration, in 2017
INTERPOL’s dedicated team, in cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
will lead a project in Ukraine centred on the smuggling
of migrants.
Secondly, the INTERPOL Group of Experts on
Action against Trafficking in Human Beings was further
expanded in January to include more than 50 Member
States. Its next meeting will be held on 14 and 16 March
in Lisbon, and will be funded by the United States State
Department. I invite all countries to regularly send
your current expert there to be a member, or designate
an expert, if they do not yet have one.
INTERPOL also deploys and implements a range
of products and services to assist its member States in
their fight against crime linked to trafficking in human
beings. Among these are the INTERPOL notices, a tool
for tracking criminals and suspects, locating missing
persons or gathering information for an investigation;
databases containing identifying information, or
information on lost, falsified or stolen travel documents,
fingerprints, DNA profiles or tools for analysing child
abuse images; or even technology solutions to connect

This crime knows no borders; when States do not
use all the tools at their disposal, such as those offered
by INTERPOL, organized and unscrupulous criminal
networks directly reap the benefits. Let us ensure that
that does not happen.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for organizing this open debate.
Human trafficking is, unfortunately, an increasingly
common feature of modern conflict. In that regard, I
wish to reply to two of the main questions asked in the
concept note drafted for the debate (S/2017/198, annex).
First, how can the United Nations and its Member
States better address vulnerable women and girls,
children, and displaced persons? Second, how can we
ensure justice for victims of slavery, human trafficking
or forced labor during conflicts?
With regard to the first question, the Belgian
national action plan against human trafficking utilizes
different strategies to address vulnerable populations.
For instance, it takes gender into account. It also teaches
a “train the trainers” course for defence personnel
who combat human trafficking. Relevant training is
also provided to the personnel of the federal agency
that welcomes asylum seekers. Additionally, a manual
has been prepared to educate asylum seekers on the

17-0663049/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

conditions and rights of workers in Belgium so as to
reduce the risk of abuse and exploitation.
On the second issue, the fight against impunity is a
core component of our national action plan on women,
peace, and security. One of the priorities of the plan
is the protection of women and girls from all forms
of violence, including sexual violence. This is a topic
that we also address in our commission on the status
of women. Since human trafficking during conflicts
is often for sexual exploitation, a section of the action
plan details several concrete actions for those cases,
including support for and cooperation with bilateral
partners in order to embed attention for and expertise
on the matter in national police and justice apparatuses,
and the promotion of practical international legal
cooperation tools.
With regard to international cooperation on
criminal matters, I note the initiative mentioned by
Argentina, Belgium, the Netherlands and Slovenia
during the previous open debate on human trafficking
(see S/PV.7847) — to promote the negotiation of a
multilateral treaty for mutual legal assistance among
States and extradition for domestic prosecution of
the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. Such a treaty would be a useful tool
for facilitating better cooperation among States
investigating and prosecuting those crimes, and
would enable signatories to both comply with their
international obligations and strengthen their national
legal system.
Of course, the primary responsibility to prosecute
such crimes lies with each State but, because of their
transnational nature, this proves to be a challenging task.
Indeed, the suspects, witnesses, evidence or materials
attesting to acts of human trafficking must often be
gathered from several States. As such, effective mutual
legal assistance among States is essential for States
that wish to investigate and prosecute those crimes to
ensure justice for the victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Mr. President, allow me to
express my congratulations to the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March.
50/78

15/03/2017

Modern-day slavery and human trafficking affect
virtually every country and constitute one of the major
threats to global peace and security as well as to our
shared economic prosperity. Human trafficking affects
women, children and men, subjecting people to cruel
forced labour and sexual exploitation.
The Royal Government of Cambodia strongly
condemns all instances of slavery and human
trafficking. In line with the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, my
delegation supports a three-pronged approach focusing
on prevention, protection and prosecution.
With respect to prevention, my delegation is of the
view that effective prevention efforts must focus on
curbing conflict while fully addressing its root causes.
As exemplified by the way in which non-State armed
groups operate, connections between armed conflict
and human trafficking are multifaceted. Non-State
armed groups openly advocate for the enslavement
of women and children in the attainment of their
misguided objectives. They actively promote slavery
and human trafficking both as a means to finance their
operations and as a method of warfare.
The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the United
Nations and the Security Council. In this context, the
Council must play an active role in addressing conflict
situations by promoting dialogue and peacefully
negotiated solutions based on the United Nations
Charter. It must follow up on the implementation
of its resolutions, providing for clear and realistic
peacekeeping mandates.
Moreover, the Security Council should closely
collaborate with the General Assembly and United
Nations agencies, including through increased
consultations between the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Conflict prevention
is the best policy to protect against human trafficking,
and, where conflict is inevitable, the Security Council
should actively engage in the de-escalation of hostilities,
with a view to safeguarding vulnerable populations.
The protection of vulnerable persons, particularly
displaced populations and refugees, is of central
importance to the success of global efforts in combating
human trafficking, forced labour and modern slavery by
non-State actors. In this light, the full implementation
of the Palermo Protocols and the New York Declaration
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

for Refugees and Migrants plays a crucial role in
comprehensively addressing human trafficking.
Moreover, in implementing protective measures,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can
mobilize efforts to strengthen protection of the rights
of the most vulnerable populations. In this regard,
Cambodia would like to emphasize the importance of
the full implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 5.2, which focuses on eliminating all
forms of violence against women and girls, including
trafficking; SDG 8.7, which focuses on the eradication
of forced labour, slavery and human trafficking; and
SDG 16.2, which aims to end trafficking and all forms
of violence against children.
The victims of human trafficking, particularly
women and children, have a fundamental right to be
protected in accordance with international law. In
this context, it is necessary to ensure the provision
of medical and psychological services to victims of
sex trafficking and forced labour trafficking, while
ensuring economic support to trafficking victims
through training and job-placement programmes. It is
also important to avoid stigmatization of these victims
as they reintegrate into society.
In this context, my delegation supports the
establishment of the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, and encourages States that are in
a position to do so to contribute to the Fund.
This brings me to the issue of prosecution, which
centrally reinforces preventive and protective efforts
in the fight against human trafficking. The Security
Council, in its resolution 2331 (2016), has recognized
that human trafficking contributes to the spread of
international organized crime, which exacerbates
conflict and fosters insecurity and instability throughout
the world. Moreover, Security Council resolution 2195
(2014) affirms that terrorists benefit from transnational
organized crime, including trafficking in persons.
As the prosecution of the perpetrators of such
crimes is central to the eradication of human trafficking,
my delegation notes the efforts made to establish
an international mechanism focused on gathering
evidence of atrocities committed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and other terrorist organizations.
Cambodia welcomes all such initiatives that are carried
out with due respect for the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter, including the principles

S/PV.7898

of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
self-determination and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States.
In the light of the importance of international
law-enforcement cooperation in the prosecution of
human trafficking crimes, Cambodia will continue
its longstanding partnership with regional partners,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
INTERPOL, among others.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that in the fight
against modern slavery and human trafficking, the global
community must ensure the effective implementation
of international obligations. Having ratified the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the protocols thereto, my delegation believes
that these efforts must be carried out in a coordinated
and comprehensive fashion, with due regard for victims’
rights and full respect for the principles and purposes
of the United Nations Charter.
The President: I would respectfully remind all
Member States to complete their remarks within four
minutes, especially in the light of the large number of
speakers inscribed on the speakers’ list.
I now give the floor to the representative of
South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of the United
Kingdom for having convened this timely open debate
on trafficking in persons in conflict situations, forced
labour and other similar practices.
We wish to begin by commending the SecretaryGeneral for his November 2016 report on the
implementation of measures to combat trafficking
in persons (S/2016/949) and the recommendations
contained therein.
In almost every conflict situation throughout the
world, human trafficking thrives. It has been established
that illicit trafficking in drugs, stolen antiques and
small arms and light weapons often follows the same
routes used by human traffickers. These activities
threaten international peace and security, for instance
by sustaining terrorism as well as criminal and armed
groups. My delegation is mindful of the fact that
one of the highest risks to displaced persons is the
threat of being trafficked, especially refugees fleeing
from conflict.

17-0663051/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

Trafficking operations often flourish in circumstances
where institutions and law-enforcement capabilities
are eroded and weakened by sustained conflict. This
undermines the rule of law, which in turn contributes
to the other forms of transnational organized crime,
exacerbating conflict and insecurity. This is a vicious
circle that requires from us united, concerted, sustained
and cooperative efforts, whose ultimate objective
is to address conflict, including its root causes. This
requires that we address development challenges as
well as external interventions, such as those we have
recently witnessed in Libya, Iraq and Syria, which
have led to the proliferation of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
Africa awaits with keen interest the appraisal of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, which will follow in the wake of
the international community’s efforts to implement the
Sustainable Development Goals, focusing on trafficking
in persons. These are important steps forward in
galvanizing our joint response to countering human
trafficking, and we welcome them wholeheartedly.
South Africa also wishes to recognize and remind
Member States of the role of the African Union, which
has paid specific attention to the issue of trafficking
in persons. In 1981, the African Union adopted the
African Charter on Human and People’s Rights, which
prohibits slavery and human trafficking. The Charter
is further complemented by the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child and the Protocol to
the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on
the Rights of Women in Africa, which make specific
provisions for the protection of women and children
against slavery.
Furthermore, the Ouagadougou Action Plan to
Combat Trafficking in Human Beings, Especially
Women and Children, adopted by the African Union
in 2006, reaffirmed the provisions, provided for an
international instrument on human trafficking and
encouraged African States to adopt legislation and
institutional measures to combat trafficking in human
beings.
South Africa has signed and ratified the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and
Children. This Convention provided valuable guidance
to South Africa in the creation of the Prevention and
52/78

15/03/2017

Combatting of Trafficking in Persons Act of 2013,
which is South Africa’s first comprehensive legislation
on human trafficking, which among other things seeks
to implement South Africa’s international obligations
with regard to this challenge.
In 2016, the Global Action to Prevent and Address
Trafficking in Persons and the Smuggling of Migrants
was launched internationally. South Africa was one of
the first 13 countries identified to participate in this
important initiative. On 22 September 2016, the South
African Government and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime jointly launched this initiative, which
strongly emphasized South Africa’s firm commitment
to countering trafficking in persons and the smuggling
of migrants.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that South Africa
remains highly concerned and seized with the matter
of human trafficking within our borders, but equally
within our region, continent and elsewhere in the
world. The particular impact that the trafficking in
persons in situations of armed conflict has on women
and children, increasing their vulnerability to genderbased and sexual violence, is of particular concern.
The fact that more people are presently displaced today
than at any other time since the Second World War is a
huge challenge, which exposes people worldwide to a
range of human rights violations, including trafficking.
Working within its mandate, the Security Council
should take an assertive and decisive stance in their
prevention so that even islands of terrorism, trafficking,
armed groups can no longer be allowed to profit in any
way from human trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania.
Ms. Kadare (Albania): First, I would like to thank
the United Kingdom presidency of the Council for
convening this meeting on such a critical and urgent
subject.
Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union and I would like to add
the following remarks in my national capacity.
Human trafficking is a global problem, affecting
both developed and developing countries, rich and
poor societies. It is transnational, and its victims are
everywhere. Therefore, it is our joint responsibility to
put an end to this sordid crime and horrendous violation
of human rights.
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is evident that the most vulnerable people are
those caught in conflict: women, children, refugees.
Trafficking in conflict zones is certainly not a new
phenomenon. It is a well known and documented fact
not only in the Middle East, but also in Africa, Asia and
even Europe. During the wars in Bosnia and Kosovo,
sexual violence was systematically used to strike terror
and humiliation into civilian populations. Yet, despite
international awareness and outrage, we still have
an incomplete understanding of human trafficking.
Our capacities to prosecute the traffickers and assist
the victims are inadequate, while the United Nations
system’s anti-trafficking efforts are fragmented and at
times overlapping.
We have to admit that, despite our efforts, far from
abating, human trafficking has flourished alarmingly.
Combined with terrorism, it has led to new barbarisms,
unprecedented in their scope and violence. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab are using human trafficking and sexual
violence, with full impunity, as a weapon of terror, but
also as an important source of revenue, with low risk and
extraordinary profit. We cannot allow this to continue.
There is nothing more demoralizing and undermining
for the values we stand for than the culture of impunity.
However, trafficking in situations of conflict is
not limited to the context of terrorism. The different
conflicts raging today are leading to the mass
displacement of particularly vulnerable groups, which
easily fall prey to exploitation and trafficking networks.
Resolution 2331 (2016), which Albania has
co-sponsored, recognizes that human trafficking
represents a threat to international peace and security.
Furthermore, it identifies the complex nexus that
exists between the trafficking in persons, transnational
organized crime, conflict and terrorism. As the first
action-oriented resolution of the Council to address
trafficking in persons in conflict situations, it was an
important step forward.
But awareness-raising and statements of
condemnation are not enough. International coordinated
action is urgently needed. We have at our disposal the
necessary international legal framework — the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols, including the Trafficking in
Persons Protocol. It is within that framework that we
need to strengthen our engagement and our cooperation
at the regional and international levels. Intelligence

S/PV.7898

sharing,
financial
investigations,
anti-moneylaundering laws and judicial cooperation — the whole
arsenal that we have at our disposal should be deployed
to combat human trafficking and dismantle terrorist
networks. Civil society, the private sector and the media
should be our major partners, especially with regard to
the prevention and protection of victims.
Albania remains deeply committed to combating
human trafficking. In line with the Palermo Protocol
and the Council of Europe Convention on Action against
Trafficking in Human Beings, our national strategy in
the fight against the trafficking of human beings and
its action plan are victim-centred and gender-sensitive.
At the regional level, Albania, Montenegro and Kosovo
signed last December a joint declaration expressing
their commitment to ensuring the application of unified
procedures for the identification and protection of
victims of trafficking.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that an integrated
multilateral action is needed to combat this pervasive
transnational crime. Furthermore, we encourage
the Secretary-General to strengthen the synergies
between United Nations agencies and to ensure that
the United Nations system strategically coordinates its
anti-trafficking efforts across its development, peace
and security, and human rights pillars, as well as its
humanitarian action. Albania stands ready to actively
participate in discussions and activities to reinforce
the response of the United Nations in eradicating this
scourge.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Allow me to take this
opportunity to congratulate the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of March and for bringing this important matter
for deliberation before the Council.
Namibia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the African Union and by the
statement that will be delivered on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The topic under discussion is important in the
general context of human rights, but more importantly,
it is critical to the issue of governance as it relates to
peace and security, as well as the underlying causes of
human trafficking in conflict situations. The reality
is that conflict situations generate human rights

17-0663053/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

violations, thereby benefiting the traffickers and their
political and economic backers. There is little need
for me to repeat the horrors that face those exposed to
trafficking and modern day slavery, as well as other
forms of victimization. Besides being denuded of their
human dignity, trafficked and enslaved persons are
too often isolated from any potential help they may
receive through multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination.
Namibia has been independent for 27 years this
month. Hitherto, we have worked hard to ensure that
any kind of trafficking is addressed and stopped in its
tracks Namibia is of the view that good governance,
peacebuilding and conflict prevention are essential to
the deterrence of crime, trafficking or slavery in any
form. Namibia therefore subscribes to the undertaking
of the African Union to silence the guns on the African
continent by 2020. Good governance will require
not only good-neighbourliness, but also regional
cooperation. It is essential that in conflict and postconflict situations, trust is restored in law enforcement
and its ability to keep populations safe.
Trafficking in persons, organized crime and
terrorism have been acknowledged in General Assembly
resolution 70/291 and Security Council resolution 2331
(2016). Victims of trafficking, especially women and
children, are vulnerable to prostitution, forced labour,
servitude, forced marriages and even the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of conflict. All of those, however,
are attributes to the lack of good governance.
Another important aspect of good governance and
the maintenance of peace and security is to ensure
that our youth and women have access to economic
advantages such as education and employment. It is
here that we must recognize the essential role of the
Sustainable Development Goals and their role in
eradicating poverty, reducing economic stressors that
can lead to youth unemployment and creating the kinds
of discontent that can undermine peace and security.
As we build economies, we must ensure development,
peace and security. In the absence of such governance
systems, human beings fall between the cracks and
are more vulnerable to the evils of trafficking of both
human beings and commodities.
Namibia has long recognized the importance of
good governance and, since its independence, has
worked hard to put in place governance and security
systems. We have placed safeguards in our Constitution
54/78

15/03/2017

to ensure the independence of the judiciary and
legislative bodies. In addition, more recently, we have
been working to ensure legislation to protect victims
of crime as well as of whistle-blowers. Moreover,
Namibia’s national development plan rests on four
pillars. One of them is to promote good governance
through effective institutions.
The Security Council has to remain steadfast
in its mandate to uphold and ensure world peace and
stability. Those who are trafficked or are vulnerable
to the crime of trafficking, particularly in conflict
situations, depend on the Council to act decisively on
matters brought to its attention in that regard.
As we all know, trafficking in persons is not
always a visible problem. Often, victims or potential
victims have been threatened into remaining silent.
Therefore, Namibia believes that using the guiding
principles of the women and peace and security agenda
can also enhance the effectiveness of the Security
Council and the whole United Nations system in its
coordinated efforts in tackling trafficking in persons,
forced labour and modern slavery. The global study
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), for
instance, has shown that women peacekeepers elicit
positive responses from victims of sexual exploitation,
rape, forced marriage and even trafficking. The United
Nations systems should therefore work to ensure the
inclusion of women peacekeepers and improve victim
access to them.
Namibia has also been a strong proponent of female
negotiators in conflict resolution. In that regard, the
Council can play an essential role by insisting that
delegations are gender-balanced. In that context, we
commend Secretary-General Guterres for his strong
and consistent appeal for Member States to include
more women in United Nations missions.
Finally, I assure you, Mr. President, of Namibia’s
firm and continued support for addressing issues of
peace and security as they relate to human trafficking,
forced labour, slavery and other similar practices.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): First, I thank the United
Kingdom for organizing today’s debate.
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union (EU).
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7898

Trafficking in persons is a gross violation of
human rights and also one of the most serious and
lucrative forms of transnational organized crime with
huge human, social and economic implications. The
problem is further exacerbated by conflicts and the
ensuing large movements of refugees and migrants
who often become easy targets of various forms of
exploitation. It is therefore imperative to accelerate
the global response to human trafficking through a
comprehensive, multidisciplinary and cross-border
approach. In a globalized world, no country alone can
disentangle the webs of traffickers. Better cooperation
should be established among countries of origin, transit
and destination in connection with information sharing,
victim identification, support and reintegration.

Bulgaria is one of the countries in Europe with
the most comprehensive institutional framework to
combat trafficking in persons. Bulgaria was one of the
pioneers in Europe to adopt specialized anti-trafficking
legislation, in 2003. Bulgaria has penalized trafficking
in line with the highest international legal standards and
has gone one step further by introducing more severe
punishment for crimes involving children as victims.
A national commission for combatting trafficking in
persons is operating at the central level, and there are
nine local anti-trafficking commissions specialized in
preventing trafficking among vulnerable communities.
The new national anti-trafficking strategy for the
period from 2017 to 2021 has a special focus on early
detection and prevention.

In recent years Bulgaria has enhanced its law
enforcement cooperation with countries in the
European Union and other partners with regard to
irregular migration, smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in human beings. Bulgarian law enforcement
authorities are active partners in numerous EU-led and
transnational operations aimed at curbing trafficking
and smuggling and bringing perpetrators to justice.
As an external border of the European Union, Bulgaria
pays special attention to the nexus between conflict
and trafficking in persons and actively supports United
Nations-led efforts to end political and security crises
in the region, which are conducive to migration flows.

Trafficking is a gendered phenomenon, and
the majority of the victims are women and girls. In
Bulgaria, as elsewhere in the world, the majority of
victims trafficked for sexual exploitation are women
and girls. In view of that, the national anti-trafficking
commission of Bulgaria provides specialized assistance
to women victims of trafficking in three Governmentfunded shelters.

The early identification of victims of trafficking
in mixed migration flows is one of the main priorities
of the Bulgarian national commission for combatting
trafficking in persons, which has established strong
partnerships with the relevant United Nations bodies
and other organizations aimed at ensuring the effective
management of migration processes and respect for the
human rights of all persons. The Bulgarian Government
invests in building capacities to identify potential and
actual victims of trafficking among migrants and
asylum seekers and to provide adequate protection, in
particular to children on the move.
Bulgaria is committed to the implementation of
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocols Thereto,
known as the Palermo Protocols, which represent
a solid foundation of international law in this area.
Furthermore, Bulgaria welcomed the first-ever Security
Council resolution on the trafficking of persons in
conflict situations — resolution 2331 (2016), adopted
last December.

Given the particular vulnerability of children to
trafficking, annual prevention campaigns are organized
in schools in partnership with local authorities,
academia, civil society and a network of youth
volunteers. A specialized coordination mechanism for
referrals and assistance for unaccompanied children and
child victims of trafficking has also been established.
In the coming months, the Bulgarian authorities
will also open a new specialized facility to provide
protection, assistance and reintegration of child victims
of trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Ms. Jashi (Georgia): I express our gratitude to
the United Kingdom presidency for convening today’s
important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and the briefers for their
contributions to this debate.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I will add several
remarks in my national capacity.
Human trafficking is a global problem affecting the
most vulnerable: women, children, internally displaced
persons, refugees and minorities. This gruesome

17-0663055/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

violation of human rights translates to various other
forms of transnational organized crime. As our
colleagues have mentioned, terrorist groups often use
human trafficking as a weapon of terror and a source
of revenue. And increased movements of refugees and
migrants have significantly increased the threat of
human trafficking. We therefore welcome the increased
focus of the Security Council on this matter, with the
adoption of its most recent resolution 2331 (2016).
The United Nations and its agencies have a special
role to play at all levels, especially in addressing the
needs of internally displaced persons and refugees
in emergency and post-emergency settings. The
engagement of the Security Council on the matter will
further promote efforts to that end, alongside the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (General
Assembly resolution 71/1).
Combating human trafficking has been a core
priority of the Georgian Government for over a decade.
The country has witnessed growing high appraisal of
its counter-trafficking measures by the global reporting
mechanisms. The latest 2016 Global Slavery Index, the
2016 United States State Department Country Report
on Human Rights Practices and the second evaluation
report of the Council of Europe’s Group of Experts
on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings all
document the visible progress made by the country.
The Global Slavery Index ranks Georgia in second
place in terms of the actions taken, based on its gross
domestic product, and as the seventeenth country
among the 167 States taking the most effective countertrafficking measures.
While bearing witness to that progress, allow me
to summarize four success factors and lessons learned
with regard to what has worked in my country. First,
sustainable political commitment and a continuously
evolving legislative framework has been a key to success.
An adequate legislative framework has been put in place,
and human trafficking is explicitly criminalized in
Georgia. Most recently, Georgia consolidated its vision
in its national action plan structured around the socalled 4Ps, namely, prevention, protection, prosecution
and partnerships around human trafficking.
Secondly, a multisectoral and multi-stakeholder
approach has been critical. The inter-agency
coordination council led by the Ministry of Justice and
including the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry
of Labour, Health and Social Affairs, non-governmental
56/78

15/03/2017

organizations and the State fund for assistance for
victims has played a critical role.
Thirdly, focus should be placed on proactive
investigations. Georgia has almost doubled proactive
investigations over the past 4 years, thanks to the
special mobile teams and a special anti-trafficking unit
under the Ministry of Internal Affairs
Lastly, raising public awareness on trafficking
has been critical as an essential prevention measure.
Georgia will therefore intensify its public awarenessraising efforts through its new information strategy,
which targets the most vulnerable groups.
The illegal occupation of the Georgian regions of
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia and Abkhazia by the Russian
Federation remains the main limitation preventing
the Government of Georgia from fully exercising its
counter-trafficking measures. There are no mechanisms
to effectively identify, investigate and prosecute alleged
trafficking-in-persons cases in the occupied territories,
while the occupying Power continues to place undue
restrictions on the local population, particularly
ethnic Georgians.
Finally, let me reiterate that Georgia remains
committed to increasing international cooperation aimed
at developing effective cross-border control measures.
We remain committed to stronger international efforts
for preventing and combating human trafficking and
modern slavery.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish
to express my delegation’s sincere appreciation to the
United Kingdom presidency for choosing the topic
“Trafficking in persons in conflict situations” for this
debate. This topic is most timely, as today our world
is experiencing an unprecedented crisis of conflicts,
marked by complexity and the massive flows of people
that they have generated, reaching a record level of
59.5 million people. That has significantly increased
the risk of human trafficking. There is a need, therefore,
to reflect together so as to seek ways and means of
strengthening action on the part of the international
community, not only to combat the scourge, but also,
first and foremost, to promptly resolve conflicts and
build lasting peace.
Trafficking in persons is one of the most heinous
crimes possible and one of the phenomena most
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

profoundly undermining the human person, as it strikes
against the most precious part of the human being,
namely, his or her dignity and human value. Nothing
could be more humiliating than to be a victim of that
scourge. The link between conflicts and trafficking in
persons is clear, as indicated by the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, in her latest report to the Human Rights
Council (A/71/303). The phenomenon develops not only
during a human or natural disaster, but also as a direct
consequence of humanitarian crises, although the loss
of life garners greater attention.
The reason is simple. Conflicts create situations
bringing vulnerability, both for affected persons
through violations of their rights, as well as in terms
of the loss of public institutions and essential services.
Traffickers use those highly vulnerable contexts to
perpetrate their despicable acts with impunity, thereby
transforming those fragile places into countries of
origin and transit for trafficking.
However, conflict situations are not the only causes
of trafficking deserving our attention. Democracy
gaps, political instability, economic, social and
institutional crises, civil unrest, systematic human
rights violations, corruption, impunity, the absence of
the rule of law, non-compliance with election results,
and the imprisonment of dissidents and political leaders
all constitute a fertile breeding ground in which human
trafficking can plant its roots.
The Security Council identified the issue of
human trafficking as a priority. In December 2015
(see S/PV.7585), the international community heard
for the first time the moving testimony and cry of
alarm expressed by Ms. Nadia Murad, a survivor of
exploitation and sexual slavery at the hands of Da’esh.
That stirring testimony was followed by the Council’s
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25,
which demonstrated the Council’s commitment to
preventing, criminalizing, investigating and prosecuting
those involved in human trafficking, leading towards
the reversal of that harmful trend.
Nevertheless, the Security Council must bolster
its action to combat the scourge on several levels,
notably through, first, improved coordination of the
international community’s response to crisis. That
requires taking into account, from the outset, all aspects
of the conflict, in particular collective, humane and
responsible management of displacements. Secondly,

S/PV.7898

improved political will is necessary in order to resolve
conflicts and build lasting peace, taking into account
the specific needs of the affected persons and victims of
trafficking, with particular emphasis on socioeconomic
development. Thirdly, special focus is necessary on
conflict-prevention tools for the strengthening of
democracy, the rule of law, justice, public services and
national institutions for the promotion and protection
of human rights. Fourthly, strengthened international
cooperation is necessary so as to address the crossborder nature of the human trafficking scourge.
Mindful of the need to combat that heinous crime,
Morocco has ratified all relevant international treaties,
including the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. Furthermore, Morocco
has updated its legislative framework to prevent human
trafficking and combat human rights violations, notably
through the adoption, in June 2016, of Law 27-14 on
the fight against trafficking in human beings. That law
includes, inter alia, broad definitions of trafficking
in human beings and the concepts of exploitation and
the victim.
The law also includes sentencing and preventive
measures to protect victims and convict the perpetrators,
with strengthened sentencing against the perpetrators
of crimes against children, pregnant women and people
in fragile situations. It also contains provisions on
institutional measures to combat the phenomenon, with
the creation of an advisory commission reporting to the
Head of Government.
The President: I wish to point out to all Member
States that we are really pleased to see how many
people want to participate in this important debate. But
in order to be fair to the 20 speakers that are still on
the list, I will use my gavel if speakers go beyond four
minutes. I would ask that those assisting Permanent
Representatives tap her or him on the shoulder if she or
he risks going over the time limit. Delegations should
feel free to circulate full remarks to all members of the
Security Council afterwards.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish to
offer our best wishes to the United Kingdom delegation
for successfully guiding the work of the Security

17-0663057/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

15/03/2017

Council this month. We also thank Ukraine for the skill
with which it led the work of the Council in February.
We also extend our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his briefing, as well as to Messrs. Yuri Fedotov
and Kevin Hyland and Ms. Ilwad Elman for their
respective briefings.

affected by those countries’ criminal actions. That is
the case of Iraq, Libya, Syria and the countries of the
Sahel, to mention but a few, where today their leaders
and peoples are fighting diligently to restore peace and
stability following armed foreign interventions, which
has led to major trauma and human suffering.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes
that it is necessary to point out that crimes of human
trafficking, violence, sexual abuse and exploitation,
modern slavery and forced labour are, from any
standpoint, despicable practices that we firmly
condemn, in particular because they have proliferated
and spread in ongoing situations of armed conflict
throughout the world, especially those promoted by
terrorist groups and other violent non-State actors
operating in the Middle East and North Africa, such
as Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and Boko Haram. The
terrorist actions carried out by these organizations
have caused a human tragedy, whose main victims have
unfortunately been the most vulnerable — women,
girls, boys — who have been caught up in wars that
they did not start and have become commodities for
these criminal trafficking networks.

We must not forget the fact that this is not a new
phenomenon, nor is it exclusive to terrorist groups.
The great Powers of the world have been the cause of
and main protagonists in promoting war throughout
contemporary history. They are also the principal
manufacturers and marketers of weapons. They are
the ones who need limitless natural resources, which
they seek in all circumstances, in order to meet their
unbridled appetite for consumption. They are the
ones who are primarily responsible for the excesses
of war, causing the massive flows of refugees, sexual
exploitation against civilians, forced labour and modern
slavery. The sponsors of these tragedies will be called
on to answer for their acts before the law and will be
judged by history.

This barbarity is a serious obstacle to the longsought peace for which we have fought so hard in our
respective national and regional environments. That
is why the United Nations is the best forum to work
together to prevent and combat the spread of this type
of crime by addressing its root causes. We urge all
international actors to take effective action to eradicate
this scourge. We cannot let human life to be used as
spoils of war by these criminals. This is a truth that
cannot be ignored, in particular by all those who incite
and promote armed intervention and conflicts. Those
who are responsible should, at all levels, must be held
accountable before the law.
Despite the fact that this terrible crime and its
related practices affect all States to some degree, the way
it is discussed in the Security Council — namely, in the
context of armed conflict — requires us to recognize
that one of the reasons that there has been a worsening
of this crime in recent years has been the destruction
of State capacities in the countries concerned as a
result of interventionism by those countries that foster
the overthrow of Governments, destroy the social,
political and economic fabric and create conditions
for the expansion of international terrorism, which
today threatens international peace and security, while
violating the human rights of civilian populations
58/78

Venezuela will never relent in its demands on the
various actors of the international community to put an
end to the supply of financial and logistical support and
weapons to terrorist groups and other violent non-State
actors that promote the crime of trafficking in persons,
enslaving men and women and using them as active
participants in armed conflicts, exploiting them in
numerous ways and exacerbating the cycle of suffering
and death. We have had enough with two-faced morality
and double standards in assessing and combating
crimes associated with trafficking in persons in conflict
situations. We must condemn human trafficking and
modern slavery, but we must also recognize that this
firm condemnation goes hand in hand with concrete
actions that involve putting an end to activities of those
who sponsor conflicts clandestinely or openly for their
own political and economic ends.
In this context, we must tackle the root causes of
these conflicts, as they foster the vulnerability that
makes people victims of trafficking. We must establish
effective accountability mechanisms and restore the
economic and social fabric of countries in post-conflict
situations. We must reinforce States’ role in promoting
stability, eradicating poverty, economic development
and social inclusion, which in the end are the true
structuring factors for preventing traffickers who incite
human suffering out of petty interests from continuing
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

to thrive in the midst of armed conflict and even in
peaceful situations.
The United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons is a point of reference and a step
forward in outlining the international commitments to
eliminating this scourge. Further, the review of the Plan
of Action, which will be held in 2017, means that we
must renew and increase the will of all States to fully
comply with the inalienable duty to combat this crime,
expand preventive mechanisms, ensure accountability,
and gather data and evidence.
In addition, we welcome the initiative that this
complex phenomenon is being discussed in the
Security Council, and in particular the recent adoption
of resolution 2331 (2016) last December, but we believe
that it is crucial to recognize that the leading role for
taking up this issue belongs to the General Assembly,
in which all States actively participate, taking into
account the multidimensional and cross-cutting nature
of the scourge. Discussion should be focused primarily
on the prevention and eradication of trafficking in
persons, bearing in mind the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, in particular respect
for the sovereignty and self-determination of peoples.
The President: I would again remind speakers that
there is a four-minute time limit for their statements. If
they turn their microphone in the correct way, they will
see the flashing light. The set-up is not very fair for the
speakers, as the microphones are not well designed to
help them see the time. But if the microphone is turned
in the right way, then the speaker will be able to see the
flashing light.
I now give the floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Galbavý (Slovakia): I wish to thank the United
Kingdom delegation for convening today’s open debate
on modern slavery, human trafficking and conflict. The
problem is global, affecting poor and rich countries
alike. Today’s debate is also timely as it is takes place
in conjunction with the ongoing sixty-first session of
the Commission on the Status of Women. Women and
girls are the most targeted group in terms of human
trafficking and exploitation.
While aligning ourselves with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union delivered earlier,
I would like to briefly make the following points on the
subject in my national capacity.

S/PV.7898

Human trafficking and modern slavery have
become one of the most profitable and fastest growing
areas of activities of transnational organized crime,
holding millions of people in inhuman conditions,
violating their dignity, personal freedom and human
rights. Poverty is at the root of the problem, as is lack
of awareness of both victims and the general public.
Emergencies, such as massive movements of people
caused by terrorism, war, poverty and oppression,
create an enabling environment where vulnerable
groups of people become easy targets and victims.
Human trafficking takes many different forms
and targets men, women, girls and boys alike. As has
been mentioned, according to the International Labour
Organization, there are 21 million people around the
world trapped in some form of modern slavery, including
trafficking, debt bondage and child labour. New forms
and ways of this criminal activity frequently emerge.
We need a mix of strong policies at the national
level and concerted action at the international level.
States must not only criminalize slavery and punish
perpetrators but also must make every effort to prevent
it and offer protection and remedy to victims. We must
also do more to address root causes of radicalism,
violent extremism and international terrorism.
Slovakia is committed to doing its share in the
fight against modern slavery. We have ratified all major
international treaties and implemented the relevant
European Union legislation. We have strengthened
our criminal code and our code of criminal procedure,
in order, in particular, to increase protection of child
victims. We have established an institute for national
anti-trafficking coordination at the State Secretary level
of the Ministry of the Interior and adopted the National
Programme to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings
for the years 2015-2018, with the aim of effectively
combating human trafficking through coordinated
activities of all entities involved at the national level.
In conclusion, once again, allow me to thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s meeting. My delegation will
continue to engage in a constructive manner in our
collective efforts to effectively mitigate the scourge of
modern-day slavery.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Leoteau (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to commend and thank

17-0663059/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Secretary-General for his briefing, and thank
Mr. Fedotov, Mr. Hyland and Ms. Elman for their
important contributions.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of measures to counter trafficking
in persons (S/2016/949) has revealed that traffickers
mainly take advantage of women, young people and
boys and girls, in particular those traveling alone,
making that group account for 79 per cent of the victims
of a terrible crime that affects all countries. Armed
conflicts have encouraged the trafficking in persons
within the context of large migrant flows, leading to
serious consequences such as early child marriage.
Panama supports the eradication of child marriage in
all contexts, not only in conflict situations. Some 60 per
cent of the victims of trafficking are foreigners from
the country with which they identify and the majority
are migrants for sexual exploitation, forced labour and
modern-day slavery.
One of the major challenges in prosecuting and
condemning the crime of trafficking is the collection
of data and proof based on which we can share good
practices in an effort to overcome the growing and
worrisome situation to which we can all relate when
crossing borders. On 15 December 2000, Panama signed
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime — the Palermo Convention — and its
protocols. Because it understands its vulnerabilities as
a transit route and a country of destination for migrants,
Panama now has a National Commission against
Trafficking in Persons, an inter-institutional structure
that provides various types of care required by victims.
Panama believes that the Security Council could
request that States Members of the United Nations
comply with the Convention and proceed to the next
stage. We have come to a standstill on the regulatory
framework. We must engage in more vigorous
prosecution of traffickers and ensure that judicial
systems in each country enforce the corresponding
sentences. To that end, we must increase resource
allocations and secure evidence, which is even more
difficult in conflict situations and when dealing with
terrorist groups and their actions.
We should also strengthen the Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, in particular
for women and children, established by the General
Assembly; not to revictimize or punish the people
who have endured that crime, but rather to support
60/78

15/03/2017

and help them, guarantee their security and accept
them in the countries to which they have been taken.
We must insist on, promote and monitor the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy towards sexual offenses,
as a clear sign of the serious commitment and political
will of all its constituent bodies and staff as well as its
Member States.
At several open debates, we suggested that joint
efforts that can be carried out by, for example, the
Security Council and the Human Rights Council,
should be strengthened, through the use of tools,
such as the Universal Periodic Review, from which
the implementation of the legal framework for the
prevention, treatment and elimination of trafficking
in persons in armed conflict should be monitored.
We would like to make special mention of the work
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
whose regional headquarters for Latin America and the
Caribbean is in Panama. It works to support States in the
difficult tasks of preventing and punishing trafficking
in persons at the global level. Likewise, we would
like to make special mention of non-governmental
organizations whose team members risk their lives,
rescuing, helping and giving a new opportunity to
victims of trafficking, in particular those working in
conflict and post-conflict zones.
It is important for us to continue to review the
prevention and prosecution of the crime of trafficking,
as recommended by States within the context of
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and including the theme in our national
voluntary reviews.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Mashkoor (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for convening today’s debate. We wish
the United Kingdom every success in its presidency of
the Security Council this month.
Trafficking in persons undermines the rule of
law and fuels transnational organized crime, which
exacerbates insecurity. Iraq became party to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime in 2009 because it is a central pillar in the
fight against international crimes. To comply with its
obligations under the Convention, Iraq adopted Law No.
28 of 2012 on combating trafficking in persons, with a
view to establishing mechanisms to assist victims of
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

trafficking, put an end to the crime and punish such
a reprehensible act. In addition, the Iraqi Constitution
contains articles that prohibit forced labour, slavery
and trafficking in women and children.
Trafficking in persons, slavery and forced labour
are practices that help to finance terrorist groups.
Da’esh criminal gangs have kidnapped thousands of
Iraqi citizens, in particular Yazidi women and children
and have exposed them to human trafficking and
slavery. Such victims have been subjected to the worse
forms of inhumane treatment. Iraq therefore requires
support to liberate victims and restore their dignity.
Iraq calls upon member States to implement the relevant
resolutions, including resolutions 2195 (2014) and 2242
(2015). In those two resolutions, the Council indicated
that sexual violence is a part of the strategic and
ideological objectives advocated by terrorist groups.
In order to implement those two resolutions,
Iraq started work with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and those efforts led to the
signing of a joint statement with Ms. Zainab Bangura
on 23 September 2016 at United Nations Headquarters.
That agreement is the start of joint efforts between
Iraq and the United Nations to address head-on such
violations and barbaric acts perpetrated by Da’esh and
other parties. Ms. Bangura, along with a group of legal
experts, visited Iraq from 25 February to 3 March.
During that visit, she spoke with the President of the
Governing Council, religious leaders and the presidents
of various institutions to explore the various legal
options. Iraq calls upon all countries to honour their
obligations and strengthen efforts to uncover trafficking
in persons operations and put an end to them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, my country regrets that
the Security Council has been unable to denounce
the terrorist bombing in Damascus on Saturday. The
Council must assume its responsibilities and condemn
the two terrorist attacks that took place in Damascus
today. The Council’s work is hampered by several of its
Western members. It continues to convey the message
that there are two types of terrorism — moderate
and extremist.
Today’s meeting is an important one for my country,
Syria. Today’s debate should be a genuine opportunity

S/PV.7898

for us to highlight trafficking in persons as one of the
most dangerous threats to humankind. It is linked to the
spread of terrorism, which exploits the most vulnerable
in communities, in particular women and children
who are victimized and fall into the trap of slavery,
sexual exploitation, forced labour and trafficking in
human organs.
Transnational organized criminal networks continue
to exploit hundreds of thousands of immigrants and
refugees who have left their homes. That is supported by
a number of Governments, particularly the Government
of Turkey, which continues to exploit internally displaced
persons and refugees as tools for political blackmail
and pressure. Before the current nefarious terrorist
war, my country, Syria, had achieved much progress in
the field of combating human trafficking. We became
a party to many international protocols, including the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air. We also promulgated our own laws, which
adhere to international standards.
However, the rights of hundreds of thousands of
Syrians are being violated in areas under the control
of armed terrorist groups, particularly Da’esh and the
Al-Nusra Front. The Governments of some Member
States continue to fund, arm and support those groups.
They overlook the fact that those groups adhere to a
takfiri Wahhabi ideology and they have a religious
doctrine that calls for killing others. I would like to
point to the recent report of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict (S/2016/361), which has documented the
crimes of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in
the fields of sexual exploitation and trafficking in
persons. But the recommendations of the report have
not been implemented.
Syrians in the areas under the control of armed
terrorist groups are enslaved. Women are being
abducted and are forced to marry terrorists, especially
foreign terrorist fighters. Those terrorist groups have
issued fatwas that allow for the sexual exploitation of
women. Children are abducted and recruited before
the eyes of their parents, and they become terrorists
and suicide bombers. Things are not better in the
refugee camps. Hundreds of thousands of Syrians live
in those camps without safety and security, and the
neighbouring countries that have opened those camps
have not lived up to their responsibility. They are not

17-0663061/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

providing a safe haven for those citizens of Syria who
have escaped from the armed terrorist groups and who
now are victims of human-trafficking networks.
United Nations reports, particularly the reports of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Organization for
Migration, have pointed out that there is a continued rise
in the activities of transnational organized criminals
within those camps involving human trafficking, rape,
the forced marriages of women and minors and organtrafficking networks that exploit children.
Ending the phenomenon of human trafficking, one
of the most heinous crimes against humanity, requires
a collective international stance and commitment to
dealing with the root causes of the phenomenon through
the implementation of Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2331 (2016), and the provision of an
enabling environment, both socially and economically,
that would lead to the achievement of sustainable
development for all peoples without exception.
The international community, particularly the
United Nations, should shoulder its ethical and legal
responsibility to find a solution for Syria by taking
serious steps to implement the Security Council
resolutions on terrorism. The Governments of some
countries must end all support provided to armed
terrorist groups. They should close their borders to
mercenaries and terrorists, and we should seek an
inter-Syrian solution led by Syrians without foreign
intervention. We should also put an end to the unilateral
coercive economic measures that have been imposed
by a number of States against my country, Syria. We
should create human, economic, social conditions that
would enable Syrians to return to their country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on presiding
over the Council for this month. I thank you for holding
this important open debate. I also thank Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC); Mr. Kevin
Hyland, United Kingdom Independent Anti-Slavery
Commissioner; and the observer of the Elman Peace
and Human Rights Centre in Somalia for their valuable
briefings this morning.
62/78

15/03/2017

Trafficking in persons is a reality and an international
phenomenon that challenges the international will and
human values. It is a grave violation of human rights.
It is a complex threat that targets vulnerable groups,
particularly women and children, in addition to persons
with disabilities and the elderly. Trafficking in persons
is a serious problem often caused by conflicts, which
create waves of displaced persons. Hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons and refugees
are forced to leave their homes and homelands to seek a
decent living. The phenomenon is compounded by the
fact that terrorist groups benefit from it, as they exploit,
recruit and brainwash youth to get them to conduct
terrorist operations. The proceeds of trafficking in
persons are used in those operations.
The adoption of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and the United
Nations Plan of Action on Combating Trafficking in
Persons constitutes the legal basis for the international
community to combat human trafficking. However, the
international community has been unable to end the
crises and conflicts. Moreover, the policies adopted have
failed to end the violations of the fundamental rights of
individuals and peoples and failed to combat impunity,
which has led to continued trafficking in persons.
Crises and conflicts create an enabling environment for
trafficking in persons and for the perpetuation of that
phenomenon, which violates the rights of individuals
and populations.
Qatar is committed to international law and
seeks to enhance cooperation in that field. Hence, we
have supported the United Nations Plan of Action on
Combating Trafficking in Persons since its adoption.
We have taken legal steps, and we have promulgated a
national law on trafficking in persons that criminalizes
it in all its forms. We have taken strict legal action to
prevent and criminalize money-laundering as one of the
tools used in human trafficking.
Qatar is one of the major contributors to the United
Nations Trust Fund for Victims of Human Trafficking.
We seek to enhance international cooperation in the
field of combating crime, especially as manifested in
human trafficking. We hosted the thirteenth United
Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice. The adoption of the Doha Declaration on
integrating crime prevention and criminal justice into
the wider United Nations agenda so as to address the
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

social and economic challenges and promote the rule of
law at the national and international levels was a step
towards dealing with this crime.
We are one of the major supporters of UNODC,
as it is the main United Nations points of reference in
efforts to combat crime. We believe in the rule of law
at the national and international levels. We believe in
the role that the rule of law plays in combating mass
atrocities and violations of human rights in countries
suffering from conflict. We have therefore worked with
partners in international groups to combat impunity.
We understand the high human price that civilians pay
in Syria as they are forced to migrate and fall victims
to traffickers. Hence, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 71/248, on the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic. That is an important
step towards combating human trafficking as an
international crime.
We believe in the need to preserve human dignity,
and we honour our international legal obligations.
Hence, together with our partners, we participate in the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons. Moreover, my country has approved the
request by the General Assembly that I should serve
as a co-facilitator with Greece for the evaluation of the
implementation of the United Nations Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons, which will be held in
October 2017.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that the international
community’s efforts to combat this phenomenon
requires concerted action, the most important part of
which is to resolve conflicts and crises and to combat
impunity. We will continue to support all the efforts of
the Security Council aimed at ending human trafficking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Almahmoud (United Arab Emirates): On
behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I would like to
congratulate the United Kingdom on its presidency of
the Council this month and its championing of efforts
to combat human trafficking around the world. We
hope that today’s debate will contribute to a greater
understanding of the role of conflict and instability in
exacerbating the problem of modern slavery and offer

S/PV.7898

an opportunity to exchange experiences in combating
human trafficking at the national level.
This is a front-line concern in our own region,
where war and displacement are rendering a significant
portion of the population defenceless. Da’esh and other
extremist and terrorist groups have subjugated innocent
people on a horrific scale as forced combatants or as
sources of revenue through their labour. But it is not
just monetary gains that such groups are reaping. The
exploitation of the vulnerable, particularly women, is
fundamentally tied to extremist ideologies that pose an
existential threat to our region and our way of life.
In order to tackle this global phenomenon, we
have to start with what is possible within our national
borders and build on that effort with others in a network
of coalitions. As a champion of gender equality,
the United Arab Emirates is particularly concerned
about the disproportionate impact that this crime has
on women and girls. We take that abuse of human
rights very seriously and are working aggressively to
combat human trafficking through law-enforcement
mechanisms and dedicated institutions throughout our
Government. Without addressing the shortcomings and
gaps in our own legislative and normative frameworks,
we could not tackle this problem head on, so in 2006
we passed a federal law — the first anti-trafficking
law in the region — banning the practice of human
trafficking and protecting its victims by implementing
strict enforcement provisions and penalties for
convicted traffickers.
However, we have discovered through experience
that legal frameworks are not enough to confront this
problem at its core. So in 2007, the United Arab Emirates
established a national committee to combat human
trafficking, implementing a multi-pronged strategy that
aims to prevent the occurrence of this crime, prosecute
and punish perpetrators, protect survivors and promote
local, regional, and international cooperation. We also
strengthened our law-enforcement ability by creating
specialized units in police departments across the
country for fighting trafficking. To build capacity and
awareness throughout law enforcement, we instituted
training sessions and workshops, including a five-month
intensive course on human trafficking, the first of its
kind in the Arab world.
Individuals subject to this heinous crime must be
protected with shelter and counselling and must be
recognized as victims, not as part of the criminal gangs

17-0663063/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

that have exploited them. So we have beefed up our
support for victims, whether women, men or children,
by opening shelters across the Emirates that offer
medical, psychological and social assistance, and by
establishing a private fund to support victims’ recovery
and resettlement.
Given our challenging regional context, our national
and multilateral defences must evolve as quickly as the
traffickers’ criminal offences do. That is why it is critical
to ensure regional cooperation on anti-trafficking
alongside our international engagement. Looking
ahead, I would like to propose three recommendations
for combating human trafficking that could be applied
at the international level, and specifically with regard
to the crises in our region.
The first is on prevention. While we must tackle
trafficking within our own borders, we must also
cooperate with the countries where trafficking
originates. This means working with Governments
to ensure legitimate migration channels, as well as
focusing on preventing circumstances that open the
door for traffickers to exploit individuals, by promoting
the rule of law in order to protect citizens and by
offering them economic opportunities. The prevention
that results from achieving sustainable and inclusive
development for all is essential to tackling the root
causes of this issue.
Secondly, the agencies combating modern slavery
are facing challenges as numerous as they are complex.
Because of that, multilateral institutions, including
the United Nations, must take the lead in improving
international cooperation between the private and public
sectors and between Governments and international
institutions. When we adopt the forthcoming global
compact on safe, regular, and orderly migration, it must
include provisions that address modern slavery.
Lastly, we urge the Security Council to enhance
its response to human trafficking, which is a problem
linked to violent extremism and terrorism. We support
the Council’s full use of the instruments at its disposal
to combat the wrath of the groups that are exploiting the
vulnerable and fomenting conflict. It is only when the
community of nations truly works together that we can
holistically confront and eradicate this grave threat to
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
64/78

15/03/2017

Mr. McHugh (Ireland): I thank you for convening
today’s important debate, Mr. President. Ireland was
proud to be a sponsor of resolution 2331 (2016), on
trafficking in persons in conflict, when it was adopted
in December, and today’s debate is a crucial opportunity
to continue that momentum. This is an issue that
affects more than 21 million people worldwide, more
than 5 million of them women and children, and it is
therefore incumbent on us to do everything we can to
address it.
I align myself fully with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU).
The EU has also taken a leading role in various policy
and programme initiatives to prevent and combat
human trafficking, and Ireland will continue to support
those endeavours. I will make three points in my
national capacity.
The first is that human trafficking is a reality
and we must respond to it. Sensitization training and
capacity-building should be at the core of our response
to cases of human trafficking, forced labour and modern
slavery. Security officials must know the signs to look
for and the support to ask for. First responders must
be sensitized in order to ensure that victims, especially
women and girls, receive the medical and psychosocial
care that they urgently need. Law-enforcement and legal
officials must be aware of the rights and responsibilities
involved in such cases. Civil-society organizations
must be empowered to act as watchdogs throughout. An
effective response to human trafficking also requires
that partnerships be formed both within and across
international and regional bodies. We are pleased to see
the growing partnership between INTERPOL and the
United Nations as one example of progress in that area.
The work of United Nations regional offices in building
partnerships with subregional organizations will also
play a key role going forward.
Secondly, human trafficking will continue if
we do not prioritize prevention. Ireland believes that
impunity acts as a driver of human trafficking. We need
to tackle that head-on and see accountability as a key
to prevention. National systems must be equipped to
uphold international and customary standards of justice
in cases related to human trafficking and modern slavery.
Moreover, we strongly believe that we need to focus
more on the conditions that make people vulnerable to
human traffickers, leading to their becoming trapped
in cycles of forced labour or modern slavery. Poverty
and economic hardship are major factors in that
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

regard. That is why implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development is crucial. Human trafficking
is explicitly addressed in four of the Sustainable
Development Goals, although implementation of all
17 Goals will ultimately be necessary if we are to tackle
the root causes of the phenomenon. A stronger focus
on sustaining peace, particularly in support given to
conflict-prevention initiatives at the national, regional
and international level, will also directly help to stem
the tide of human trafficking.
Thirdly and lastly, we must take a gendered
approach in responding to human trafficking. Human
trafficking, forced labour and modern slavery force
people into circumstances that no human being should
have to endure. The effects on women and girls can
be particularly harrowing. The New York Declaration
on Refugees and Migrants (General Assembly
resolution 71/1) commits all States to ensuring that our
responses to large movements of refugees and migrants
mainstream a gender perspective. This does not simply
entail instituting extra security and response measures;
it also means ensuring women’s participation in policies
and programmes aimed at combating and preventing
human trafficking.
This issue is a priority for Ireland. Our commitments
are set out in our national action plan to prevent and
combat human trafficking, now in its second phase.
It was developed in consultation with national and
international partners, including civil society, and sets
out a clear, collaborative programme for advancing the
fight against trafficking and enhancing the protection of
victims. Raising public awareness is key to preventing
and combating human trafficking. Ireland also provides
funding to various international and multilateral funds
involved in combating the issue. Preventing human
trafficking is an enormous challenge that requires the
concerted efforts of all involved, and only through
collaboration at the international, regional, bilateral
and national levels will it be advanced.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I join the
previous speakers in commending your initiative, Sir,
to convene this important debate on human trafficking
in conflict situations.
Human trafficking is an issue not only of human
rights but of peace and security, as well. Given its
close connection to corruption, organized crime and

S/PV.7898

terrorism, the devastating impact of human trafficking
on peace and security cannot be overly emphasized.
While conflicts generate an environment conducive
to human trafficking, human trafficking itself is also
a factor that exacerbates conflicts. That is further
compounded by the fact that vulnerable groups such
as women, children, refugees, migrants and internally
displaced persons are the most susceptible to human
trafficking in conflict situations. Indeed, violent
extremist groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Boko Haram, not only employ sexual
violence as a weapon of war, but also strategically
use human trafficking to recruit terrorist fighters,
including child soldiers, and finance war and terror. In
short, those groups exploit the trafficking of vulnerable
populations as a means to strengthen and expand their
power and influence. Furthermore, human trafficking
is inherently transnational in nature, occurring in
every corner of the world and affecting developing and
developed countries alike.
Taking all of those factors into consideration, I
would like to highlight the following three points in our
discussions on the ways to combat human trafficking in
conflict situations.
First, all Member States, especially those directly
or indirectly engaged in or affected by conflicts, must
work together to fight against human trafficking in
conflict situations. Given its transnational nature,
human trafficking cannot be effectively addressed by
conflict-affected countries alone. Moreover, in coping
with that crime, due diligence should be exercised
to uphold the principles enshrined in all the relevant
human rights conventions and Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2331 (2016).
Secondly, a coordinated approach is essential.
Those international agencies addressing the criminal
aspect of human trafficking, such as INTERPOL and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
those dealing with the human rights and humanitarian
issues, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, UNICEF, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
UN-Women, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, should work closely
together through coordinated responses and strategies
so as to strengthen synergies.

17-0663065/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

Thirdly, with a view to finding effective and
sustainable solutions to human trafficking in conflict
situations, maximum efforts should be undertaken
to protect and support victims and hold perpetrators
accountable. Campaigns to raise public awareness of
the serious consequences of human trafficking should
also be stepped up through the concerted efforts of the
international community. For its part, in recent years,
the Republic of Korea has taken concrete measures
to strengthen its institutional basis to combat human
trafficking both domestically and internationally. We
not only codified human trafficking as a serious crime
into our national legal system in 2013, but also ratified
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women
and Children in 2015.
At the same time, as the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) this year, Korea, I believe, has a
role to play in coping with that issue in the context of
sustaining peace. The PBC, in fact, has been deliberating
on the importance of regional approaches and collective
efforts in addressing such cross-border challenges,
especially in places like the Sahel region in Africa.
Furthermore, women and youth, the most vulnerable
groups to human trafficking, are also high on the agenda
of the PBC. This year, the PBC will further deliberate
on the empowerment of those groups so that they can
better contribute to the peacebuilding process, and I
hope that such discussions will add greater momentum
to addressing human trafficking in the broader context
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
I simply cannot speak about human trafficking in
the Chamber today without recalling my compatriots
who are suffering from that heinous crime, albeit in
a somewhat different context. Even as I speak, North
Koreans who have escaped their country in search of
freedom are exposed to the danger of falling victims
to human trafficking. Indeed, there is no peace and
security without human rights, and without peace
and security there are no human rights. That is all the
more reason why the Republic of Korea attaches great
importance to eradicating global human trafficking
in conflict situations and other circumstances. I can
assure you, Sir, of our commitment to playing our due
role in achieving that collective goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
66/78

15/03/2017

Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): Let me begin by
commending the Government of the United Kingdom
for its role in ensuring that the Security Council will
consider how to further apply itself and how to join in
system-wide efforts to combat this abhorrent crime.
The issue of trafficking in persons, modern slavery
and forced labour is high on Thailand’s national agenda,
as successive Governments have recognized that human
trafficking erodes human security and poses a serious
threat to both Thailand and the international community.
Domestically, Thailand has exerted immense efforts to
strengthen domestic legislation to close legal loopholes
and worked fiercely to ensure effective prosecution. In
order to extend our protection and prevention efforts,
we have also engaged the private sector and civil
society in increasing transparency in the supply chains
of businesses, particularly in the fishing sector.
At the international level, Thailand has placed
great emphasis on bilateral, regional and international
cooperation to eradicate human trafficking, forced
labour and the transnational organized criminal
networks that prey on the vulnerable. We were therefore
encouraged to see the Council adopt resolution 2331
(2016) three months ago, and today we are again
encouraged to hear the Council discuss how it can
support international efforts to combat trafficking in
persons more effectively.
From Thailand’s standpoint, first, peacekeeping
and all other personnel deployed in conflict and postconflict areas must be properly trained to identify
the victims of and those vulnerable to trafficking.
They must be have an understanding of the threats
and security challenges that arise from transnational
organized criminal networks. They must know the
immediate, practical and legal protections that are
available. They must be able to respond to the needs of
victims and to those vulnerable groups.
Secondly, data and trends on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations must be collected, monitored and
assessed to inform policy and concerted action against
armed groups and criminal networks. Such data has to
be evaluated within the broader trends of trafficking in
persons globally. Only then will we be ably to truly see
a comprehensive picture of the problem and address it
in a comprehensive and effective manner. It also has to
form a key part of the consideration of actions that the
Council takes on conflict and post-conflict situations.
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Thirdly, we also have to take a serious look at
strengthening inter-agency coordination within the
United Nations system on the issue of trafficking in
persons. That can be done through connecting the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and regional organizations, or through more
focused briefings at the Council that engages agencies
such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
or the International Organization for Migration.
Whatever option is chosen, now is the time to pursue it.
To be effective in its anti-trafficking efforts, the
international community needs to take a common,
consistent and coordinated stance on the issue with the
engagement of the entire United Nations system and,
moreover, the crucial support of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to participate
in this very important debate on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations. First, I express my gratitude
and congratulations to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for having convened this high-level debate
today, which allows us to deepen our understanding of
a serious phenomenon and develop a joint analysis of
its causes and the increasingly sophisticated methods
of terrorists and traffickers, as well as to identify
appropriate solutions to sustainably solve the problem.
We underscore the judiciousness of the concept note
(S/2017/198, annex), which clearly lays out the problem,
clarifies what is at stake and asks a number of key
questions in a heuristic approach.
I thank the Secretary-General and the Director
General of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, as well as Mr. Kevin Hyland and Ms. Ilwad
Elman, for their penetrating perspectives and analyses.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Bolivia on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Trafficking in persons is a transnational crime
that today spares no country. Sadly, we witness all too
frequently a tragedy affecting thousands of persons,
particularly women and children. In addition to
suffering the horrors of armed conflict, they are often
the victims of trafficking and sexual violence, crimes
that comprise an extremely perverse affront to human

S/PV.7898

dignity and that, in certain circumstances, may well
be flagrant violations of international humanitarian
law and international conventions on human rights and
transnational organized crime.
The issue of human trafficking has been a main
priorityof the United Nations over the past few decades.
The 2000 Palermo Protocol and the 2010 United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons serve as the cornerstones and benchmark
documents for all States Members of the Organization.
At the same time, in recent years we have seen a shift
in the forms of human trafficking, particularly during
and after conflict.
In various regions of the world affected by conflict,
sexual violence is used to destroy as a tactic of war
or terrorism and is a key element of the ideology and
activities of extremist groups such as Boko Haram,
Da’esh and Al-Shabaab. Those terrorist groups openly
advocate human trafficking as part of their military
strategy or as a source of funding. As a result, the
Security Council must pay particular attention to the
links between such phenomena as human trafficking,
sexual violence in conflict situations and the activities
of terrorist groups.
Djibouti recognizes that the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, represent
the core international framework for combating human
trafficking. The spirit of the Convention must be
embedded in the national legislation of Member States
and duly implemented. In that regard, we attach great
importance to the assistance provided by relevant
bodies to Member States, such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
particularly the guidance provided on legislation and
implementation. We hope that they will make further
progress on the issue and we support their crucial work.
The Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, highlighted the following in her report:
“It is estimated that 10 to 30 per cent of children
in fighting forces are female. Girls who are forcibly
recruited or abducted into military service typically
face forced domestic labour and sexual violence
and exploitation such as forced marriage and/or
sexual slavery.” (A/71/303, para. 31)

17-0663067/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

Additionally, the report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361/Rev.1)
highlighted the fact that in the past two years sexual
violence has been increasingly linked to the strategic,
ideological and financial objectives of extremist and
terrorist groups.
In the third report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2178 (2014) by States affected by foreign
terrorist fighters (S/2015/975, annex), its Executive
Directorate encouraged Member States to develop
effective regional strategies to deal with cross-border
issues and to cooperate closely with border communities
to foster knowledge sharing.
(spoke in English)
Indeed, if we are to effectively tackle this scourge,
we need to communicate more effectively, share
intelligence and mobilize resources. That requires
investment, vigilance and cooperation.
Over 90,000 men, women and children from
neighbouring countries transit through Djibouti en
route to Yemen and other locations in the Middle
East. In 2015, during the sixth meeting of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Regional Consultative Process on Migration, held
in Djibouti, States members of IGAD decided to
redouble their efforts to combat trafficking in persons
and smuggling of migrants. My Government recently
enacted a new anti-trafficking law on the fight against
trafficking in persons and illicit smuggling of migrants,
repealing Djibouti’s law of 2007.
In conclusion, Djibouti is appalled by the
commodification and dehumanization of human
beings. It reiterates its commitment and its willingness
to cooperate with the international community in the
global effort aimed at combating this increasingly
complex and sophisticated scheme developed by a vast
network of facilitators and criminals.
The President: I just wish to remind everybody
we have 10 speakers remaining on the list. To be fair
to everybody, I would ask speakers to keep within the
four-minute time frame. I will otherwise have to use
the gavel.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Philippines.
68/78

15/03/2017

Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
trafficking in persons in conflict situations, with a focus
on forced labour, slavery and other similar practices.
About a year ago, the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, addressed the Council
and said that
“trafficking in persons in conflict and crisis
situations is not a mere possibility or isolated
incident; rather, it happens on a regular basis as a
consequence of conflict” (S/PV.7704, p. 6).
It must therefore be seen and addressed as a systemic
outcome of conflict. Conflict-related trafficking
is, however, rarely detected, and even less often
addressed. That observation is shared by our Philippine
inter-agency council against trafficking, which
acknowledges the existence of trafficking in persons
incidents in conflict areas in the Philippines, but faces
the difficulty of tracking those incidents.
The Philippines has adopted a one-country team
and multistakeholder approach to trafficking in persons
that consolidates the mandates, efforts, resources
and interests of the duty-bearers and stakeholders
to come up with a robust response. That has resulted
in promoting awareness and the mainstreaming of
interventions, down to the grass-roots level. Realizing
the increased vulnerability of populations in conflict
areas, the Government has activated a structure
called the gender-based violence cluster, composed
mainly of law enforcers and social welfare service
providers who specialize in gender issues, and civil
society representatives. The cluster is tasked to
address the needs of women and children in conflict
situations, especially in mitigating vulnerabilities to
sexual violence and trafficking. The cluster develops
and implements programmes for access to protective
information, psychosocial and trauma-informed
care, protective custody and access to education and
economic opportunities.
The issue of child soldiers, especially young men
and boys, is also of serious concern to the Philippine
Government. The Government considers the recruitment
and use of children as soldiers as a grave case of violation
of child rights. In that regard, our efforts are focused on
preventing their recruitment, investigating allegations
of recruitment, holding the perpetrators accountable
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and training front-line officers in appropriate methods
to assist children rescued from armed groups.
To address the problem of human trafficking as
a means to finance the activities of terrorists, armed
groups and transnational organized crime networks, it
is important to examine trafficking corridors and the
business flow of trafficking. That approach has enabled
the Philippines to strategically locate victims and
traffickers in the entire process, especially at critical
points of intervention where victims are the most visible
and can be rescued. It also allows the identification of
critical points in the business flow to deal the strongest
blow to the operations of trafficking syndicates and
to expose and develop strategies to arrest new means
employed by traffickers.
The Philippine Government has made it a priority
to provide our migrant workers with protection from
human trafficking and exploitation. That protection
is provided through national laws, international
arrangements, cooperation with destination countries
and initiatives in multilateral forums. Recently, we
have worked with the United States, the International
Organization for Migration and other partners on the
Migrants in Countries in Crisis initiative to improve
responses to assist migrants in countries experiencing
conflict or natural disaster. The guidelines, principles
and practices leverage the competencies and strengths
of various stakeholders to save lives, increase protection
and decrease the vulnerabilities of migrants, including
from trafficking. The global compact for safe, orderly
and regular migration also provides us with an
opportunity to strengthen international cooperation
to allow migrants to move across borders safely and
prevent them from falling into the arms of traffickers.
The very nature of human trafficking requires crossborder cooperation. Member States need to strengthen
international coordination on information-sharing, law
enforcement, border control and judicial systems, and
to learn important lessons to enhance their own national
action plans to more effectively combat the problem.
Criminal networks, armed groups and terrorists groups
must not be allowed to further thrive in situations of
instability and chaos, to prey on the fear, hardship and
misery of others caught in conflict and post-conflict
situations, or to profit from activities such as forced
labour, slavery and other forms of exploitation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.

S/PV.7898

Mrs. Boura (Greece): I too would like to commend
and to congratulate the United Kingdom on its initiative
in organizing this open debate.
Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to add
the following.
Human trafficking and modern slavery are
indeed global crimes that violate human rights,
affect and devastate communities and present a
threat to international peace and security. In conflict
situations, they may amount to war crimes, or crimes
against humanity.
In situations of armed conflict and instability,
criminal networks and traffickers target the most
vulnerable populations, particularly women, children,
displaced persons and refugees. Armed groups
systematically engage in the sexual enslavement and
trading of women and girls, and treat civilian populations
as a resource to be exploited and commodities to be
trafficked and traded as part of the economy of war.
The Secretary-General’s 2016 report (S/2016/949)
identifies the complex nexus between trafficking in
persons, organized crime, corruption, armed conflict
and terrorism. In spite of the important legislative
framework adopted by the international community in
order to combat this global problem in recent decades,
human trafficking and exploitation in many forms,
including forced labour and recruitment to armed
groups, remain an issue of grave concern and a law
enforcement challenge.
Taking into account the unprecedented levels of
human displacement and the increased vulnerability
of potential victims in refugee and migratory
flows, the prevention of human trafficking must
now be a priority. We are firmly convinced that the
international community should, at the same time,
focus on comprehensive awareness-raising campaigns,
establishing a proactive and inclusive identification
regime for victims and strengthening law enforcement.
In our efforts to combat human trafficking, we
must crack down on the enormous profits generated by
traffickers, follow financial trails and use all available
investigative tools to prosecute the perpetrators. The
implementation of the legal framework to combat human
trafficking would be more meaningful if accompanied
by efforts to identify, protect, assist and rehabilitate
victims. We need to work closely together to promote

17-0663069/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

multilateral cooperation, enhance early identification
procedures and establish robust referral mechanisms so
that victims can access protection services.
Through close cooperation with leading
international organizations and United Nations
institutions, especially the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, specialized training for law
enforcement and front-line professionals is now more
necessary than ever. Echoing the European Union
statement, we reiterate the importance of strengthening
multilateral partnerships and of engaging, in line with
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), more women
and young people in actions against human trafficking.
Greece, a first entry point for hundreds of
thousands of migrants and refugees arriving in Europe,
has established the Office of the National Rapporteur
on Trafficking in Human Beings, within the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, as well as a national identification
and referral mechanism for victims of trafficking.
Of course, sustaining peace and implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals will eventually address
a number of root causes that lead to trafficking, forced
labour and modern slavery.
We are confident that this debate and the momentum
created in the Security Council will contribute to
our common efforts. Greece is ready to support
and participate actively in all relevant initiatives to
strengthen our response to this global challenge.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Myanmar.
Mr. Hau Do Suan (Myanmar): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
open debate. My delegation extends its best wishes for
the success of the United Kingdom presidency of the
Security Council.
Trafficking in persons has become a dire threat
to millions of vulnerable and fragile people across the
world. The problem of trafficking is woven into many
other challenges: conflict, terrorism, organized crime,
extreme poverty, sexual violence against women and
young girls and migrant smuggling. In view of the
seriousness of the problem, the international community
has committed itself to ending human trafficking
through the implementation of Goals 5,8 and 16 of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
As part of national efforts to combat trafficking
in persons, Myanmar is a State party to various
70/78

15/03/2017

international legal instruments including the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime; the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; the Protocol against
the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; and the Treaty on
Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters among
Like-Minded ASEAN Member Countries.
Myanmar enacted a law against trafficking in
persons in September 2005. We are now reviewing the
law to bring it in line with the changing circumstances.
Myanmar thanks the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime for being a strong partner in the fight
against transnational crimes in close collaboration with
INTERPOL. Myanmar has been tackling this issue
through a comprehensive framework that includes
domestic legislation — a five-year national plan of
action. We have recently launched the third five-year
national plan of action to combat trafficking in persons.
Yearly work programmes are developed to implement
the plan in the five key areas — namely, policy and
cooperation, prevention, prosecution, protection and
capacity-building.
Myanmar is also actively taking part in regional
efforts to combat human trafficking. We have been
working closely with our regional partners on issues
through regional mechanisms such as the Coordinated
Mekong Ministerial Initiative against Trafficking and
the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in
Persons and Related Transnational Crime.
The cessation of conflict and peacebuilding are
some of the most effective ways to solve the problem
of human trafficking. The democratic Government of
Myanmar has made national reconciliation and peace
one of the country’s most important priorities and is
fully committed to achieving that objective. It has
advanced the peace process by establishing a regular
timetable for negotiation through the Union Peace
Conference and opening the dialogue to all ethnic armed
groups. The first session of the Peace Conference,
also known as the 21st-Century Panglong Conference,
was held from 31 August to 3 September 2016. The
second session is expected to convene soon, upon the
conclusion of political discussions at the national level.
Recent clashes in Northern Shan and Kachin States
have highlighted the importance of achieving peace
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7898

and have even strengthened our firm resolve to move
ahead with the peace process to end the conflict.

were done to me, I cannot say out loud ... I didn’t
think I could survive much more.”

We have also taken appropriate measures to
prevent potential human trafficking, slavery and labour
exploitation in conflict areas. As part of those measures,
information sharing campaigns, workshops, and
awareness-raising seminars about people smuggling
and trafficking in persons are being held. Awarenessraising pamphlets, published in local languages, have
been distributed. All of those activities were carried out
in collaboration with Government and United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
international NGOs and religious groups.

It may be hard to believe, or perhaps we would prefer
not to believe, that 45 million people find themselves
in some form of modern slavery. According to the
Walk Free Foundation Global Slavery Index, these
are 45 million people deprived of their identity, taken
away from their families, traded and transferred from
one hand to another as if they were pieces of property
instead of human beings — imagine, 45 million people
deprived of freedom. This would amount to the entire
population of Ukraine, to 70 per cent of the population
of France, 4.5 times the population of Bolivia, 5.5 times
the population of my country and more than 13 times the
population of Uruguay. It is hard to grasp this number,
let alone to comprehend the tragedy and suffering. But
it is impossible, even inhuman, to remain indifferent
while listening to the words of people like Zinab.

With the rapid inflow of foreign investments into
Myanmar, we have been taking measures to avoid
labour exploitation and abusive labour practices.
In order to better promote and protect the labour
rights of our workers, the Government introduced
legislation, policies and regulations, in conformity
with the provisions of relevant International Labour
Organization conventions.
Myanmar will continue to make every effort
to combat the menace of human trafficking in a
comprehensive and coordinated manner, combining
law enforcement, human rights and social development
perspectives, as reaffirmed by the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons. Let us all continue our collaborative efforts
and cooperative action to address the issue of human
trafficking in order to make our world a safer and more
secure place for all.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Allow me to begin by reading
the words of Zinab, a 31-year-old Yazidi woman:
“We were in Kocho village when they came ... The
girls ages 10 to 30 were taken to Mosul ... I was taken
to Tal Afar and kept in a cage ... I escaped ... but was
caught again ... I was kept in a house as a slave for
a month ... then another girl and I got out through
a small window ... They handed me right back to
Da’esh ... The man who bought me that time beat me
badly and raped me whenever he wanted. He made
me wash his clothes and clean his house ... [Then I
escaped again, but another] guy beat me, raped me
and kept me in a locked room ... Half the things that

In recent years, human trafficking, forced labour
and slavery have become ever more dire and painful
with each passing day. For our region, the Middle East,
this debate could not be more relevant and timely.
Vulnerable refugees fleeing the horrors of war in Syria
frequently end up in another horrifying reality — that
of slavery and exploitation. Armed groups, terrorists
and powerful transnational criminal networks are
taking advantage of the helplessness of refugees,
including young children, and forcing them into labour,
crime and prostitution while falsely promising them a
better future in Europe. Terrorist groups like Da’esh
regularly coerce girls into sex slaves and force boys as
young as eight years old to carry out terrorist acts such
as suicide bombing.
For many around the world, such horrors might
sound like a distant reality. For us in Israel, we
sadly witness such atrocities in our own backyard.
Together with a surge in international terror, cases of
unimaginable forced labour, slavery and untold cruelty
are flooding the Middle East and flowing to other
regions of the world.
The signing of Palermo Protocol and the adoption of
resolution 2331 (2016) were steps in the right direction,
but signing declarations and adopting resolutions is
not enough. From our own experience, we know that
the key to saving lives lies in the protection of those
that are most vulnerable, enacting and enforcing
laws and encouraging rehabilitation.In Israel in 2010,
we were finally able to put an end to the trafficking

17-0663071/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

of women for prostitution. Israel was able to achieve
this outcome by applying a system for prevention,
prosecution and rehabilitation. Israel strongly believes
that by combining these three decisive actions, we will
be able to work towards the eradication of slavery and
human trafficking.
To conclude, in less than a month Jews around the
world will sit around their Passover table and recall the
story of how the ancient Israelites escaped bondage
in ancient Egypt and achieved freedom in the land of
Israel. Freedom and the abolishment of slavery for all
humankind are indeed fundamentally enshrined in our
culture. In fact, we are commanded to retell this story
every year and to recall how we were treated when we
were slaves — and we have been doing so for thousands
of years. With the bitter memories of slavery forming
our collective memories, Israel is more committed than
ever to cooperating with the Council to fight against
terror, slavery, forced labour, sexual slavery and other
similar practices. It is high time that we all work
together to finally remove this age-old scourge from
the annals of humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr Yaakob (Malaysia): Malaysia joins previous
speakers in thanking the United Kingdom for convening
this meeting. The focus on the issue of human trafficking
in armed conflict, which highlights a disturbing trend
that warrants strengthening international action, is
indeed commendable and timely.
Allow me also to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and Mr. Yuri Fedotov for their briefings and
steadfast commitment to addressing the issue of human
trafficking. I also wish to thank Mr. Kevin Hyland and
Ms. Ilwad Elman for their harrowing and powerful
testimonies. Their courage and fortitude in the face
of unspeakable horrors should compel us to act and
demand to be matched by the strongest resolve on the
part of the international community so as to ensure that
the detestable treatment that they have witnessed and
others have experienced is not repeated.
Trafficking in persons is absolutely unacceptable in
any context. Human trafficking entails the extrajudicial
judgment that certain groups of people — be it on the
basis of ethnicity, faith, gender, economic status, age
or other random criteria — are inferior and can be used
as a means to an end. Human traffickers treat people
without dignity and negate the respect inherent to all
72/78

15/03/2017

humankind. Such twisted concepts and beliefs are
especially pernicious in situations of armed conflict,
where the vulnerability of civilian communities makes
them prime targets for such horrendous acts.
We are currently witnessing a nightmare scenario
in which non-State armed groups are actively engaging
in human trafficking activities to fulfil their distorted
visions of the world. Da’esh and its ilk have shown
that they are capable of immense cruelty through the
prevailing use of sexual violence, enslavement and the
trade in women and girls for recruitment and financial
purposes. In that regard, the practices of groups such
as Da’esh and Boko Haram in perpetrating sexual
violence, including through the trafficking of women
and children, demand heightened and greater attention
and responses from the Council. We wish to briefly
highlight three aspects that we believe will make a real
difference in tackling the scourge.
First, as with all transnational crimes, strengthening
operations and coordination among Member States,
as well as regional and international organizations, is
imperative. In that regard, we call on Member States
that have yet to ratify and implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its Additional Protocol — which prohibit trafficking in
armed conflict, identify perpetrators and hold them
accountable — to make information and evidence of
acts of trafficking in persons and sexual violence
in conflict available to the Council and channeled
to the relevant Sanctions committee, including the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. We support integrating a
focus on trafficking in persons and the use of sexual
violence in armed conflict into the work of the
Monitoring team of the 1267 (1999) Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
where there are clear linkages to terrorist activities.
At the same time, the crucial outreach and
advocacy roles of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict must be better
leveraged. The securing of commitments and action
plans for parties to the conflict so as to end and prevent
violations and abuses associated with trafficking in
persons, including sexual violence and the recruitment
and use of children, should continue to be pursued.
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

We call for the Council’s continued engagement with
the special envoys, including through the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the various
sanctions committees.
I would like to emphasize the need for victims
and survivors of trafficking and sexual violence to
be supported in returning to a secure and stable life.
Women and children subjected to any violation or
abuse, including trafficking and sexual violence, at
the hands of Da’esh and similar groups, should be
considered as victims and given access to funding and
as the principal foundation for our considered action
to do so as soon as possible. Given the multifaceted
dimensions of trafficking in persons, including where
it is associated with sexual violence and the funding
of terrorist activities, it is crucial that the international
community mobilize complementary legal means,
where available, to investigate, disrupt and dismantle
trafficking networks. We fully support the efforts of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other bodies, as well as bilateral partners, in providing
technical support to Member States to build law
enforcement capacities.
Through our own experience as a country of
destination and transit, we have learned that cooperation
and coordination with neighbouring countries and the
international community are essential to our common
efforts to combat this ugly scourge. Malaysia, as a
member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), is happy that the Association has made a
unified commitment to combatting and preventing
trafficking in persons through the implementation of
the ASEAN Convention against Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and its related plan
of action, established in November 2015. We also
appreciate the strong support for such regional-level
efforts on the part of of the East Asia Summit partners,
as reflected in the Summit declaration adopted
last September.
In maintaining international peace and security,
the Security Council must better utilize its available
tools to monitor trends in humanitarian assistance.
In that respect, community and religious leaders are
pivotal in ensuring the reintegration and rehabiliation
of survivors and in eliminating the stigma that can be
associated with the ordeal that they have been through.
In that regard, we support continued partnership with
civil society to enable survivors and communities to
heal and renew.

S/PV.7898

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia’s
enduring resolve to combat and eradicate trafficking
in persons and our equally strong commitment to
continuing to work with the international community
until we bring an end to those crimes against humanity.
The President: I wish to remind the few speakers
we have remaining to try to keep their statements
within the four-minite limit in order to be fair to those
yet to speak. The light will flash when four minutes
are up.
I now give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks the delegation of the United Kingdom for
organizing this open debate on “Trafficking in persons
in conflict situations: forced labour, slavery and other
similar practices”. We commend you, Mr. President,
for the comprehensive concept note (S/2017/198, annex)
provided to guide our discussions. My delegation also
thanks the Secretary-General and other briefers for
sharing their perspectives on this important subject.
Nigeria also associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
Trafficking in persons has remained a global
phenomenon affecting the most vulnerable people
caught in the web of conflicts, including internally
displaced persons and refugees. Terrorist groups, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and others, have used human trafficking,
forced labour and other similar practices as weapons of
terror and important sources of revenue.
The sexual exploitation of women and girls,
including sexual enslavement, forced marriage and
forced prostitution are among the grave factors
underpinning human trafficking during and in the wake
of conflicts. Such exploitation is used by extremist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), Boko Haram and their affiliates to generate
revenue, as well as reward and retain terrorist fighters.
Today, it is estimated that more than 60 million
women, children and men are fleeing conflicts,
escaping wars or seeking a better life. Yet, as they make
their journey, many are caught in the web of human
trafficking and being coerced into slavery and other
forms of exploitation. Having realized the deleterious
effects of this phenomenon, it is gratifying to note
that we are all united in our conviction to overcome

17-0663073/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

the evil of trafficking in persons, through effective
international cooperation.
Nigeria recognizes the urgent need for the
international community to fight trafficking and to take
the necessary steps to block financial flows between
and among terrorist organizations. It is pertinent
that Member States of the United Nations undertake
investigations and prosecute cases of human trafficking
perpetuated by their nationals. Nigeria considers it
imperative that all perpetrators should be brought
to justice through concerted international response
necessary for resolving the challenge of human
trafficking. Having established that most victims of
trafficking are women and girls, it is only appropriate
for our responses to include special attention to their
rights. Furthermore, Member States must also adopt
gender-sensitive and rights-based migration policies in
this regard.
The fight against human trafficking has remained
an issue of national priority for the Government of
Nigeria. The National Agency for the Prohibition of
Trafficking in Persons, which is the principal institution
charged with the responsibility of leading this fight,
has provided an effective and comprehensive legal and
institutional framework for the prohibition, prevention,
detection, persecution and punishment of crimes
of human trafficking. The Agency, with the active
collaboration of international partners, has made very
significant contributions to the fight against trafficking
in persons.
We appreciate the efforts of humanitarian actors that
are undertaking advocacy campaigns to publicize the
risks of trafficking and the tactics employed to coerce
and traffic victims and what such victims could do to
protect themselves. In addition to taking preventive
measures, States must engage in the protection of
victims. The Palermo Protocol specifically requires
States to protect the human rights of victims and to
provide measures for the physical, psychological and
social recovery of victims of trafficking.
Nigeria recognizes the various efforts made at
the international level to combat human trafficking.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2331 (2016)
condemned the sale of, or trade in, persons seized by
terrorist organizations and other groups for purposes
of sexual slavery and exploitation and forced labour.
As encapsulated in the concept note, human trafficking
and modern slavery are global crimes, with a large
74/78

15/03/2017

number of displaced persons as victims. Considering
the multidimensional nature of these phenomena,
we believe that these crimes must be addressed both
collectively and comprehensively, including by taking
a close look at their root causes and drivers. We must
also adopt a coherent, comprehensive and coordinated
approach, while recognizing the role and responsibilities
of countries of origin, transit and destination in
promoting and effectively protecting the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of all individuals subjected
to these crimes.
We must aim to enhance coherence and build
alliances to confront these issues head-on. Equally
critical is the need for greater responsibility sharing
to provide protection to those in need. To achieve this
objective, we must implement the strategy laid out in the
Global Plan of Action to Combat Human Trafficking.
With solid partnerships and a clear approach, we can
ensure the criminals are brought to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Gone (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We have every faith in you and will
provide you with support during your term.
My delegation is very pleased to participate in
this high-level open debate on trafficking in persons
in conflict situations, which gives us the opportunity
to discuss this important issue. Allow me also
to congratulate the speakers this morning on the
contributions they made to our debate.
Trafficking in persons in conflict situations is of
particular concern. The images and testimony provided
by the media in conflict zones show to what extent this
phenomenon is not only a serious violation of human
rights, but also a real threat to international peace and
security. Last Thursday, 9 March, at the United Nations,
at a high-level event on the fight against impunity for
atrocities, we heard a moving account by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We also heard at the event the
heart-rending account by a young Yazidi woman who
had been held hostage by Islamic State jihadists and
we heard her plea for the Security Council to take up
the fate of her people in Iraq. Testimonies, such as that
of this young Iraqi, could also be that of the people in
the Lake Chad basin, of many countries in conflict
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7898

and of many refugee camps in Africa and around the
world. Since this morning, many speakers have recalled
such practices, which are well known and varied. They
include sexual slavery, the use of victims for labour,
forced domestic work and forced recruitment into
armed groups.

trafficking in persons in times of conflict most often
flourishes in an environment that has been weakened
by a decline in the rule of law. Support for strong State
institutions appears to be an essential in this regard.
The strengthening of the capacity of civilians fighting
this phenomenon should also be encouraged.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), of which my country is a member and which
is affected by this phenomenon, has since 2002 regularly
adopted several action plans, the most recent of which
covers the period 2016-2020. These plans propose,
among other things, the adoption of national legislation
penalizing trafficking in persons, measures to protect
and assist victims, and public awareness campaigns. In
this context, the strategic and operational support of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
to ECOWAS has made a significant contribution to the
prevention and suppression of trafficking in persons in
West Africa.

While the correlation between hotbeds of conflict
and the resurgence of trafficking in persons seems
undeniable, we also must bear in mind such situations
as poverty and low levels of education. The Government
of Côte d’Ivoire believes, therefore, that the fight
against trafficking in persons in times of conflict
and in times of peace must take a comprehensive
approach. The appropriate implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals in fragile countries is
an opportunity. It is also important to support States
affected through the creation of databases to better
identify the phenomenon of trafficking in persons in
order to improve victim assistance.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank the United Nations for its multiform support
through UNODC for the implementation of the
ECOWAS action plan. In line with this regional
strategy, Côte d’Ivoire ratified, on 25 October 2012,
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and signed the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. We also adopted law 2010-272 on the prohibition
of trafficking in persons and the worst forms of child
labour and the law of September 2016 on combating
trafficking in persons.

At this moment, when the Commission on the
Status of Women is holding its sixty-first session, and
against the backdrop of the empowerment of women,
my delegation hopes that today’s debate will help to
give hope to all victims of trafficking in human beings
in situations of conflict.

Given the unprecedented scale of the phenomenon
of trafficking in human beings in times of conflict, the
mobilization of the entire international community is
more necessary than ever. In this regard, my delegation
welcomes the adoption last December of resolution
2331 (2016) . In particular, my country encourages all
Member States to encourage the implementation of
existing national and international legal instruments
to combat this scourge, in particular by bringing the
perpetrators of these crimes before the competent
criminal courts.
The existence of international organized crime
networks mean that States, civil society organizations
and the United Nations system must coordinate their
actions. As has been pointed out throughout this debate,

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the presidency for convening this open
ministerial debate and for submitting a concept note on
the topic (S/2017/198, annex).
We are also grateful to Secretary-General António
Guterres and the other briefers for their statements.
The exploitation of people through trafficking,
including forced labour, slavery and recruitment by
armed groups, is a serious abuse of human rights, while
certain acts associated with trafficking persons in the
context of armed conflict may amount to war crimes.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns all acts of trafficking in
persons and is combatting such acts and other similar
practices. We share the concern over the scale and
number of challenges, which have recently deteriorated
due to increased violence, terrorist activities and
humanitarian crises.
The international legal framework for combatting
human trafficking is based on the rules operating
within the relevant branches of international law that

17-0663075/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

15/03/2017

ensure protection in all situations, including armed
conflict. Success in fighting criminal activities
during conflicts, including human trafficking and
similar practices, requires first and foremost a strong
commitment to binding obligations and standards. It
is critically important to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular those relating to conflict
prevention and resolution.

Mr. Kayobosi (Uganda): At the outset, I bring
warm greetings from our Minister for Foreign Affairs,
The Honourable Sam Kutesa, and convey his apologies
for not being able to come and participate personally
in this important debate due to other State duties.
He conveys his greatest appreciation to the United
Kingdom presidency for the invitation extended to him
to participate in this important debate on a topic that is
so critical to Uganda.

We note with concern the nexus between trafficking
in persons, terrorism and transnational organized
crime. Particular consideration must also be given to
armed conflicts that are aggravated by foreign military
occupation and external political, military, financial
and other support to separatist regimes established in
occupied territories and organized criminal networks
operating in such areas. Efforts to bring unlawful
situations to an end and to disrupt and dismantle the
networks involved must be a priority.

My delegation greatly appreciates the briefings
delivered earlier by the Secretary-General and
other briefers.

Among the issues requiring attention in the
context of human trafficking, forced labour, modern
slavery, organ removal and other similar practices
is that of civilians, including women and children,
taken hostage or reported missing in connection with
armed conflict. Azerbaijan continues its consistent
efforts in that regard, including through the relevant
biennial resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Commission on the Status of Women, of which my
country is a main sponsor.
The best deterrent is undoubtedly ensuring a
speedy end to impunity for conflict-related violations
and abuses of human rights through all available
means. When national authorities fail to investigate,
prosecute and convict the perpetrators, the international
community should play a more proactive role. It is
important that the Security Council, Member States,
regional organizations, mediators and envoys in
mediation, peace and preventive diplomacy processes
ensure that peace and justice work together effectively.
It is also essential to emphasize the role of the
relevant humanitarian mandates within the United
Nations system in addressing situations of armed
conflict and the important of international lawenforcement cooperation, including with respect to the
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
76/78

Trafficking in persons in conflict situations is
perhaps one of the most challenging evils that the world
is currently confronted with, and the organization of this
open debate by the delegation of the United Kingdom,
under its presidency of the Security Council, is very
timely in providing an opportunity to Member States to
share insights into how the root causes of this scourge
and the challenges being confronted in countering it
can be effectively addressed.
Uganda happens to be in a region that has
experienced a lot of conflict, which has exacerbated
the problem of human trafficking in the region. The
conflicts in our region have made the majority of
our people, particularly women and children, more
vulnerable to organized criminal networks that engage
in human trafficking to destination countries for mainly
forced and cheap labour, sexual exploitation and, in
some cases, slavery.
A number of reports have recently revealed some
of the most horrific experiences of women and girl
children who have been trafficked in some of the
destination countries, where they end up being sold
as objects. These trafficked persons, particularly
women and girls, have endured untold torture and
sexual abuse at the hands of their tormentors. Uganda’s
delegation deeply deplores this phenomenon, which is
unacceptable, and calls for the concerted efforts of the
international community to decisively confront it.
As rightly pointed out in the concept note before
us (S/2017/198, annex), the link between trafficking in
persons, organized crime and terrorism is increasing
in magnitude and scope, as clearly demonstrated in the
case of Libya, where the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons continue to provide both direct
and indirect funding to armed and terrorist groups. This
is a clear example of how conflict situations, whose root
17-06630

15/03/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

causes are multifaceted, have engendered that linkage
and made it thrive to unimaginable proportions, leading
to a further exacerbation of human suffering.
Trafficking in persons in conflict is also closely
intertwined with other transnational organized crimes,
such as money-laundering and drug trafficking. The
financial resources that accrue from human trafficking
enable money-laundering to thrive and in turn largely
contribute to funding terrorist activities. And the cycle
continues. It is therefore evident that this requires a
holistic approach that addresses the interconnectedness
of these vices to our societies.
It is imperative that Member States, with the support
of the international community, develop comprehensive
mechanisms that promote a coordinated approach to
addressing the root causes of this phenomenon. Needless
to point out, some of the root causes of such conflict
situations that enable human trafficking to thrive
include, but are not limited to, widespread inequalities
in the global economic environment, poverty, foreign
occupation in some situations, discrimination based on
religion, gender and race, and other vices. Addressing
such root causes and mitigating the enormous adverse
effects associated with this evil phenomenon requires a
holistic approach with the full support of the Security
Council and the entire United Nations system.
It is in that context that my delegation welcomes this
open debate and extends its full support to measures to
be developed to address this problem. Working together
through the United Nations system would help to send
a strong message to the perpetrators of these crimes
and to undermine and curtail the capabilities of their
networks to execute their criminal activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): At the outset,
let me, like other speakers, thank the British presidency
for this debate on an important and complex topic.
In view the importance that Aruba, one of the
four countries in our kingdom, attaches to the fight
against human trafficking and modern slavery, let me
acknowledge the presence in my delegation of Minister
Hooyboer-Winklaar, Minister for Education and Family
Policy in the Government of Aruba and Head of the
Delegation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the
Commission on the Status of Women.

S/PV.7898

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union, we support the statement made by the
representative of Italy, also in the context of our split
term in the Security Council in 2017 and 2018.
There is an obvious need for the Council to
address the issue of human trafficking in conflict, as
it clearly undermines international peace and security.
I shall focus on three issues in that regard: prevention,
protection and prosecution. Let me start with prevention.
National
responsibility
and
international
cooperation are key to an effective preventive approach
to human trafficking. This requires at least three
things. First of all, we need more in-depth analysis
and greater information-sharing to understand how
criminal networks operate, because terrorist groups
are increasingly engaged in human trafficking and
the smuggling of people. To this end, the Netherlands
promotes international cooperation between financial
intelligence units.
Secondly, we need to step up our joint effort to
combat the current criminal networks involved in
human trafficking, for example in the area of border
security. As co-Chair, together with Morocco, of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, the Netherlands is
committed to placing this topic high on the agenda
because greater border security also addresses crossborder human trafficking in conflict areas.
Thirdly, we believe that we should increase our
vigilance. In order to strengthen the implementation
of our anti-trafficking legislation and policy, in 2000
the Netherlands appointed an independent national
rapporteur on trafficking in human beings with that
objective especially in mind.
That brings me to my second issue, that of
protection during conflict. Here, one specific area of
focus should be the protection against human traffickers
of vulnerable groups among refugees and internally
displaced persons, especially women and children. One
way to do so is by increasing the resilience of displaced
persons and host communities alike. Also from that
perspective, the Netherlands supports education,
economic development and employment for displaced
persons and host communities in the wider Syrian
region and the Horn of Africa. In addition, countries
should ensure that proper care is available for victims
of human trafficking, including safe shelter and medical
and psychological care.

17-0663077/78

S/PV.7898

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me finally move to my third issue, prosecution
after conflict. In view of the enormous human suffering
traffickers cause, their impunity is simply intolerable.
Together, we should join forces to investigate and hold
traffickers accountable. This requires strengthening
legal frameworks at the national level. These frameworks
must of course be in line with international standards.
The international community should continue to assist
countries that lack the capacities to do so.
Capacity-building is also crucial when it comes to
training national law enforcement agencies, prosecutors
and lawyers. In that regard, let me commend the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for all the capacitybuilding it is doing worldwide to end impunity for
human traffickers.
In conclusion, under the Spanish presidency the
Council unanimously adopted resolutions 2331 (2016),
on human trafficking in conflict. The importance of
implementing the resolution and other international
conventions cannot be overestimated. Together, we
should redouble our efforts to cooperate to prevent
human trafficking, protect victims and prosecute
perpetrators. The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands
ready to continue to be a partner in this endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Labour Organization.
Mr. Homayounpour: As we have heard many
times today, the International Labour Organization
(ILO) estimates that 20.9 million people are victims of
forced labour. This represents about 3 in every 1,000
of today’s world population. Forced sexual exploitation
accounts for 22 per cent of all victims, whereas forced
labour exploitation makes up 68 per cent of the total.
This is a huge business. In fact in 2014 estimates
indicated that it generates annual profits of $150 billion.
Two-thirds of the estimated total, or $99 billion, came
from commercial sexual exploitation, while another
$51 billion resulted from forced economic exploitation,
including domestic work, agriculture and other
economic activities.

78/78

15/03/2017

In June 2014, the International Labour Organization
adopted a legally binding Protocol to the Forced
Labour Convention of 1930 (No. 29), designed to tackle
modern forms of forced labour and strengthen global
efforts for their elimination. The Protocol, supported
by a recommendation, was adopted by Governments,
employers and worker delegates to the International
Labour Conference. The Protocol strengthens the
international legal framework by creating new
obligations to prevent forced labour, to protect victims
and to provide access to remedy, such as compensation
for material and physical harm. It requires Governments
to take measures to better protect workers, in particular
migrant labourers, from fraudulent and abusive
recruitment practices, and emphasizes the role of
employers and workers in the fight against forced
labour. The Protocol is now open for ratification, and I
am happy to report 13 ratifications thus far, including
that of the United Kingdom.
It is very clear that everyone has a role to play in
fighting modern slavery and that unless we all come
together and unite against it, we are going to face an
uphill battle. That is why the ILO, with many partners,
has facilitated the creation of Alliance 8.7. A partnership
of partnerships, as it is called, Alliance 8.7 is a coalition
committed to accelerating and intensifying actions to
tackle the problems of forced labour, modern slavery,
human trafficking and child labour, thereby contributing
to the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal
8.7. I invite all to join the Alliance and help improve
coordination and joint action, which, as we have heard
over and over again today, remain real challenges in
this area of work.
The ILO is also creating a global business network
against forced labour and human trafficking to work
with employers and the private sector in ensuring that
slavery does not infiltrate supply chains. We at the ILO
look forward to continuing and expanding our work
together in combatting such violations of human rights.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

17-06630
