S/PV.7826

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7826

th meeting
Monday, 5 December 2016, 4.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. González de Linares Palou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-41356 (E)
*1641356*

S/PV.7826

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Maman
Sidikou, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic; and
Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs.
Mr. Sidikou is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“Following the visit of the Security Council
to the Democratic Republic of Congo from 11 to
13 November, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the
Council regarding the situation in the country:
“The Security Council is monitoring very
closely the recent political development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and remains
concerned about the risk for destabilization of the
country and the region as a whole in the absence
of a swift and consensual resolution to the current
political crisis, as illustrated by the violence of
19 and 20 September 2016.
“The Security Council thanks the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and all its interlocutors for the fruitful discussions
that have taken place during this visit.
2/19

05/12/2016

“The Security Council acknowledges the
political agreement reached on 18 October 2016
and takes note of the appointment of the new Prime
Minister. The Security Council is encouraged by
the unanimous commitment of Congolese actors to
prevent destabilization and to continue inclusive
discussions in order to reach a broad consensus
towards free, fair, credible, inclusive, transparent,
peaceful and timely presidential and legislative
elections leading to a peaceful transfer of power
in accordance with the Congolese Constitution
for the stability, development and consolidation
of constitutional democracy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
“The Security Council further calls on political
groups that did not sign the political agreement to
remain engaged in dialogue. The Security Council
welcomes commitments to respect and preserve the
Constitution in letter and spirit and looks forward to
the implementation of further confidence-building
measures to ease tensions and build consensus.
“The Security Council welcomes the ongoing
mediation efforts led by the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO) and calls on all
political actors to continue working in good faith
and in a spirit of compromise towards a swift
political solution, before 19 December 2016, that
paves the way for peaceful, credible, inclusive
and timely elections as soon as possible in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council further encourages the region to pursue its
efforts in support of the mediation.
“The Security Council urges the Government,
as well as all relevant parties to ensure an
environment conducive to free, fair, credible,
inclusive, transparent and elections, as recalled in
resolution 2277 (2016), which includes a free and
constructive political debate, freedom of opinion
and expression, freedom of assembly, equitable
access to media, including State media, safety and
the freedom of movement for all candidates, as well
as for election observers and witnesses, journalists,
human rights defenders and actors from civil
society, including women.
“The Security Council calls on the authorities
to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms,
especially the right of peaceful assembly, and to
exercise maximum restraint in their response to
16-41356

05/12/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

protests, and also calls upon the opposition forces,
for their part, to show responsibility by ensuring
the peaceful character of their demonstrations.
“The Security Council reiterates its call upon
all political parties, their supporters and other
political actors to exercise maximum restraint
in their actions and statements, to refrain from
violence, violent speeches or other provocations
and to address their differences peacefully. The
Security Council also calls on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to hold
accountable those responsible for the killings on
19 and 20 September and for all human rights
violations and abuses. The Security Council takes
note of the recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
“The Security Council stresses the importance
for the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its national partners to take all
necessary steps to accelerate the preparations for
the elections without further delays, including by
expediting the update of the voter registry.
“The Security Council is also deeply concerned
by the humanitarian situation, which continues to
severely affect the civilian population in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
persistence of violence in that area, in particular in
North Kivu Province where nearly 840,000 people
were internally displaced as of 30 September
2016 and more than 700 civilians have been killed
since October 2014. The Security Council urges
authorities to hold accountable those deemed
responsible for the acts of violence.
“The Security Council calls on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to take
further action, in accordance with international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, as applicable, and
with the support of MONUSCO in accordance with
its mandate, to end the threat posed by the Allied
Democratic Forces, the Forces Démocratiques
de Libération du Rwanda and all other armed
groups operating in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Security Council encourages
further cooperation between the Forces Armées
de la République Démocratique du Congo and
MONUSCO in tackling this violence and continue

S/PV.7826

their efforts to neutralize armed groups operating
in eastern Congo.
“The Security Council reiterates its full
support to MONUSCO and its appreciation for
the Special Representative’s leadership in trying
to ease tensions. The Security Council urges
MONUSCO to fully implement its protection of
civilians mandate, including to respond to current
and ongoing security threats and reminds troopand police-contributing countries of the need for a
comprehensive approach and to take all necessary
measures to carry out MONUSCO’s mandate as set
forth in resolution 2277 (2016).
“The Security Council welcomes the regional
initiatives and efforts by regional States to promote
peace, stability and democracy in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to enhance cooperation
towards the neutralization of armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
establishment by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda of a Joint
Follow-up Mechanism and encourages further
action. The Security Council extends its thanks to
Angola, Chair of the International Conference of
the Great Lakes Region, for the fruitful discussions
held in Luanda on 14 November 2016. The Security
Council also welcomes in that regard the reform of
the governing mechanisms of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, including
the decision to hold an annual high-level meeting of
the Regional Oversight Mechanism in a signatory
State, with a view to strengthening regional
ownership of the Framework.
“The Security Council expresses its
determination to continue to closely follow the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in particular the security conditions on the ground
and the efforts to successfully conclude the
electoral process.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2016/18.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.
Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to speak
to you and the Council about the situation in the

16-413563/19

S/PV.7826

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Democratic Republic of Congo since your visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in November.
My statement will focus on the political situation,
with particular emphasis on the good offices undertaken
by the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo
(CENCO) and the arrangements made by the Mission
with regard to the deadline of 19 December and the
security situation in particular in the eastern part of
the country.
Two weeks after the constitutional end of President
Kabila’s second and last term, and more than six
weeks after the signing of the comprehensive political
agreement of 18 October, on peaceful, credible and
transparent elections, the political situation remains
uncertain. The good offices led by CENCO since early
November, with the endorsement of President Kabila
and which had aroused great hope for a peaceful exit
from the political impasse, seem or seemed to be fading.
In complex situations, appearances can sometimes
be misleading.
The positions of the key players, namely, those of the
presidential majority and the Rassemblement des forces
politiques et sociales acquises au changement — known
as the Rassemblement de l’opposition — appear not
to have changed. The presidential majority continues
to reject a second dialogue and the Rassemblement
insists on a truly inclusive dialogue. A few moments
ago I learned, through a presidential communiqué, that
President Kabila just relaunched the CENCO initiative
in person, called on it to pursue its mission and assured
it of his full support.
(spoke in English)
While we are steadfastly continuing our good
offices engagement with the Government, the security
services, political parties and civil society, we are now
fast approaching the symbolic date of 19 December
and the period going into early next year with a sense
of apprehension. In that context and drawing lessons
from the violent events of 19 and 20 September, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has further updated its contingency plans and is further
adjusting its posture and deployment to mitigate
politically driven violence and protect civilians, to the
extent possible within its available resources and in its
areas of deployment.
4/19

05/12/2016

Specifically, the Mission has reinforced its presence
and coordination mechanism in Kinshasa to implement
our protection of civilian mandates, within capacity,
while the force and police continue to carry out day
and night patrols in Kinshasa, as well as in other parts
of the country. We have also established in Kinshasa,
Goma and Lubumbashi three mobile teams to monitor
and report on human rights violations and restrictions
of political space. Those teams are designed to deploy
into areas that are without a permanent MONUSCO
presence but are deemed at high risk of politically
driven violence. The Mission is also coordinating
its plans with the United Nations country team, in
particular with regard to the provision of humanitarian
assistance to civilian populations that may be displaced
by such violence.
Let me stress here that those efforts may not be
fully sufficient to mitigate or respond adequately to
any major outbreak of politically related violence.
First and foremost, it is the political will of the main
political actors that will determine how the existing
and real tensions are managed and whether or not they
degenerate into violence. Secondly, the force and police
capabilities available to the Mission in Kinshasa are
stretched thin. Furthermore, as the Mission fine-tunes
its plans to ensure the safety and security of its personnel
and facilities, we are cognizant of the fact that there
may well be requests from the diplomatic community
and other actors present in Kinshasa for support, which
would further stretch the Mission’s limited capacities.
My senior colleagues and I will continue to work with
the Secretariat to address those challenges, and I am
grateful for the support of the Council in those matters.
Going forward, it is my hope that the efforts of
CENCO, with the support of countries of the region, in
particular the Republic of Angola and the Republic of
Congo, will eventually broker a rapprochement between
the presidential majority and the Rassemblement de
l’opposition. Such a rapprochement would contribute
to averting violence on 19 December and in the period
immediately following, and in the medium term also
contribute to a peaceful transition process required
for a credible electoral process. I would therefore like
to encourage the members of the Council to reinforce
the message that it conveyed to the Congolese political
actors during their visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo last month, namely, that they remain
primarily responsible and accountable for the peace
and stability of their country. I hope that the Council
16-41356

05/12/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

might also express its appreciation for the efforts of
CENCO to facilitate a détente between the Government
and the Rassemblement.
It is also important for the Council to urge the
Prime Minister-designate, Mr. Samy Badibanga, to
finalize his commitments with all stakeholders in
order to form an inclusive transitional Government to
promote a spirit of reconciliation and lead the country
through a peaceful and stable transition period.
I would like to conclude by highlighting the fact that,
in this period of political uncertainty, the deteriorating
economic situation is also having an adverse impact
on the stability of the country. Socioeconomic factors
constitute an important potential trigger for violence
during this period. I would therefore like to echo the
Prime Minister-designate’s personal appeal to me, when
I met with him on 1 December, and his request for the
international community’s support as his Government
intends to re-engage international financial institutions
in that regard.
Finally, we must be cautious that the focus on
political events in Kinshasa and our preparations to
mitigate election-related violence do not distract us
from our operations against armed groups in the eastern
part of the country. The situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains cause for concern and
could well be exacerbated by armed groups and criminal
networks capitalizing on the political uncertainty at the
national level, thereby compounding the risks faced
by the civilian population. The spill-over effect of the
ongoing conflict in South Sudan, the growing number
of South Sudanese refugees arriving in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the presence of armed actors
along the border between South Sudan the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are also of increasing concern.
We must continue to monitor those developments
very closely. MONUSCO will therefore continue in a
determined manner in its coordinated operations with
the Congolese Armed Forces against armed groups to
ensure the protection of civilians in the eastern part of
the country and with the Congolese police to strengthen
the rule of law.
On regional matters that impact the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I will also continue my close
coordination and collaboration with Special Envoy
Djinnit in our diplomatic efforts at regional level.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Sidikou
for his briefing.

S/PV.7826

I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Sir, and members
of the Security Council for this opportunity to brief
everyone on electoral developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Sidikou has just briefed everyone
on the political and security developments, as well the
measures taken by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) to provide support and enhance
the protection of civilians. I will therefore limit my
remarks to what the United Nations has done to support
the electoral process.
In resolution 2277 (2016), the Security Council
decided that the priority tasks of the United Nations in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo should include the
provision of technical assistance and logistical support
for the revision of the electoral register. Accordingly,
the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department
of Political Affairs undertook an advisory mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 24 April
to 10 May, first, to assess the political environment
and preparations for updating the voter register and
polls; secondly, to assess the capacity of national
institutions, including the National Independent
Electoral Commission (CENI) and that of the United
Nations as it relates to the implementation of resolution
2277 (2016); and, thirdly, to consider the implications
of the implementation for the United Nations in terms
of human and financial resources.
The Mission made the assessment that United
Nations and international support would be critical to
allow the Independent National Electoral Commission
to organize the voter registration exercise within
the shortest time frame technically possible and
that a political agreement among key stakeholders
would be necessary to move elections preparations
forward peacefully. In accordance with resolution 2277
(2016) and the findings of the advisory mission, the
United Nations has been providing support to African
Union (AU) facilitation and national stakeholders,
including on technical issues pertaining to the
electoral process.
As Council members are aware, the 18 October
political agreement reached by the presidential
majority and part of the opposition provides for a
complete overhaul of the voter register by 31 July 2017
and the holding of presidential and legislative elections

16-413565/19

S/PV.7826

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

05/12/2016

simultaneously. It also provides for the possibility of
holding local elections on the same day, financial and
technical conditions permitting, or within six months
following the general elections. Under the agreement,
elections would be announced on 30 October 2017,
following which CENI is expected to organize the
general elections within 6 months — meaning, by April
2018. The agreement also calls on the Government to
provide CENI with the logistical and financial resources
necessary for the completion of the electoral process.

the transportation of more than 3,500 tons of registration
materials to 16 main hubs and to at least 104 of the 225
antenna sites. CENI is taking care of the remainder of
the antenna sites and the registration centres. Since
28 October, MONUSCO has provided four cargo planes
and 16 helicopters to CENI, and since then 520 tons
of registration materials have been transferred by the
Mission from Kinshasa to other provinces. In addition,
MONUSCO has provided support for the deployment of
50 voter registration agents.

The timeline suggested by the agreement presents
some advantages, including shorter deadlines than
the one initially envisaged by CENI, which cuts down
the number of days required to organize the elections.
However, it is worth noting that this would be the first
time for CENI to embark on such a herculean electoral
undertaking with such serious logistics implications.
Needless to say, the continued support of the
international community, including through financial
assistance, will be crucial to ensure the success of
the electoral process. Furthermore, broadening the
base of the political consensus and the acceptance of
the electoral timeline by national stakeholders will be
critical, given that the only peaceful way out of the
current stalemate will be through a negotiated solution.

Council members will recall that in 2015,
UNDP established an electoral project further to the
recommendations of the 2013 electoral needs assessment
mission. However, the capacities of the project to
provide assistance are stretched to the breaking point.
Out of a project budget of $123 million, only about
$10 million have been mobilized. Financial constraints
continue to prevent UNDP from properly staffing the
project and implementing planned activities.

On 31 July, the voter registration exercise was
launched in Gbadolite, which is in Nord-Ubangui
province. The registration process is planned to take
place in two phases. The first phase is a pilot project,
and the second will be staggered over four operational
areas to cover approximately 17,500 registration centres
throughout the remaining 25 provinces of the country.
The pilot project in Nord-Ubangui was completed on
31 October. As of 1 December, almost 90 per cent of
the 850,000 prospective voters had been registered.
About 45 per cent of them are women. CENI has
started preparations for the second phase and the voter
registration will be simultaneously launched in the
middle of December, in two operational areas covering
12 provinces. In the meantime, registration agents
are being trained and the deployment of registration
material is under way.
In accordance with resolution 2277 (2016), the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
have been providing logistical and technical expertise
to concerned national stakeholders for the registration
process. MONUSCO logistics support alone includes
6/19

MONUSCO and the Secretariat are also taking
administrative steps aimed at providing the United
Nations with the material and human resources
necessary to undertake the technical and logistical
support to CENI. As recommended by the advisory
mission, the MONUSCO electoral division is being
established with a view to putting in place an integrated
electoral assistance team that brings together UNDP
and the MONUSCO electoral division. The Department
of Political Affairs is providing support to the process
through the electoral roster. In addition to the
electoral expert deployed to support AU facilitation,
the Department of Political Affairs has deployed
its principal electoral officer, based at the United
Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa,
to spearhead the Mission’s electoral support efforts,
pending the recruitment of a director for the electoral
division of MONUSCO.
On 31 October, a joint centre comprising experts
from CENI and the United Nations was established to
better coordinate voter registration operations. United
Nations support to the voter registration process is
being provided amid a very challenging political,
financial and security environment. Moreover, the
electoral calendar and the funding of the process by the
Government are still not fully clear. Out of an electoral
budget of over $1 billion, the Government is committed
to disbursing $300 million in 2016. However, while the
Government paid $20 million monthly from January
to June and similar monthly allotments in Congolese
16-41356

05/12/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.7826

francs from July to September, it reportedly has not
disbursed any funds since October.

for the termination of the powers of the President
and parliamentarians.

Despite the challenges faced by the political
process, the international community will need to
exert additional effort to help improve the political
environment surrounding preparations for the elections,
most notably with a view to securing a level playing
field, as well as to providing necessary technical and
financial assistance. It is essential that MONUSCO
and UNDP be provided the means to deliver on their
commitments and mandates.

We regret the victims of 20 and 21 September
demonstrations. However, we suggest that it would be
logical to talk about human rights violations only after
the investigations have been completed and the role
played by opposition leaders in provoking the unrest
and violence against Government representatives has
been assessed.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
To that end, the presidency will use the flashing lights
on the collars of the microphones to prompt speakers to
bring their remarks to a close.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We note the effective efforts of Special Envoy
of African Union, Mr. Edem Kodjo, in assisting the
successful conclusion of the intra-Congolese political
dialogue and the signing of the political agreement of
18 October. We are convinced that that agreement will
play a role in ensuring political stability in the very
difficult time leading up to the election. We commend
the 17 November appointment of Mr. Samy Badibanga
to the post of Prime Minister as the first step in
implementing the agreement. We call on the political
forces in the country that have not signed the agreement
to continue to participate in the political process.
We are convinced that the interpretation of the
agreement with respect to defining the update of the
voter register and the concrete time frame for holding
the presidential election should be determined by the
Congolese people themselves. The intervention of
external players on the pretext of imposing their psuedorecommendations for organizing the electoral process
and broadening the political space is unacceptable.
Such actions are liable to violate the equilibrium that
has been achieved with such difficulty. We should
refrain from interpreting Congolese fundamental law,
because the country has its own Constitutional Court,
which on 11 May ruled concerning the procedure

The main reason for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo’s place on the Security Council’s agenda
is the fact that the conflict has not been resolved and
illegal armed groups remain active in the eastern
regions of the country. We are pleased to note the full
cooperation that has been established between the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Government of the country, and we pay tribute
to the personal efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou.
We hope that the re-establishment of full-scale
joint operations of the MONUSCO Force Intervention
Brigade and the Congolese army to neutralize illegal
armed groups, will ultimately help to eliminate the
security vacuum in the eastern part of the country.
We also commend Kinshasa’s efforts to improve its
cooperation on security issues with the Governments
of neighbouring Uganda and Rwanda. We believe it
important for States members of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to
step up their efforts to ensure the implementation
by all signature countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. In that regard, we note
the efforts being made by ICGLR under the presidency
of Angola. We call for the provisions of the Framework
to be invoked in addressing the problem concerning the
arrival of supporters of the former First Vice-President
of South Sudan, Mr. Machar, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in August.
The problems of the region cannot be resolved
through force. We need to implement plans for the
disarmament, demobilization and repatriation of former
fighters of the Mouvement du 23 mars. So far, steps have
been made in that area only by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo itself. It is important that MONUSCO
remain impartial and limit itself strictly to its Security
Council mandate on the eve of the elections. We are

16-413567/19

S/PV.7826

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

convinced that a close partnership with Kinshasa will
allow the Mission to fulfil its role of stabilization.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Our
meeting today is taking place shortly after the very
important meeting that the Security Council organized
in mid-November (see S/PV.7819). Today’s meeting
clearly highlights the importance that the Security
Council attaches to the latest developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We acknowledge
the impact of the events in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on the stability of the Great Lakes region
and the region as a whole. I would like to make a few
comments in that regard.
It goes without saying that the upcoming elections,
as outlined in the Constitution, are of special and indeed
historical importance for the fate of the country. They
will enhance stability, the constitutional order and the
country’s institutions. In that light, Egypt insists on the
importance of the political agreement that was reached
thanks to the mediation of Mr. Kodjo, paving the way for
free and peaceful elections. We welcome the measures
that have been taken to implement the agreement,
particularly the nomination of a new Prime Minister.
The credibility of the agreement naturally depends on
its appropriate implementation without further delay,
including preparations for the elections, ensuring their
transparency, adopting confidence-building measures,
protecting the fundamental freedoms of citizens, and
ensuring the freedom of the press, within the framework
of the law.
In addition to the implementation of the agreement,
all political actors must work to build a broad
consensus in order to ensure the stability necessary
for the organization of the elections in accordance
with the Constitution. We welcome the efforts being
undertaken to that end, in particular those of the
Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo. We call on
all political actors to contribute to those efforts and to
demonstrate flexibility. We urge them to seek ways to
overcome their differences and conflicts in order to
preserve and guarantee the stability and security of
the country. In that context, Egypt strongly welcomes
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/18, adopted by the
Council today, which refers to our ongoing support for
those efforts.
I would like to say a word on the very important
role played by the African Union and other regional
organizations, in particular the International Conference
8/19

05/12/2016

on the Great Lakes Region under the leadership of
Angola, which has played a very important role in what
has been achieved so far. We need to step up our efforts
to overcome the remaining difficulties.
I further note that the future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be decided solely by its
own people and institutions country. Respect for the
Constitution is incumbent on all national actors, while
the international community must also respect the
sovereignty, independence and Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is indeed an
essential factor for preserving peace and security there.
I would like to very briefly focus on the situation
in the east of the country. I have made two visits to the
country over the past few months, first with the Council
and also within the framework of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), which Egypt has the
honour of chairing. On both occasions I was able to see
first-hand the suffering of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the horrible living conditions
they endure in that part of the country.
In the context of the cooperation between the
Congolese army and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, military operations have been bolstered, which
has enabled significant progress against armed groups.
Unfortunately, those efforts have not prevented those
groups from committing crimes and violence against
the civilian population, not to mention an increase in
ethnic tensions, such as the attack on a camp in North
Kivu. That, of course, has contributed to a deteriorating
situation in the east of the country.
Furthermore, in order to find a lasting solution it is
important to make progress on the issue of reconciliation.
Tensions need to be eased and the grievances of the
local population heeded, including those of refugees
and displaced people. It is also important to combat
impunity, ensure the rule of law and expand the
authority of the Government. We also need to improve
the living conditions of the citizens. Lastly, we need to
find a solution to the crisis characterized by the illegal
export of natural resources, because it threatens the
economic development of the country.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Sidikou and Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
their briefings.
16-41356

05/12/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The political process in the Democratic Republic
of Congo is at a critical junction. President Kabila
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo are committed to advancing national dialogue,
safeguarding State stability and promoting economic
and social development, which China welcomes.
In the meantime, the security situation in the country
remains quite fragile. The achievement of lasting
peace, prosperity and development is an arduous task
and has a long way to go. It therefore needs continued
support from the international community. The Council
visited the Democratic Republic of Congo and Angola
in early November, which reflects the importance
that the Security Council attaches to the issue of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. China would like to
make the following observations on this issue.
First, we resolutely promote the political process in
the Democratic Republic of Congo. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of Congo and the relevant
opposition parties have signed a political agreement
tht covers the election schedule, the establishment of a
political transition and the appointment of a new Prime
Minister. China welcomes those developments. We call
on the opposition parties that are not yet part of the
national dialogue to sign onto the the political agreement
as soon as possible, resolve their differences through
dialogue and dedicate themselves to the peace, stability
and development of the country. The international
community should respect the development path
independently chosen by the Democratic Republic of
Congo and, on the basis of respecting the sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of Congo, provide constructive
assistance to the political process.
Secondly, we vigorously promote security and
stability in the country. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the Democratic Republic of
Congo governing forces have made positive headway
in their fight against armed groups. Countries in the
Great Lakes region are interdependent; their security
is closely connected. China encourages countries
in the region to continue with the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region.
Furthermore, it calls on them to make more progress
in the implementation of the Nairobi Declaration and
in their response to the threat posed by armed groups.

S/PV.7826

Thirdly, the roles of regional and subregional
organizations should have full play. The African Union
(AU) has played an important role in facilitating national
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) held a high-level meeting on the topic and
issued a communiqué, which demonstrates the support
of countries in the region for a political settlement
of the problem. The United Nations should give full
play to the comparative advantages of regional and
subregional organizations, such as the AU and ICGLR,
thereby strengthening coordination and cooperation
with each other with a view to creating synergy. China
appreciates and supports the positive role of MONUSCO
in promoting peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and advancing the political process,
including disarmament and demobilization.
The Chinese Government has always supported
the peace process of the Democratic Republic of
Congo and, over the years, has provided assistance to
its nation-building efforts within its capacity. We have
also sent peacekeepers to MONUSCO. Along with the
broader international community, China stands ready
to continue our constructive role in the realization of
peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of Congo.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): There has been no
shortage of warnings to the Security Council regarding
the risk of conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The failure to undertake timely preparations for
the electoral list were apparent a year ago. And in July,
the Deputy Secretary-General warned the Security
Council (see S/PV.7732) that violence and instability
associated with a political crisis could still preventable
if an inclusive political agreement could be reached. We
saw early signs of that instability and violence manifest
itself, with dozens killed on 19 and 20 September.
But a slow, burning situation can be among the most
challenging for the Security Council to address when we
are confronted with so many emergencies at the same
time. And influencing the parties in a situation that has
been on the Security Council’s agenda for so long is not
easy. Visiting missions, like the one we undertook last
month, is important in order to engage directly with
the Governments and other stakeholders, listen to them
and deliver messages from Council members directly
to the parties.
We are pleased that we have now agreed on
a common set of messages in today’s presidential

16-413569/19

S/PV.7826

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

statement S/PRST/2016/18. That is an important
outcome, although ideally it would have been preferable
to issue the statement closer to the time of the visit.
There are a few points that deserve particular emphasis.
First, the Congolese political leadership — both
in Government and opposition — must heed the calls
from the Council to act with a spirit of compromise to
achieve a consensus political agreement on the path
ahead, building on the 18 October agreement and before
the scheduled end of the President’s current term at the
end of December.
Secondly, political leaders on all sides need
to encourage a political environment in which the
Congolese can freely engage, with freedom of assembly
and the media, while avoiding incitement of violence.
Thirdly, as was underscored by our visit and
meetings in Luanda, the region is among those first
to face the implications of conflict, and it has a key
role to play in building support for an inclusive
political agreement.
The Congolese continue to suffer from insecurity
in the eastern parts of the country. When we were in
Beni last month, we saw the fear and anger felt by
Congolese who are suffering from appalling human
rights abuses. While addressing the immediate political
crisis in Kinshasa, we must also remain engaged on
the imperative of stabilizing the security situation
in the east, protecting civilians, neutralizing armed
groups, such as Allied Democratic Force and the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, and
establishing accountability for the human rights abuses
that have taken place. The Congolese authorities have
the lead role to play in achieving that, supported by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
At the same time, MONUSCO must devote resources
and be well prepared for conflict risks associated with
the political crisis. The missions ongoing contingencyplanning efforts are particularly important in that
regard, as outlined by Mr. Sidikou.
Finally, we would have seen real value in Assistant
Secretary-General Andrew Gilmour participating
in this briefing to share his observations on his
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights inside the country.
Indeed, the linkage between human rights abuses as a
10/19

05/12/2016

potential driver of conflict could not be clearer than the
present circumstances.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sambo
Sidikou, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, for their
comprehensive briefings.
I would like to once more reiterate Uruguay’s
commitment to stability and peace in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, not just as an elected member of
the Security Council but also as a country that has
contributed troops to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) in an uninterrupted fashion over
the past 16 years.
As referred to in presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/18, the Security Council undertook a field
visit a little less than a month ago and the messages that
were conveyed focused on the political and security
situation in the country. The Democratic Republic of
Congo finds itself at a decisive moment in its history
in political terms. Furthermore, both the Congolese
population and the international community have great
expectations vested in the holding of free, transparent,
inclusive and credible elections.
Political stakeholders, who should act in the
interests of the nation and its inhabitants, have the
enormous responsibility of achieving the necessary
consensus to hold credible elections without unjustified
delays, so as to avoid any escalation of tension or
violence. Uruguay wishes to reiterate its call to political
groups that have yet to join the dialogue process to do
so and play a constructive role that can contribute to the
proper holding of elections.
Of concern are the complaints of violations of
civil and political rights, including violations of the
freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, that
have been committed, inter alia, by forces or personnel
linked to the Government. It would be better for the
persons responsible for such violations be brought
to justice to account for their acts sooner rather than
later. Uruguay wishes to emphasize that it will be of
great importance during the preparation, development
and implementation of the election process that all
necessary guarantees be provided for the monitoring,
protection and promotion of human rights.
16-41356

05/12/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Unfortunately, many rulers in Africa and still more
in other parts of the world are calling for constitutional
reforms when they wish to extend their terms in office.
Every constitution involves laborious negotiations
in which almost all political actors and parties and
civil society organizations of a country participate.
A constitution also implies a delicate and balanced
social, political and legal pact in which all the citizens
of a country subscribe to or have what is referred to in
English as “ownership” of the country’s magna carta.
Reforming constitutions with the sole objective
of extending elected terms of office or of allowing for
persons in power to be re-elected has proved to be a
misguided and damaging practice for the political and
democratic evolution of States over the past 40 years.
One day, all Governmental leaders without exception
will understand that the essence of democracy is the
regular holding of general elections in accordance with
constitutional guarantees and that what is important
about that is seeing political alternation among different
political parties as natural and healthy for society as a
whole. We hope that the unanimous political messages
delivered by the members of the Council during their
recent visit to the country are echoed throughout the
political class and the population of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Finally, Uruguay wishes to pay tribute to each and
every one of the officials deployed in MONUSCO who
have been making an enormous sacrifice on a daily
basis to contribute to the peace and stability of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are, without a
doubt, the true guarantee that this entire process comes
to fruition.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to the thank the
briefers, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Sidikou and Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun, for
their update on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Continued monitoring and reporting by
the United Nations on developments on the ground are
crucial at this critical juncture.
Over the past decade, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has made great strides in overcoming its
conflict-ridden past and shown immense determination
in addressing remaining challenges to peace and
security. Consolidating democratic gains and setting the
stage for a peaceful transition of power in accordance
with the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the

S/PV.7826

Congo, we believe, is a key step to securing the lasting
peace and stability desired.
The current long-simmering political impasse over
electoral processes is therefore deeply worrying and
poses an immediate challenge that risks undoing the
positive gains we have recently seen in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Security Council travelled
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo last month
to show solidarity with the Congolese people, with a
view to improving the political and security situation,
including through supporting efforts for credible,
transparent and inclusive elections. In this regard,
we welcome the presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2016/18), and, in our national capacity, we wish
to reiterate some of the key messages contained therein.
First, all parties agree that sincere and inclusive
dialogue is the only path to peacefully resolving
the political impasse. The agreement reached on
18 October in the context of the national dialogue was
an important first step towards resolution. However, it
is clear that more inclusive engagement is needed to
achieve an outcome that all Congolese stakeholders can
rally behind.
Secondly, we urge all political stakeholders
to return to the negotiating table in good faith and
engage in dialogue towards a swift and consensual
way forward. In this regard, we emphasize our support
for the mediation efforts of the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo.
Thirdly, it is imperative that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all political
leaders issue strong messages to their supporters that
violence is unacceptable. This warning must be backed
by quick and impartial measures to investigate all
cases of violence and hold perpetrators or instigators
to account.
Fourthly, we call for the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and all political
stakeholders to continue taking confidence-building
measures to mitigate tensions and create an environment
conducive to dialogue. We appeal to all stakeholders to
act responsibly and refrain from rhetoric and actions
that could exacerbate the situation.
While the fate and future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo rests in Congolese hands alone,
we call on the regional and international communities
to lend their full and proactive support to mitigating

16-4135611/19

S/PV.7826

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

tensions, averting the risk of violence and ensuring that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains on the
path of peace and security.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this urgent meeting. I am very grateful
for the sobering analysis just shared by our briefers.
As we have heard so clearly, the clock is ticking for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the world is
watching. Just two weeks remain until President Kabila’s
second term comes to an end — two weeks to prevent
even more violence, even more deaths and even more
conflict in a country that has already suffered too much.
So here in this open meeting we have an opportunity to
send an unequivocal message to President Kabila that
he must make the right choice, respect the Constitution,
respect the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, respect his two-term limit, commit not to stand,
and hold elections as soon as possible. In truth, there
is no other option. We all know what comes next if he
makes the wrong decision. We saw it in the bloodied
streets of Kinshasa in September. We cannot allow such
barbarity to be repeated in a fortnight’s time.
We know what needs to happen. The Constitution
is clear. President Kabila’s term ends on 19 December.
The two-term limit cannot be changed, and certainly not
just to suit one man’s political agenda. The Government
must reach a consensual political agreement that is in
line with the Constitution before that date. President
Kabila heard this message loudly and clearly when the
Security Council visited last month. It is a message that
the United Kingdom’s Parliamentary Under-Secretary
of State for International Development, James Wharton,
repeated only two weeks ago.
It is now time for Kabila and his Government to
undertake confidence-building measures so that can
mediation efforts have a chance of success. This means
dropping the spurious charges against opposition
members, releasing political prisoners and lifting the
media ban. It also means that all sides must reject
violence and commit to peaceful dialogue. In these
efforts, we fully support the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo and the mediated discussions
between the Government and opposition groups. We
urge all parties to continue to engage in dialogue to
reach a peaceful compromise before 19 December.
But that is only half of the message that we need
to send today. If President Kabila ignores the Council,
we must be clear that there will be consequences. It
12/19

05/12/2016

cannot be business as usual if nothing has changed in
two weeks’ time. The Government must respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms essential to political
debate and credible elections, freedom of speech and
assembly, access to the media and accountability for
human rights abuses. Not respecting these fundamental
norms increases tensions and heightens the risk
of violence.
In October, the European Union threatened to
impose sanctions on members of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo security forces responsible for
the suppression of these fundamental freedoms and
the abuse of human rights. The Council needs to be
prepared to respond in a similar fashion if the situation
deteriorates. In parallel, we also need to be preparing
to help, should the worst occur. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo needs to have contingency
planning in place to respond effectively if needed. The
biggest peacekeeping mission in the world, with a clear
mandate to protect civilians robustly, cannot stand by if
civilians are threatened.
As I said at the start, the world is watching. But it is
watching us in the Council just as much as it is watching
President Kabila. We have seen countless times how
difficult it is to bring peace and stability to a country
or region after conflict has begun. We are discussing
here a situation where the violence has not yet erupted.
We have an opportunity to stop a conflict before it
begins, so we owe it to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to the credibility of the
Security Council on conflict prevention to make sure
that President Kabila listens.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the briefers.
Just recently, the Council had an important occasion
and a prime opportunity to deliver our concerns
directly to the President of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Joseph Kabila. The political agreement of
18 October 2016 can be seen as an indication of political
will among a large part of the national stakeholders to
prevent the destabilization of the country.
At the same time, it is, in our opinion, only a starting
point in the long process of resolving accumulated
disagreements and problems among all political actors.
Therefore, the continuation of an inclusive dialogue
among all national stakeholders in order to hold free,
fair and credible, inclusive and transparent elections in
16-41356

05/12/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Democratic Republic of the Congo should be the
next, obvious step. There is no other way to address this
already complicated situation.
If the situation descends into violence, there
will be no winners, only losers. Ukraine calls on all
national stakeholders to continue the dialogue and find
common ground for a nationwide compromise as soon
as possible.
The deaths of protesters during the 19 and
20 September clashes this year are still fresh in our
memory. Thus, considering the information that is
incoming about preparations for public protests after
19 December, as was announced by some opposition
parties, we call for maximum restraint and urge the
Government to refrain from responding to provocative
acts with force, which would only aggravate the fragile
situation. Respect for human rights, particularly
the freedom of assembly, freedom of opinion and
expression, and equitable access to the media are of
paramount importance for creating an environment
conducive to the holding of future elections.
We call on all political actors to continue working
in a spirit of compromise to reach a swift and
consensual resolution of the current political crisis
and prevent further destabilization of the country after
19 December.
We expect that this message, as well as today’s
statement by the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2016/18), will be heard by all parties
concerned. The perpetual cycle of violence has to be
broken; otherwise, our efforts will suffer the fate of the
infamous rock of Sisyphus.
In conclusion, I want to recall a recent example
that struck me deeply. In November, the United Nations
peacekeeping Facebook page posted information about
the excavation of an armoured fighting vehicle operated
by Malaysian peacekeepers stationed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the early 1960s. The vehicle,
inaugurated as a memorial to the first peacekeeping
operation, was termed “a tangible symbol of the
history of peacekeepers in the Congo”. Below that post,
someone wrote,
“We do not need memorial pictures for a truck
or tank. We need food, water, new shelter or a
cruise ship to temporarily house these people in
desperate need.”

S/PV.7826

To me, it is a sobering reminder of the fact that in
more than six decades, the United Nations presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo still has not fully
succeeded in stabilizing that country. We should not let
history repeat itself.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I wish at
the outset to thank our briefers.
As we approach the constitutionally mandated
end of President Kabila’s term, on December 19, the
United States is increasingly concerned about the risk
of widespread violence and instability. We thank the
African Union for facilitating the national dialogue
that led to the October 18 accord, which was a good
start but, unfortunately, lacked the buy-in of major
opposition parties, lacked adequate guarantees to
ensure a transfer of power and included in unnecessary
delay in the timeline for presidential elections, a delay
until April 2018.
The ongoing mediation efforts by the Congolese
National Conference of Bishops (CENCO) are an
important step towards improving the agreement and
make it more inclusive. CENCO’s efforts represent
the best hope for reaching a consensus agreement
among key stakeholders that ensures timely elections
and a peaceful transition of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The United States is not alone in its support for
CENCO’s efforts or in our concern for the increasing
risk of instability and violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. During the Security Council’s
visit to Kinshasa, Council members agreed that the
only way ahead was on a clear consensual path that
could forestall violence and allow for elections and
a transition of power. I would particularly like to
thank France and Angola for their leadership during
the Security Council trip to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Angola. The type of direct, united
messaging that we heard during that visit was exactly
what was needed.
The Security Council knows what is ahead if a
consensual way forward is not found. The violence and
loss of life that we have repeatedly seen in Kinshasa
surrounding previous electoral periods and the deadly
events of September 19 and 20 remind us of the need for
consensus on holding presidential elections in 2017 and
guaranteeing the country’s first democratic transition
of power. To ensure a smooth, peaceful transition, the

16-4135613/19

S/PV.7826

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

05/12/2016

Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must take several steps.

that we have just adopted (S/PRST/2016/18) is a further
demonstration of the leadership of those two countries.

First, the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs
to protect political space and respect for human rights,
including the rights to peaceful assembly and freedom
of expression. When the Government cuts off legitimate
means of expression, it forces individuals to use more
confrontational methods to have their voices heard.

We are pleased to see the Council devote particular
attention to the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This is justified given the vital national
and regional importance of the country’s stability given
the country’s strategic position in the Great Lakes
region, a region that has been beset for years now by
complex security and political crises. During our visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we were
able to see the complex realities on the ground, which
remain characterized by various trends despite the
clear progress represented by the political agreement
of 18 October emanating from the political dialogue
facilitated by the African Union.

Secondly, it is now time for President Kabila to
make a clear, public statement that he will not seek a
third term.
Thirdly, the Democratic Republic of Congo also
needs increased electoral safeguards to ensure free
and fair elections, such as changes in the leadership
of the Independent National Electoral Commission,
guarantees for a transfer of power and an electoral
timeline that holds presidential elections in 2017. On the
technical side of the electoral process, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has known
since 2011 the timing for elections and the need to revise
the voter rolls. We are highly sceptical of the recent
conclusion by the Commission that an election cannot
be held until December 2018. A range of technical
experts have indicated that presidential elections could
take place in 2017. The Government’s failure to move
forward with undertaking and completing this task
is not a technical problem. It is a problem of political
will. We support CENCO’s efforts to revisit the
electoral calendar.
The Security Council preaches the mantra of
preventive diplomacy, but to put these words into
practice, the Council must maintain its pressure on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo stakeholders to come
to a consensual agreement on the way forward. We must
also continue to press for respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and we must continue to press
for a clear timeline and a path forward that ensure that
elections proceed and that President Kabila steps down.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation, like others that spoke before
it, would like to thank the briefers, Mr. Sidikou and
Mr. Zerihoun, for their very constructive presentations.
We also thank France for having taken the initiative to
convene this meeting, which is evidence of its tireless
commitment to this issue following its co-leadership,
with Angola, of the visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Luanda. The presidential statement
14/19

In our opitnio, this agreement remains a good
basis for our work, but needs to be consolidated
by the commitment of the whole of the range of
common stakeholders and also international partners
support. That is why my delegation urges the Security
Council to support the efforts of the Conférence
épiscopale nationale du Congo aimed at bringing
together the positions of the political actors on the
electoral process, the mechanisms for managing the
transition and measures for re-establishing trust. And
while we welcome Angola’s efforts as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
we also encourage the African Union and the regional
mechanisms and frameworks to continue to work for a
peaceful political process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo conducive to free, fair, credible, inclusive,
transparent and peaceful presidential elections.
That goal is still attainable for the Congolese people,
their political actors and the international community.
The only issue that matters is enabling the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to attain it. In our view, for the
Security Council to do that, as it did during our visit
there, it must with one voice encourage the country’s
political actors, civil society and its people as a whole,
first, to explore further the inexhaustible possibilities of
dialogue with, on the one hand, a formal, unequivocal
commitment to peace and respect for human and civil
rights and to preserving the people’s life and property
and ensuring public order and stability; and, on the other
hand, to demonstrating a genuine willingness to seek
compromise and reinforcing a spirit of mutual trust.
Secondly, the Council should urge the political
actors, civil society and people of the Democratic
16-41356

05/12/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Republic of the Congo to engage in a peaceful, open
and inclusive political process, which is still the only
path that can lead to the calm, credible elections that
we all desire. Clearly, we have to consider the financial
challenge that the political process presents and that
is crucial to its predictability. In this atmosphere of
uncertainty, we must also act quickly or run the risk
of seeing the economic and humanitarian situation
deteriorate, exacerbate tensions and undermine the
foundations of a peaceful political process. Lastly, the
continued worrying situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo should absolutely not become a
distraction from the essential task of focusing on the
political process.
In this context, the challenge for the United
Nations generally, and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) in particular, is to maintain its
level of engagement in the East regarding the protection
of civilians and the fight against the armed groups in
support of the Congolese security forces’ actions. To
that end, we believe it vital that the Mission’s forces be
reconfigured with the aim of dealing with the potential
risk presented by the country’s overall political and
security situation in a very delicate electoral context.
In that regard, and in conclusion, we would like to
assure MONUSCO — which we warmly commend
for its extraordinary efforts, considering the size and
complexity of the problems it is dealing with and
which, by the way, we were able to see for ourselves
during our visit — that it has the continued support of
the Senegalese delegation and of Senegal itself, which,
as the Council knows, is a troop contributor to this
important Mission.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Representative Sidikou and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun for their briefings.
Japan welcomes the timely adoption today of
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/18, following the
Council’s visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
last month. With 19 December two weeks away, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is entering a critical
phase on the peace and security front. Japan would like
to urge the Congolese stakeholders to heed the following
three points. First, the Government and the opposition
should engage seriously in a direct dialogue. During
the Council’s visit to Kinshasa, I advocated strongly
for ensuring that President Kabila and Mr. Tshisekedi

S/PV.7826

have direct talks aimed at finding a way forward. Both
parties should show leadership in that regard.
Secondly, preventing and avoiding mass violence is
a responsibility shared by all Congolese parties, in the
opposition as well as the Government. Violence in the
streets must never become the last resort for achieving
any political objectives. We very much hope that the
opposition leaders will show how determined they are to
prevent demonstrations from being spoiled by violence.
I am very much in agreement with Mr. Sidikou when he
rightly said that a display of political will on both sides
is urgently needed.
Lastly, during our meeting in Kinshasa some
members of the ruling party told us that logistical
and financial difficulties were preventing them from
organizing the elections on time. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is proud of its national
institutions. Many African countries, including nations
that are poorer than the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, have succeeded in organizing elections. If
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is united and
determined to conduct this democratic exercise, I am
confident that it will overcome its difficulties and hold
successful elections. I hope that the strong message
to that effect from the Security Council and the
international community reaches the political leaders
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Japan also reaffirms its full support for Special
Representative Sidikou and for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): I would like to thank
Mr. Zerihoun and Mr. Sidikou for their briefings on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Angola welcomed the signing on 18 October of
a comprehensive political agreement on organizing
peaceful, credible and transparent elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and notes with
appreciation the confidence-building measures that
the Government has taken so far, encouraging all
the Congolese stakeholders to remain committed
to peace and the political process. On 12 November,
the Government of Angola issued a declaration on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, stating that it
would be closely monitoring its neighbour’s situation,
based on the two countries’ relations of friendship and
cooperation and their historical and cultural ties, and
affirming Angola’s respect for the sovereignty of the

16-4135615/19

S/PV.7826

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

05/12/2016

Democratic Republic of the Congo and its policy of
non-interference in that country’s affairs.

in line with the common vision expressed during the
recent visit to Angola by the Security Council mission.

Angola believes that peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be preserved,
since they are crucial to peace and stability in the region,
especially in central and southern Africa and the Great
Lakes area. We also believe firmly that the country’s
ongoing political disputes must be resolved through
dialogue and without violence or any other illegitimate
means. While we affirm our support for a peaceful
solution to the disputes between the Government
and the opposition, we call on the parties concerned
to maintain dialogue and negotiations as a means of
finding a way out of their political and pre-electoral
impasse and avoiding violent confrontation at all costs.

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Sidikou
and Mr. Zerihoun for their briefings. We are convinced
that the agreement reached in October between the
main political and social stakeholders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, within the framework of a
national dialogue on organizing democratic, credible
and transparent elections, is the foundation for a
road map that will lead to the holding of presidential
elections. In that regard, the establishment of a
Government of national accord and the appointment of
a new Prime Minister are positive achievements, in line
with the agreement reached by the parties.

We also welcome the decision to entrust the post
of Prime Minister to someone from the ranks of the
opposition, who we encourage to engage in any
inclusive dialogue as a key instrument to ending the
crisis. Respect for the Constitution and other legal
instruments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by the Government and the opposition are fundamental
prerequisites, which presuppose that the President of
the Republic can be replaced only through a democratic
electoral process.

We believe that the national dialogue initiative
must be ongoing and inclusive because it is perhaps
a way to assist in achieving political and institutional
stability. We are convinced that it will strengthen the
climate of trust needed to achieve consensus among
all political stakeholders, including those who are not
yet part of the national dialogue. In that regard, the
Security Council must continue to support the efforts at
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
initiatives of the support group for the facilitation of the
national dialogue led by the African Union facilitator,
the good offices of the Conférence épiscopale nationale
du Congo, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Southern African Development
Community. All political stakeholders must be
encouraged to participate in a constructive dialogue to
dispel any institutional uncertainty in the coming days.

The appointment of Mr. Samy Badibanga as the
new Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to lead the transitional Government is a
key development in the complex political situation
prevailing in the country and we encourage the Prime
Minister to pursue negotiations for a national dialogue
with all Congolese political actors and stakeholders.
The recent announcement that elections will take place
after the completion of voter registration be a positive
sign of commitment to organizing elections in due
course. It is our firm desire that the Congolese authority
and the people be able to put their differences aside and
engage in a transparent dialogue in order to establish an
inclusive transitional Government and agree on a road
map to guide the country to political stability, postelectoral peace and development.
Finally, we reiterate our support for the efforts
of the African Union facilitation, led by Mr. Edem
Kodjo and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mr. Maman Sidikou, and welcome the regional
initiatives, in particular that of the International
Conference of the Great Lakes region, aimed at
strengthening synergies with the Security Council
16/19

With regard to security, we remain concerned
about the recurrence of violent incidents perpetrated by
insurgent groups, Congolese and foreign alike, in north
and south Kivu, which exacerbates a humanitarian
situation with grave impact on the civilian population
in the eastern part of the province. In addition, we are
concerned about the rise in the number of internally
displaced persons, clashes among communities and
insecurity in the region. We believe that the decision
on the steps to be taken now lies in the hands of the
Congolese people without the intervention of external
actors. The international community must assist the
Congolese, in strict compliance with the principles
of independent sovereignty, in the goal of preventing
violence as a way to resolve political differences, which
are a threat to the stability of the country and the region
as a whole.
16-41356

05/12/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.7826

Ms. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
I will be brief. The Council has been clear and
unanimous in presidential statement S/PRST/2016/18,
which was read at the start of today’s meeting. I will
make three points.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.

First, the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains of concern. The country is at a
critical juncture in terms of its political and security
environment, and a fully inclusive political agreement
has not yet been reached in spite of the messages
conveyed during the visit of the Security Council and
the mediation efforts of the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo, which we support and believe
must continue. The temptation to be swept into a
power struggle is present on all sides, but that game
is a dangerous one. If the downward spiral of violence
begins, no one will be able to predict how it might be
stopped. It must be prevented at all costs.

First, I thank Mr. Sidikou and Mr. Zerihoun. We
fully support their efforts and work. We know that this
is a very difficult time for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and for the entire Great Lakes region and
that is why their briefings and recommendations are
especially valuable to us.

Secondly, the Council must steadfastly pursue the
preventive diplomacy efforts that it has undertaken
since its visit to the country. We have been unanimous in
reiterating the expectations of the Council with regard
to Congolese political leaders by encouraging a fullfledged, consensus-based dialogue to peaceably settle
ongoing disputes and by urging the Government to
implement the confidence-building measures necessary
to bring about a swift conclusion to the dialogue, such
as the release of political prisoners, the end to judicial
proceedings and the removal of obstacles to freedom
of the press. The onus is on Congolese political
stakeholders to take the steps necessary to maintain
stability and hold elections as quickly as possible, in
line with the provisions of the Constitution. To date,
that has not occurred. We must therefore steer them in
that direction.
Thirdly, that is indeed the goal of the presidential
statement that we just adopted. France thanks all
members of the Council for the constructive work
that has allowed the text to be adopted by consensus.
The presidential statement is a clear expression of the
Council’s expectations on confidence-building measures
and the need for flexibility in a spirit of compromise. A
political agreement that is more in-depth and inclusive
must be swiftly reached. It is key to preventing a major
political crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that could destabilize the entire region.

My statement will be brief because almost all has
been said. I would like to convey three messages.

My second message is an urgent one — there is no
time to waste. The Security Council has been committed
for decades to the situation and to restoring peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the most recent proof of that fact was our visit to the
country. We are all very aware of the threat of political
instability looming over the country. That is why we
must redouble our preventive diplomacy efforts. Each
passing day counts. We must continue working until
an inclusive and comprehensive agreement is reached
among all of the country’s political leaders. The date
of 19 December should not be a fatalistic one. If we
all work together, it should be a date on which we all
celebrate a peaceful political transition agreement.
My third message is one of support. In the Council,
we have supported each and every initiative to ensure
a peaceful transition of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We support the appointment
of new Prime Minister Badibanga. We believe him to
be open, flexible, non-authoritarian and a man of good
will. He is a true bridge to dialogue with the opposition,
rather than an instrument of the Government or a traitor
to the post, as the most radical have set him out to be.
He is someone we must support if we wish to find a
good faith solution.
We must also support the Conférence épiscopale
nationale du Congo, which has done a remarkable job
and has recently overcome the significant obstacle of
having been rejected and accused as been exceedingly
unfavourable towards the opposition. We must continue
to support it because we believe it to be a key instrument
for inclusive dialogue and for reaching an agreement.
We also obviously support the unity of the Security
Council, as demonstrated once again in the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/18 earlier this
evening. The statement sends an appropriate message
and strikes a balanced tone. We also wish to join France

16-4135617/19

S/PV.7826

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in thanking all delegations for their efforts towards and
commitment to achieving our success. The presidential
statement is not an end in and of itself, but rather one
more milestone in a sustained effort that the Council
must make in order for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to return to political normalcy.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and express
how honoured we are to have you preside over the
deliberations of the Security Council for the month of
December. I extend a warm welcome to the friendly
country of Spain, with which the Democratic Republic
of the Congo enjoys an excellent relationship based on
mutual respect.
I would also like to pay tribute to the President of
last month’s deliberations, the representative of Senegal,
and thank him for the way he steered the deliberations
of the Council in November.
Finally, Mr. President, I thank you for having
taken the initiative of convening this meeting, thereby
enabling the Council to once again sit and consider the
situation in my country.
After the briefings of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, allow me to speak briefly about the security
situation that the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) are pursuing in the
east of our country — the fight against armed groups,
particularly the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR) and the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF). While the attacks of the FDLR are sporadic, the
clashes with the ADF — as the army has consistently
pointed out — represent an asymmetric war because
the enemy uses guerilla tactics and avoids direct
confrontation, preferring ambushes. These enemies of
peace have perfected their mode of operations. They
infiltrate the civilian population and then attack them,
at times drawing them in by wearing the uniforms of the
FARDC. The international composition of that terrorist
force, which consists of rebels of over six nationalities,
deserves the attention of the international community.
18/19

05/12/2016

Nevertheless, I must point out that for nearly
a month, Beni has enjoyed a certain calm and the
population has been able to go about its business. In
late September, the military court in Beni, North
Kivu, began to deal with crimes carried out against the
civilian population of that region by holding hearings
against members of the ADF who were captured during
FARDC operations, with the support of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Death sentences
have been handed down.
Allow me to also mention an element from South
Sudan, the Sudanese People’s Liberation Army, which
is now on our territory. Indeed, in order to preserve
friendly relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Republic of South Sudan; avoid
an atmosphere of suspicion with countries with
which we share a long border; and no longer expose
the long-suffering population of eastern Congo to
the presence of foreign rebels, my Government has
already informed the Council and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of the decision taken by the
Congolese people. We do not want Sudanese or South
Sudanese elements — the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement — on our territory. That Government
position was reiterated to Council members by the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo when they visited the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Considering that the situation does not seem to be
moving in the direction the Government would like, the
Permanent Mission of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will once again address that issue through a note
that it will present to the Council.
Allow me to also comment on the situation
following the dialogues and the electoral process.
The Head of State, respectful of the commitments
undertaken by the States parties to the dialogue
through the political agreement of 18 October, have
recently — as many have pointed out — named a new
Prime Minister from the political opposition. The longawaited Government of national unity will soon be
made public, with the primary mission of organizing
presidential and legislative elections at the national
and provincial levels, to be held in April 2018. In the
meanwhile, the review of the voting register, which
was launched in July, has been registering voters in
12 of the country’s 26 provinces, and we have also
started deploying electoral kits to all provinces. This
16-41356

05/12/2016

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

process will be completed by 31 January 2017, with the
logistical support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Independent National Electoral
Commission plans to close the operation of revising the
voting registry by 31 July 2017.
Pursuant to paragraph (b) of article V of the
political agreement for the holding of calm, credible
and transparent elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the convening of the electoral body by the
Independent National Electoral Commission will occur
on 30 October 2017. All the details of the electoral
timetable will soon be made public by the Independent
National Electoral Commission. Confidence-building
measures to further ease the political environment and
to foment trust among the political stakeholders are
also part of the tasks of the national unity Government
that will soon come into being.
In this difficult period for my country, my
Government greatly appreciated the visit made by the
members of the Council to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 11 to 13 November. The Government is
working on the recommendations made by the Council
to maintain peace and security across the country. I
wish to assure the Council that my country remains
committed to respecting human rights. My delegation
can affirm without hesitation that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is one of the countries of the

S/PV.7826

region that is most respectful of human rights and
whose democracy is among the most advanced and
dynamic. It is true that not everything we do is perfect,
but I assure the Council that efforts are being made to
move forward.
My Government cannot restrict freedom of
expression and assembly in a country of 400 political
parties and 800 press and media organizations. The
protective measure taken by the Governor of the city of
Kinshasa to suspend public demonstrations for a certain
time is not intended to stifle democratic expression. It
has been taken solely for the purpose of protecting the
population, which still bears the trauma caused by the
sad events of 19 and 20 September.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes once again to
express to the Council the gratitude of the Congolese
people and their Government for the efforts of the
United Nations to ensure peace and stability in their
country. We take this opportunity to pay a final tribute
to His Excellency Secretary-General Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
to whom our people will remain indebted for all the
achievements of the universal Organization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo during his tenure.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

16-4135619/19
