A /70/PV.66

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

66th plenary meeting

Thursday, 3 December 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the seventieth
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
(A/70/573)
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
Assembly has before it the report of the Credentials
Committee circulated in document A/70/573, containing
a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report. The draft resolution reads
as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Having considered the report of the Credentials
Committee and the recommendation contained therein,
“Approves the report of the Credentials Committee”.
I now give the floor to the Chair of the Credentials
Committee, Mr. Jan Kickert, Permanent Representative
of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria), Chair of the Credentials
Committee: On behalf of the Credentials Committee, I
have the honour to introduce the report of the Committee
concerning the credentials of the representatives of
Member States to the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, contained in document A/70/573.

Having considered the credentials of the
representatives at its meeting of 24 November, the
Credentials Committee adopted without a vote a draft
resolution accepting the credentials. The Committee also
recommended to the plenary of the General Assembly
the adoption of the draft resolution concerning the
credentials of representatives to the current session of
the General Assembly contained in paragraph 11 of the
report of the Committee.
I should like to note that since the meeting of the
Credentials Committee, formal credentials in the form
required by rule 27 of the rules of procedure were
received by the Secretary of the Credentials Committee
regarding Saudi Arabia. The General Assembly is
therefore requested to adopt the draft resolution
approving the report of the Credentials Committee and
the additional credential submitted subsequent to the
meeting of the Credentials Committee.
Finally, I should like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Committee and to the Secretariat for
facilitating our work.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution
entitled “Credentials of representatives to the seventieth
session of the General Assembly”, recommended by the
Credentials Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/18).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-40278 (E)

*1540278*

A/70/PV.66

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran has asked
to speak in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted. I remind him that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation joined the consensus on the resolution
just adopted. However, I should like to express my
delegation’s reservation on those parts of the report
contained in document A/70/573 and the resolution that
may be construed as recognition of the Israeli regime.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 3?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 16
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/70/373)
Draft resolutions (A/70/L.20 and A/70/L.24)
The Acting President: I am pleased to deliver the
following statement on behalf of the President of the
General Assembly, Mr. Mogens Lykketoft.
“Today we discuss the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the promotion of a culture of peace
and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace. At the
outset, I should like to commend the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
and the various United Nations entities that are
committed to promoting the values of the culture
of peace. I should also like to highlight the role
played by the Permanent Mission of Bangladesh in
introducing this draft resolution.
“I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (A/70/373), which, given recent terrorist
attacks and reports of intolerance towards forcibly
displaced persons, is extremely timely. Recent
events demonstrate very clearly that achieving a
culture of peace and strengthening intercultural and
interreligious dialogue is perhaps more important
today than at any time in our past.

2/23

03/12/2015

“The challenges we face in building a culture
of peace, however, are visible across our world
today. They are visible in the conflicts that
rage across the world, that are pulling societies
apart, where innocent civilians are targeted,
humanitarian law is flouted and the foundations
for development are destroyed. They are visible in
the violence, death and inhumanity arising from
the acts of violent extremists. They are visible in
the continued actions of organized criminal gangs,
of corrupt and fraudulent Governments and of
those who attack culture and diversity. They are
visible in the injustice of endemic poverty, a lack
of opportunities or access to basic services; in ever
increasing environmental degradation, and in the
discrimination borne by millions of women and
girls worldwide.
“The Secretary-General’s report captures the
dynamics that are giving rise to these instances of
conflict, violence, discrimination and intolerance.
It highlights also key trends in migration, media,
trade, tourism, urbanization, climate change and
new technology that give rise to new opportunities
and tools for advancing mutual understanding and
respect.
“At the same time, the report recognizes that
in addition to inequality, prejudice, intolerance
and conflict, means of communication such as the
Internet are often being seized upon as vehicles for
divisiveness and incitement to hatred and violence.
There is a clear need, therefore, for the international
community to adapt to the current trends in the
world today, align strategies and provide resources
commensurate to the task.
“During this anniversary year, there are a
number of opportunities for Member States and the
United Nations system to further advance a culture
of peace based on respect for and the exercise
and enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. The rapid implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1) is one such opportunity.
“The inclusion of goals and targets that seek to
both build peaceful, just and inclusive societies and
to address drivers of conflict and violence such as
exclusion and inequality or an absence of the rule
of law or inclusive and accountable institutions,
will greatly advance a culture of peace in line with

15-40278

03/12/2015

the International Decade for the Rapprochement of
Cultures 2013-2022.
“In this regard, it is imperative that every effort
is made during this first year of the Sustainable
Development Goals to bring all actors on board
and to get implementation off to the best possible
start. There is also a need for the international
community to urgently support efforts to bring an
end to protracted conflicts such as that taking place
in Syria.
“At the same time, not all differences and
conflicts in a society can be managed by external
mediators or peacekeepers. National capacities for
managing conflict and for building dialogue are
as vital as a revived economy or infrastructure.
Conducting wider civil dialogue, building effective
and sustainable capacities for conflict prevention
and resolution contribute to the transformation
of governance institutions. These issues are
particularly relevant in the context of the ongoing
reviews on peace building, peace operations and
on women and peace and security. They are also
relevant for the forthcoming Secretary-General’s
plan of action on preventing violent extremism.
“These are but a few of the opportunities
before us to build the mindset of a culture of peace
which is the most constructive and preventive
approach for reducing conflict. All of us must work
to further embrace that mindset whether in our
domestic, regional or international policies. And in
the face of threats from those who wish to divide
us, the General Assembly can contribute to the rise
of a culture of peace by demonstrating the power
of solidarity, by cherishing our diversity and by
continuing to make progress towards our common
objectives of peace, human rights and sustainable
development.”
(spoke in Arabic)
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.24.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): It is an honour for me
today to introduce, on behalf of all the co-sponsoring
Member States, the draft resolution entitled “Followup to the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace” (A/70/L.24), in my maiden
statement at the General Assembly as the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh.

A/70/PV.66

Bangladesh takes pride in having introduced this
text to the Assembly since 2001. We are pleased that
it has been receiving the overwhelming support of
Member States and has been adopted every year by
consensus.
Peace is integral to human existence. Inculcating
a mindset of a culture of peace is an aspiration of all
humankind. It is also the essence of the Charter of
the United Nations. The world today faces too many
problems of narrow-mindedness that disrupts our
shared objective of a peaceful, sustainable, progressive
society. Inequality and discrimination, intolerance
and hatred throughout the globe are generating new
dimensions of conflicts. Today the number of displaced
populations is the highest in recent history. Climate
change poses formidable challenges to the global
community. Terrorism and violent extremism remain
major impediments to global peace and development.
In this context it is an imperative in today’s world to
inculcate a mindset of a culture of peace to address the
menace.
Bangladesh is committed to promoting the culture
of peace and non-violence. More than four decades ago,
the father of our nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, in his maiden speech to the General Assembly,
envisioned the establishment of a global order based
on peaceful coexistence, social justice and freedom
from poverty, hunger, exploitation and aggression.
The present Government, under the leadership of
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, is also committed to
promoting peace not only at the national level but also
at the regional and international level and maintains a
zero-tolerance policy to all forms of terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalization.
In this context, I should like to express my
delegation’s deepest condolences to the bereaved
families of the innocent victims of yesterday’s senseless
killings of disabled persons. That is more painful as we
are observing today the International Day of Persons
with Disabilities.
We thank the Member States and their delegations
for their active participation in the negotiation process
this year. Draft resolution A/70/L.24 elaborates
different elements for promoting a culture of peace. Let
me highlight four elements that have been recognized
in the draft resolution.
First, it welcomes the inclusion of the promotion
of a culture of peace for sustainable development

15-402783/23

A/70/PV.66

in Agenda 2030. Secondly, the draft resolution
underscores education as the most critical element
for institutionalizing a culture of peace for mutual
understanding, active citizenship and human rights.
Thirdly, it highlights the role of women and youth in
advancing the culture of peace and in particular the
importance of greater involvement of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. Fourthly, the
draft resolution also notes the initiatives of civil society
in collaboration with governments to strengthen civilian
capacities to enhance the physical safety of vulnerable
populations under threat of violence and to promote the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
The high-level forum organized on 9 September
by the President of the General Assembly at its sixtyninth session provided us with a unique opportunity to
bring together Member States and stakeholders and to
reinvigorate our common endeavour for promoting a
culture of peace. Holding such events every year will
convey a strong message to the world and especially to
the youth that the United Nations is truly committed to
nurturing a culture of peace. We look forward to holding
the high-level forum by the President of the General
Assembly during the seventieth session and hope that
it will make a meaningful contribution in furthering a
culture of peace for a pro-people, pro-planet, inclusive,
peaceful and sustainable world for all.
Just two months ago, the world leaders adopted the
historic 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which depicts a critical linkage between peace and
development. The peaceful coexistence of people,
societies and communities has been underscored as an
essential element for development in this transformative
Agenda. While we see Agenda 2030 in its entirety, its
target 4.7 has specifically recognized the importance
of learning a culture of peace and nonviolence for
sustainable development.
In the context of the ongoing peacebuilding
architecture reform process, draft resolution A/70/L.24
bears significance, as building the mindset of a culture
of peace is the basic, most constructive and preventive
approach for reducing conflict. The culture of peace
begins with each one of us. Unless we are ready to
integrate peace and non-violence as part of our daily
existence, we cannot expect our communities, our
nations, or our planet to be peaceful. We should be
prepared and confident in resolving the challenges of
our lives in a non-aggressive manner.

4/23

03/12/2015

The text receives the support of a large number
of Member States every year. I am pleased to mention
that this year more than 90 countries are sponsoring
this important draft resolution. We express our sincere
thanks and commendations to all the sponsors for their
support and commitment. I hope, as in past years, we
will be able to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.24 by
consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to the representative of the Philippines to
introduce draft resolution A/70/L.20.
Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.20, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, under
agenda item 16, “Culture of peace”.
In 2004, the Philippines first introduced to the
General Assembly a resolution on the promotion of
interreligious dialogue (resolution 59/23). We did so
in the firm belief — shared by many partners in the
United Nations — that one of the ways of achieving
global peace would be through drawing the human
family closer in greater understanding and respect for
diversity.
Our initiative to pursue global peace through
greater understanding of our religious and cultural
diversity has grown from strength to strength, garnering
interest, participation and ownership by more and
more stakeholders. Now in 2015, we have adopted the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1), which includes among its goals the promotion
of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development. That is in perfect harmony with the vision
of the draft resolution that we introduce today.
The draft resolution recalls the invitation of the
General Assembly to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
to play a leading role in the International Decade
for the Rapprochement of Cultures (2013-2022).
Two new UNESCO activities — Unite for Heritage,
which celebrates and safeguards cultural heritage and
diversity throughout the world; and its conference
on youth and the Internet: fighting radicalization
and extremism — are noted in the draft resolution.
Various initiatives of Member States are also noted,
such as the fifth Congress of Leaders of World and
Traditional Religions, held in Kazakhstan in June, and
the international symposium to launch the African

15-40278

03/12/2015

Initiative on Education for Peace and Development
through Interfaith and Intercultural Dialogue, held in
Benin in May.
The text further builds on nearly a decade of
experience on interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
I cannot overemphasize the value of what we continue
to do in promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, and how that dialogue serves as a foundation
for a just and lasting peace. As we all say, without peace
there can be no sustainable development.
The Philippines and Pakistan thank all Member
States that have traditionally co-sponsored and
supported this resolution through the years. Allow us
also to welcome and thank those Member States that
are co-sponsoring the draft resolution for the first time.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation would like at
the outset to express its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report on agenda item
16, “Culture of peace”. We commend UNESCO and
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations for their
valuable contribution to interreligious and intercultural
dialogue and commend Member States which have
undertaken various initiatives to advance this
objective. I should also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge and thank all delegations which took part
in the negotiations on this year’s draft resolution and
contributed to its updating and further enrichment.
Our common aspiration and vision of a peaceful
and harmonious world is far from being realized.
Armed conflicts continue to rage in several parts of the
world. Poverty persists. Some conflicts have unleashed
human dislocation, refugees and forced migrants, on a
scale not witnessed for more than half a century. Gross
violations of human rights are rampant. Terrorism
continues to pose a global threat and seems to be taking
an even more deadly form. That poses an unprecedented
challenge.
At the same time, we are witnessing a growing
trend towards xenophobia and religious intolerance
with new kinds of extremist ideologies spreading in
different parts of the world. These complex, though
related phenomena require concerted global action and a
comprehensive long-term strategy. This strategy should
not only respond to symptoms but also address the root
causes and underlying drivers of violent extremism and
terrorism. That surely must include meaningful and
greater dialogue among the world’s different religions
and civilizations.

A/70/PV.66

The world’s great religions rest on common values
that should unite and not divide us. We need to identify
and build on these commonalities. Cultural diversity
can be used as a positive force to promote harmony
and cooperation in multicultural, multi-religious and
multi-ethnic societies. To make this happen we have to
join forces and summon our collective will and energy
to eliminate bias and prejudice, shun stereotypes and
engage in genuine and constructive dialogue across
cultures and religions.
Interreligious and intercultural dialogue should
be pursued in a structured, multi-tiered and inclusive
manner, including but not limited to religious and
community leaders, scholars and civil society
organizations. The ultimate goal of such dialogue
should be to promote peace and prevent conflict by
removing mutual suspicions and mistrust and promoting
understanding across civilizations in order to build a
global culture of peace.
The draft resolution we are going to adopt today calls
on the nations of the world to facilitate and strengthen
various channels and dimensions of this dialogue with
the full involvement of all relevant stakeholders. It also
calls on the relevant United Nations agencies to support
and facilitate this dialogue at regional and international
levels. It is our earnest hope that the General Assembly
will once again lend unanimous support to this
important resolution.
Mr. Sarubbi (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Paraguay thanks Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his very detailed report on the romotion of
a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace
(A/70/373). This is the second occasion on which a
combined report on the implementation of resolutions
69/139 and 69/140 has been submitted.
When the nations of the world joined together to
create the Organization, we did so with the idea of
preventing recurrence of the catastrophes that had
occurred in the first half of the twentieth century.
Today, as we commemorate the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations and new challenges are emerging
every day, Paraguay believes that we need to redouble
our original commitment and continue to strive to
achieve those ideals in order to ensure that all human
beings can live a better life.
We are bearing witness to significant progress, but
at the same time we are at a difficult moment in which

15-402785/23

A/70/PV.66

thousands of human lives are being lost every day,
families are being expelled from their homes and entire
populations are being forced to migrate. The impact of
these tragedies, alongside the irreparable damage that
is being done to our environment and cultural heritage
and will be very difficult to mitigate, has made the
current situation one of enormous gravity.
The issue under consideration today, a culture
of peace, is defined by the United Nations as a set of
values, attitudes, modes of behaviour and ways of life
that reject violence and prevent conflict by addressing
their root causes through dialogue and negotiation
among individuals, groups and nations. The scope of
this definition has shown with time that the appropriate
path along which to seek peace is also that upon
which we need to address the root causes that start or
perpetuate conflicts.
To that end, it is critical to promote development
and eradicate poverty and inequality. Our efforts need
to give priority to the immediate and long-term needs
of the most vulnerable populations, because we have
learned that peace is not only the absence of conflict and
that poverty and inequality also threaten peace. In that
regard, States are obligated to reduce the inequalities of
all types that exist within countries so that individuals
can fully enjoy their rights. Fortunately, today we
have the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), which we hope will contribute to
resolving inequalities within nations and between them,
with special attention to developing countries, small
island developing States and land-locked developing
countries.
Paraguay believes and trusts that the multilateral
system will promote and guarantee a culture of peace
through clear guidelines that will allow countries
to take concrete action. That is why, as a member of
the Human Rights Council, we are promoting a view
of human rights that is universal, indivisible and
inalienable, as well as the improved functioning of and
coordination among human rights mechanisms at the
regional and global levels. In that regard, Paraguay,
alongside other States members of the Common Market
of the South, promoted the adoption of Human Rights
Council resolution 18/15, entitled “The incompatibility
between democracy and racism”, which reaffirms that
racism and other related forms of intolerance threaten
human rights and are incompatible with democracy and
the rule of law. Paraguay believes that individuals’ lack
of access to their fundamental rights erodes trust in

6/23

03/12/2015

national institutions and organizations and undermines
the path towards the peaceful coexistence of peoples.
In addition, and bearing in mind that education is
one of the fundamental means of building a culture of
peace, Paraguay since its recent election as a member of
the Executive Board of UNESCO, has been committed
to promoting cultural diversity by safeguarding
all aspects of heritage and by improving cultural
expression. Understanding and accepting that diversity
enriches our habitat rather than divides us should to
contribute to building peace.
In order to contribute to a culture of peace, my
country proposed that the General Assembly designate
30 July as the International Day of Friendship. That
proposal was adopted by consensus as resolution 65/275.
It is our conviction that the universal value of friendship
inspire peaceful initiatives, promotes tolerance and
builds bridges among communities, honouring cultural
and religious diversity. It also contribute to the efforts
of the international community, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, to promote dialogue
among civilizations, solidarity, mutual understanding,
reconciliation and peace.
We have no doubt that we have learned some
lessons. We have overcome obstacles and made progress
on important issues, but much remains to be done.
Let us learn from our mistakes, share good practices,
accept diversity, respect cultures and instil values that
contribute to building a better and fairer world for all
of humankind.
Finally, I should like to inform the Assemly that my
country is among the sponsors of the draft resolutions
introduced by the delegations of Bangladesh and the
Philippines, and looks forward to their adoption by
consensus.
Mr. Ismail (Brunei Darussalam): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10
States members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), namely Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my
own country, Brunei Darussalam.
At the outset I should like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his annual report on the work of the
Organization (A/70/373). The report provides a
comprehensive and detailed overview of the activities,
achievements and challenges of the Organization on

15-40278

03/12/2015

a wide spectrum of issues of common interest and
concern to all.
I should also like to take this opportunity to
commend the Philippines, Bangladesh, Iran and
Pakistan for their efforts in facilitating the draft
resolutions under agenda item 16 “Culture of peace”.
On 22 November, ASEAN leaders adopted the 2015
Kuala Lumpur Declaration on the Establishment of the
ASEAN Community at the twenty-seventh ASEAN
Summit in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, which formally
establishes the ASEAN Community on 31 December
2015. The ASEAN Community underlines our
aspirations for a truly rules-based, people-oriented,
people-centred community. Our leaders also adopted
ASEAN 2025: Forging Ahead Together declaration,
and we remain committed to the ongoing process of
ASEAN community-building, guided by the purposes
and principles of the ASEAN Charter.
An ASEAN Community is characterized by the
rich diversity of people with different backgrounds,
ethnicities, languages, religions and cultures living
together in a region of lasting peace, security and
stability, sustained economic growth, shared prosperity
and social progress. Since the establishment of ASEAN
in 1967 its member States have been able to coexist in
relative peace despite the multiracial, multi-religious
and multicultural societies in the region. ASEAN
cannot stress enough the importance of creating and
maintaining a culture of peace in the region, as well
as beyond. The ASEAN Declaration of 1967 and
the ASEAN Charter of 2007 enshrine ASEAN’s
commitment to maintaining peace, security and
stability.
ASEAN is committed to promoting its fundamental
principles, shared values and norms, as well as the
principles of international law governing peaceful
conduct among States, and thereby enhancing regional
peace and stability. ASEAN also strives to strengthen its
centrality, unity and cohesiveness towards a democratic,
transparent, just, rules-based and inclusive community
comprising three important pillars: first, the ASEAN
Political-Security Community; secondly, the ASEAN
Economic Community; and thirdly the ASEAN Sociocultural Community. This is further cemented by the
ASEAN Community Vision 2025: Forging Ahead
Together, which embeds the culture of peace, including
the values of tolerance and moderation, as a force for
harmony, peace and stability in the ASEAN region and

A/70/PV.66

beyond, and to promote respect for diversity, tolerance
and understanding of people of different faiths, religions
and cultures.
ASEAN commends the role of the United Nations
in addressing conflicts throughout the world and
promoting the culture of peace. In commemorating
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations we
were encouraged by the achievements of this body
over the past seven decades. We also highly appreciate
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations to promote
a culture of peace through dialogue and negotiation;
enhance tolerance, trust and mutual understanding; and
address all forms of political and religious disputes and
radicalism.
ASEAN recognizes the importance of Goal 16 of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1), which promotes peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development, provides access to justice
for all, and builds effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels. We see the complementarity
of the 2030 Agenda with our own community-building
efforts. We therefore reaffirm our commitment to
strengthening the existing multifaceted partnership
between ASEAN and the United Nations.
ASEAN welcomes the active involvement of the
United Nations in the South-East Asian region. ASEAN
will continue to strengthen cooperation and institutional
ties with the United Nations within the framework of
the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership
between the two organizations signed in 2011. We
look forward to further collaborating with the United
Nations in various areas of mutual interest including
strengthening cooperation to address transnational
threats such as violent extremism and international
terrorism. In this connection, we were pleased that the
United Nations participated in the ASEAN Regional
Seminar on Preventive Diplomacy and Mediation
Training in Brunei Darussalam in October 2014.
ASEAN welcomes the efforts of various regional
and international organizations in the promotion of the
culture of peace. ASEAN member States have been
participating in the activities of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations (UNAOC). We appreciate the
role of UNAOC in promoting greater understanding
and respect among civilizations, cultures, religions and
beliefs. These principles have also been reiterated in
the Bali Declaration as the outcome of the sixth Global
Forum of UNAOC last year. In this connection we look

15-402787/23

A/70/PV.66

forward to engaging with other United Nations Member
States at the seventh Global Forum of UNAOC in Baku,
Azerbaijan, in April 2016.
ASEAN also welcomes the programme of action
adopted by the UNESCO General Conference in
November 2011, aimed at promoting wider engagement
with a culture of peace and non-violence. UNESCO
plays an important role in the efforts to counter
radicalization and extremism, especially among
young people. We applaud the conference organized
by UNESCO on “Youth and the Internet: fighting
radicalization and extremism” in Paris, as well as the
launch of the UNESCO Unite for Heritage campaign
this year. We believe these initiatives are important
as they focus on areas that the youth can relate to and
the important role that they play in efforts to counter
extremism.
Without a doubt, the positive interaction and
synergy of the peoples of the South-East Asian region
have contributed to the success that has made ASEAN
what it is today. As home to more than half a billion
people, South-East Asia is a mosaic of religions and
cultures and home to many ethnic groups. That diversity
is also our source of strength and harmony in the region.
A big part of this is the practice of moderation in the
region in all dimensions. Embracing moderation and
understanding are fundamental ASEAN values which
have been inculcated in our everyday lives.
In this regard, we condemn and deplore the violence
and brutality committed by extremist organizations and
radical groups, whose impact increasingly poses a threat
to all regions of the world. We denounce all unlawful
acts of destruction, violence and terror in all its forms
and manifestations and reiterate our commitment to
combating terrorism, including our support for Security
Council resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), which
call on the international community to suppress the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
ASEAN believes that every single act of terror is an
act of cowardice and should be strongly condemned. The
acts of terror in France, Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, Yemen
and other parts of the world serve as a stark reminder
of the need for us to remain vigilant and resolute in
our fight against terrorism. We need to coordinate more
closely to stamp out terrorism and violent extremism.
In addition, we will continue to share best practices on
counter-radicalization and tackle roots of extremism
in various forums such as the East Asia Summit

8/23

03/12/2015

Symposium on Religious Rehabilitation and Social
Reintegration, held in Singapore in April.
ASEAN adopted the Langkawi Declaration on the
Global Movement of Moderates at the twenty-sixth
ASEAN Summit in April, which outlines measures to
promote moderation and curb extremism throughout
the region. ASEAN is encouraged that the Global
Movement of Moderates has received widespread
support from the international community, including
academic institutions and civil society organizations.
We were encouraged by the initiatives by relevant
stakeholders and civil society actors, including
the Global Movement of Moderates Foundation, in
advancing the philosophy of moderation in ASEAN
as an all-encompassing approach not only to resolving
differences and conflicts peacefully, but also to
ensuring sustainable and inclusive development and
equitable growth, and promoting social harmony and
mutual understanding among countries and regions.
To conclude, ASEAN takes this opportunity to
reiterate our commitment to upholding a culture that
promotes peace and tolerance. We are resolute in playing
an active role in realizing the objective of the culture of
peace. We also believe that ASEAN’s collective efforts
will contribute to the work of the United Nations in
promoting peace, security and stability in the world. In
this regard, ASEAN stands ready to work with regional
and international partners in supporting the efforts of
the United Nations towards achieving these goals.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): The Kingdom of Thailand
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Brunei Darussalam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (A/70/373).
As we celebrate the seventieth anniversary of
the United Nations, we are witnessing considerable
achievements in the maintenance of peace and
security. Over the past decades, the United Nations
and the international community have worked together
relentlessly to promote peace and tolerance through
various means. However, in many parts of the world,
much still needs to be done to resolve or to prevent
conflicts or to cope with emerging threats to peace,
due to intolerance of religions, faiths or other cultural
differences. Peace is not simply a state of the absence
of violence. Rather, peace is a process that ensures
political and social inclusiveness, access to justice,

15-40278

03/12/2015

respect, the promotion of human rights, the right to
development, sovereign equality and tolerance through
constructive engagement and dialogue based on mutual
respect and understanding. Allow me to highlight some
of Thailand’s perspectives on this issue.
First, Thailand firmly believes that a culture
of peace is a set of values, attitudes and ways of life
based on the principles of freedom, justice, democracy,
tolerance, solidarity and respect for diversity. We share
the view of the Secretary-General that we should move
from a culture of reaction to a culture of prevention,
which is the true culture of peace. We therefore strongly
urge political and spiritual leaders to work hand in
hand to promote mutual respect and bridge the gap
of understanding among people of different religions,
races, faiths or beliefs, in particular through interfaith
and intra-faith dialogues to prevent possible conflict
that may arise from disrespect of differences.
In support of our belief, Thailand will host, early
next year in Bangkok, an international symposium
on interfaith dialogue — a track 1.5 event to be
co-organized by the Research Centre for Islamic
History, Art and Culture, which is a subsidiary body of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. We hope that
this effort will contribute to enhancing dialogue across
different cultures.
We also welcome the tenth anniversary of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations (UNAOC). As
an original member of the Group of Friends of UNAOC,
Thailand has proactively promoted the culture of peace
and interreligious, interfaith and intercultural dialogue.
We commend the commitment and the active role of
UNESCO, as the lead agency, and other United Nations
entities in this regard.
Secondly, young people have a vital and leading
role to play as a present and future driver of change,
an inclusive and peaceful society, and sustainable
development. Therefore, it is vital to cultivate a seed of
tolerance and mutual respect in their hearts and minds
through education, training and capacity-building
programmes. In this respect, Thailand last month
hosted an international event entitled “One Young
World Summit 2015”, which gathered young leaders
from throughout the world, with a view to cultivating
a culture of peace, enhancing skills needed to become
successful social entrepreneurs, establishing friendly
and long-lasting connections and developing solutions
to some of the world’s most pressing issues.

A/70/PV.66

Thirdly, we are of the firm conviction that women
are agents of peace by nature and thus can significantly
contribute to cultivating a culture of peace in both
conflict and non-conflict situations. We have therefore
spared no effort to empower women and enhance their
participation in the policy and decision-making process
at both the national and local levels and to enable them
to reach their full potential as productive members of
society.
Fourthly, we must promote the role of the media
in communicating the message of peace and mutual
understanding, eliminating hatred and prejudices,
and promoting respect and tolerance among people of
different identities. Responsible media can make a lot of
difference in preventing conflict as well as countering
incitement and dissemination of violent ideology and
terrorist propaganda.
Peace is multidimensional. It must be cultivated
and fostered in a comprehensive manner. Thailand
shares the view, expressed by many, that peace,
security and development are mutually reinforcing.
Sustainable development enables an environment for
peace. We therefore strongly support and urge full
implementation of Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, as it serves as a blueprint for
global governance conducive to a peaceful society and
a peaceful existence among nations.
The Kingdom of Thailand, as traditional sponsor
of all General Assembly resolutions under this agenda
item, hereby reaffirms its commitment to promoting
a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace.
Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to begin by thanking SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his report (A/70/373), which
outlines the subjects addressed by and activities of the
main bodies of the United Nations to foster a culture of
peace, dialogue, understanding and cooperation among
religions and cultures in the ultimate aim of promoting
peace. We also commend the efforts, good offices and
crucial role of UNESCO in implementing the working
programme on peace and rejecting violence, as well
as the Action Plan for the International Decade for the
Rapprochement of Cultures.
We live in a world where peace is threatened by
conflicts between States and societies, as well as
between individuals, and undermined by racism,
extremism, violence and religious tension. This all

15-402789/23

A/70/PV.66

exacerbates the conflict between ideas. Our world
today is living through a rejection of the way in which
other people live — the language of exclusion. What
that means is that today we need to look into the causes
of intolerance, why other lifestyles are being rejected,
and consider the causes that lead people to extremism.
That requires a considerable effort at the local, regional
and international levels to transition from a culture
of hatred and racism towards a culture of intellectual
coexistence.
Our world is facing a number of grave dangers,
including extremism and terrorism. No State is spared
the scourge of extremism and terrorism, which challenge
the culture of peace and dialogue and requires us to
promote a message of peace, coexistence, dialogue,
understanding and cooperation among religions and
cultures. Recently, we have seen criminal terrorist
acts in a number of States and attempts to sow chaos
and fear in our societies, including in Kuwait, where
last June a heinous terrorist attack was carried out at a
holy site, claiming the lives of 27 martyrs. This was an
attempt to create interreligious tensions, but national
understanding and awareness of the values of tolerance
and peaceful coexistence served as shields against
the attempts of these criminals to sow discord among
our ranks. That act will not intimidate us but will
consolidate our determination and cohesion in facing
terrorism and extremism.
Many countries are trying to make progress in
drafting constitutions that will contribute to building
a modern State. The State of Kuwait also seeks to
promote tolerance and freedom so as to improve the
conditions of our society. Our Constitution enshrines
these values through various provisions stipulating
the rights and responsibilities of citizens, without
discrimination on the basis of gender, origin, language
or religion. Our Constitution reiterates that justice,
freedom and equality are the pillars of our society.
Cooperation among citizens is essential. It also states
that peace is the State’s objective. The safety and
security of our State are the responsibility of citizens as
well. Our Constitutions guarantees freedom of opinion,
expression and belief.
We seek to promote moderation in conformity
with the noble religion of Islam. We have established a
commission to promote moderation and address racism
and terrorism in all of their manifestations, as well as
unity among the different categories within our society.

10/23

03/12/2015

The culture of peace and dialogue was anchored in
Kuwaiti society long before the creation of our modern
State. We have set an example of acceptance, tolerance
and dialogue among different cultures and religions.
The history of our ancestors is rich in demonstrations of
rapprochement and openness to other civilizations and
other populations. Our country is small in size but is a
meeting point for different peoples and brings together
different nations and cultures representing the majority
of religions and cultures in the world. We try to ensure
safety and security in an environment of security and
mutual respect.
With regard to the Sustainable Development Goals,
we stress the creation of a peaceful and inclusive society.
Our State emphasizes the need to promote efforts to
build peace and dialogue among different civilizations;
stresses moderation, tolerance and mutual respect; and
rejects extremism and violence as the main causes of
conflicts. Our State seeks to promote the efforts of
the Organization. We believe in the lofty values of
the Charter of the United Nations. The Alliance of
Civilizations can help to promote international efforts
in that regard. Kuwait is a member both of the Alliance
and of its Group of Friends. The Alliance promotes
dialogue among civilizations and communication
among peoples.
We have adopted a national plan in conformity
with the objectives of the Alliance of Civilizations
to promote the values of moderation and peace and
combat terrorism and extremism. We have created an
international centre for moderation that promotes these
and analogous values and modern ideas on the basis of
dialogue, acceptance of and respect for others’ opinions,
and peaceful coexistence. The centre has organized a
number of conferences at the regional, international
and local levels.
Finally, the culture of peace and respect for human
rights, freedom and expression are essential values in the
context of equality, justice, eliminating unemployment
amd raising awareness of issues relevant to the search
for peace. That requires serious work and joint efforts
on the part of the international community. What is at
stake here is an essential element in promoting societies
and their capacity to survive. Without peace, we will
not be able to achieve development.
Ms. Konurbayeva (Kazakhstan): My delegation
supports all the draft resolutions under the agenda item
“Culture of peace” being adopted today, as they advance

15-40278

03/12/2015

understanding, tolerance and solidarity within and
among nations, so acutely needed in today’s world torn
by strife, conflicts, terrorism and religious intolerance.
Implementing these resolutions calls for wellcoordinated action by the United Nations system, its
Member States, regional organizations and all other
stakeholders to reduce poverty which breeds conflicts,
to foster social cohesion and inclusion, pluralistic and
democratic participation, and sustainable development
of all segments, including those of women, youth and
children. Focus must also be on ethnic and religious
minorities, indigenous peoples, refugees and displaced
persons and migrants.
Today we have the possibility of minimizing
extremism and prejudices through education and
the promotion of values, the appropriate use of new
technologies and the dissemination and free flow of
information. We must concentrate on building respect
for human rights, pluralism and gender equality while
stepping up our efforts to end all forms of xenophobia,
racial discrimination and intolerance.
Kazakhstan, as a nation with about 130 ethnic
groups and almost 20 different religious denominations,
has established a unique mechanism of inter-ethnic and
interfaith dialogue — the Assembly of the People of
Kazakhstan — that plays an important role in statehood
development and decision-making, including through
direct participation in the legislative processes in the
Parliament of my country. Kazakhstan has enacted
new legislation and instituted new Government
agencies and mechanisms protecting mutual respect
and understanding. My country is highly committed
to providing ethical and spiritual education to help
children and young people overcome the spiritual
vacuum of human values and to strengthen the moral
fabric of its society.
Making use of the wisdom and influence of spiritual
leaders to foster peace and stability, Kazakhstan
triennially convenes a Congress of Leaders of World
and Traditional Religions. The Congress created the
Council of Religious Leaders to focus on cooperation
with other forums and international organizations. It
also established a dialogue platform for spiritual and
political leaders in their quest for peace and stability.
We look forward to enhanced cooperation between
the Congress and the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations to promote further intercultural and
interfaith dialogue. Kazakhstan has also initiated

A/70/PV.66

the United Nations International Decade for the
Rapprochement of Cultures within the years 20132022, aimed at providing space for decade-long events
and activities, to move from tolerance to an actual
culture of peace.
Terrorism, while threatening the entire world,
actively abuses religious rhetoric to expand its influence
and justify violence and barbarism. It is no secret that
terrorists use Islam as their ideology, thereby distorting
perceptions of that religion. But as the SecretaryGeneral rightly said during the high-level debate
on promoting tolerance and reconciliation in April,
religions do not kill; people do. To bridge the gap and to
overcome mistrust and hatred the President Nursultan
Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan initiated the convening in
the near future of a United Nations high-level forum on
Islam against terrorism. We invite all Member States to
support this initiative and unite against the destructive
nature of radicalism and violent extremism.
To conclude, I should like to reiterate my country’s
strong commitment to continuing to support joint global
efforts in promoting peace and stability and creating a
better future for all.
Mr. Mwinyi (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation welcomes the opportunity to participate
in today’s debate on the very important subject of
fostering a culture of peace. We see today’s meeting as
an opportunity to reaffirm the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, which have been
immaculately summed up in the draft resolutions set
for adoption.
Like many delegations in this Hall, we are deeply
concerned about the growing wave of extremism,
violence and conflicts that are engulfing many societies,
including Africa’s, whose people have for the past 400
years endured the horrors of slavery, colonialism,
apartheid, resource plunder, chronic poverty and
protracted conflicts. In joining the United Nations, our
young independent nations firmly believed that our
people and countries would never again see conflicts
and wars that have repeatedly brought untold sorrow to
humankind. Yet, we continue to witness such horrors
and their attendant ramifications, including the recent
unprecedented migration and refugee crisis in Europe
and other parts of the world.
What is more shocking is the emergence of
non-State actors whose brutal transnational operations
pose an imminent threat to our collective security.

15-4027811/23

A/70/PV.66

Terrorist groups such as the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and others are
everyone’s worst nightmare. Yet we cannot simply wish
them away. We need to act collectively and resolutely
to suppress their criminal activities by blocking their
means of survival, namely, weapons, funds, supporters
and ideology.
It is worth recalling that military measures are
not by themselves an antidote to terrorism. Far from
it! As the Secretary-General once reminded us,
“missiles may kill terrorists, but good governance kills
terrorism”. Military measures can only lead to further
radicalization and the spread of violent extremism,
the dispersal of the problem, and an upsurge of terror
sympathizers.
In addition to good governance at all levels we
need to promote inclusive economic development,
eliminate all forms of discrimination, eradicate poverty
in all its forms, end illiteracy, and reduce inequalities
within and among nations. We also need to strengthen
local, national, regional and international institutions,
improve global governance, and silence the guns.
We underscore the importance of international
cooperation in addressing violent extremism,
especially by tackling the root causes. We welcome
several interventions to this end, including those
spearheaded by the United Nations entities at regional
and national levels. We wish to underscore, however,
that these interventions must take into account national
and regional contexts and priorities. Whereas some
countries may require assistance to build or rebuild
national institutions others may wish to focus their
attention on socioeconomic ways of addressing the
underlying causes of violent extremism.
For instance, Tanzania attaches great importance
to youth empowerment as a means of addressing violent
extremism. Consequently, we recognize and appreciate
the important role of education in nurturing the
competencies of tomorrow’s global citizens, including
their aptitude to understand others, empathize, think
critically and exchange ideas peacefully. When we
empower young people with the relevant knowledge
and skills of mutual respect and tolerance and the
responsible use of the Internet and social media,
we literally open up a window of opportunities for
employment and decent work, constructive engagement
and self-affirmation. By the same token, this investment
can prevent their involvement in nefarious activities.

12/23

03/12/2015

It can also limit the likelihood of their succumbing to
terror networks, which increasingly use the Internet
and social media to foment extremism and radicalism,
especially among young people.
Likewise, we are fully aware of the important role
of faith-based organizations and religious leaders who
exhibit tremendous influence in our communities. It
is important therefore to engage them in our efforts to
foster a culture of peace, mutual respect and tolerance.
Tanzania has witnessed at first hand the effectiveness
of interfaith dialogue in addressing a myriad of
challenges facing our communities, including violence
and violent extremism. Among the lessons learned
is that associating any religion with terrorism can
undermine trust, mutual respect and cooperation,
which are necessary precepts for defeating extremism
and radicalism.
In addition, we must take full advantage of all
social, cultural and diplomatic tools at our disposal for
building tolerant and responsible societies. We believe
that tourism can be an important vehicle for cultural
dialogue and mutual understanding among the peoples
of the world. Tanzania welcomes cultural tourists
from all corners of the world to visit our country and
intermingle with our people, enjoying their food,
music, sports, legends and rich traditions. We have
also opened our doors for cultural diplomacy, whereby
many countries have established cultural centres in
the country. We are ready to learn from other cultures
without necessarily abandoning our own.
I cannot conclude my statement without expressing
our utter dismay at the escalation of the deliberate
destruction of cultural heritage as part of a cultural
cleansing strategy. We note that such acts may constitute
a war crime. We therefore call for the perpetrators to be
held accountable. We also call for the return of stolen
artefacts to their countries of origin and restoration or
rehabilitation of damaged heritage sites. The work of
UNESCO in that regard is indeed commendable.
Finally, we wish to reaffirm Tanzania’s readiness
to work with other Members of the Organization,
the United Nations system and other stakeholders
in formulating, implementing and strengthening
measures aimed at fostering a culture of peace at all
levels. We keenly await in this regard the finalization
of the Secretary-General’s plan of action for preventing
violent extremism. As Mwalimu Nyerere, the founder
of independent Tanzania, once remarked: “Violence is

15-40278

03/12/2015

unnecessary and costly. Peace is the only way”. Let us
invest in peace.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): To
understand the importance of the culture of peace for
the work of the United Nations, all it takes is to examine
its founding document, the Charter. Establishing peace
and a culture sustaining it is the essence of the Charter
of the United Nations and the basis of all the lofty goals
enshrined therein.
It is important to realize that peace, as meant by
the Charter, is not a static state of affairs achieved
by imposition and domination but a dynamic one,
characterized by tolerance and respect for each other.
The Charter seeks not to eliminate differences for
the sake of peace but to ensure that all have the right
to live and flourish despite differences. To practice
tolerance and live together in peace with one another
as good neighbours is the means the Charter adopts for
achieving a lasting and noble peace.
Today, 70 years after its adoption, global
developments attest to the rightfulness of the paths
the United Nations has chosen. As the dark forces of
violent extremism from Syria to Iraq and from Paris
to Beirut try to impose their absurd views upon all
nations by resorting to savagery and terror, the merits
of safeguarding and celebrating our unique identities
become more and more clear. When considering a
solution to the menace of terrorism, we should face
reality. If wars and military might were able, as some
Powers assume, to solve human problems, we would not
face such brutality. Indeed force is not a panacea for all
problems and the huge machinery of war cannot build;
it can only destroy.
If we are to construct a culture of peace in the
minds of men, it is not only the minds of terrorists
and extremists that need to be changed. Change in the
mindset of those who prefer to solve each and every
problem by the use of force is also an imperative. We
need to realize that, to build a culture of peace, we should
have the courage to tackle the underlying causes which
need and legitimize extremism and terrorism. Only if we
take serious action to address poverty, discrimination,
injustice and occupation will the culture of peace get
the oxygen it needs to breathe. We need to plant the
seeds of peace in the soil enriched by tolerance, justice,
mutual respect, instructive interaction and dialogue
among cultures and civilizations.

A/70/PV.66

Some days ago, in the wake of the terrorist attacks
in Paris, the Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic of
Iran wrote his second letter addressed to young people
in the West. The need to change mentalities was among
the points raised in that letter, which seeks to provide
its young audience with a genuine perspective from
inside the Islamic world on the heinous phenomenon of
terrorism. His Eminence writes that:
“the first step in creating security and peace is
reforming this violence-breeding mentality. Until
... terrorism … is divided into ‘good’ and ‘bad’
types, and until governmental interests are given
precedence over human values and ethics, the roots
of violence should not be searched for in other
places.”
Two years ago, based on the initiative of His
Excellency Mr. Hassan Rouhani, President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, my Government introduced
to the General Assembly a resolution on a world against
violence and violent extremism, which was adopted as
resolution 68/127. Developments since the adoption
of the resolution bear witness to the relevance of the
call and the necessity for urgent action by all nations
to curb violent extremism. To follow up on this same
path, we have proposed an updated draft (A/70/L.21 )
of the same resolution which is being negotiated and
will be ready shortly for action by this Assembly under
the current agenda item, “Culture of peace”. This year’s
draft resolution reflects the developments of the past
two years while renewing the call to counter violent
extremism and following up on the ideals proposed in
the first resolution.
We look forward to continued support from
Member States for the initiative, which should help
all of us close ranks with a view to fighting violent
extremism in the interests of saving humanity from this
scourge and promoting peace, moderation, dialogue
and understanding among cultures, religions and
civilizations.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank the President for the invitation to
participate in the debate on agenda item 16, “Culture of
peace”. We wish to pay tribute to the Secretary-General
for his efforts in the preparation of his second report on
the promotion of a culture of peace and interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace (A/70/373). I thank Bangladesh

15-4027813/23

A/70/PV.66

and the Philippines for the introduction of the draft
resolutions under discussion.
The alarming increase in the phenomena of
radicalization, violent extremism and terrorism,
underpinned by intolerant ideologies based on exclusion,
hatred and the rejection of others, unfortunately finds
fertile ground in the lack of respect for human rights,
lack of social justice and disparities in the levels of
development at the international level. All these factors
require us, now more than ever, to make concerted
efforts at all levels to address these phenomena, which
threaten international peace and security in general and
the stability and safety of our peoples and societies.
In this context, my country, Tunisia — with a
history spanning more than 3,000 years in which it
has played a vital role as a bridge between successive
civilizations — sees the need for concerted efforts and
cooperation in order to increase rapprochement and
coexistence among States and nations so as to deepen
the concepts of peace, tolerance and dialogue among the
civilizations and to consecrate the humanitarian values
of the promotion of peace, development and stability.
We have enshrined the culture of peace and
tolerance through the national dialogue that we
convened in one of the most difficult periods in our
democratic transition over the past few years. I recall
the important role played by four national bodies in the
success of our national dialogue, which led to our being
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 2015 in recognition
of our democratic experience and appreciation for an
innovative peaceful national dialogue that sends a
message to a world in dire need of hope, tolerance and
dialogue in the face of raging conflicts and violence.
The international community is now called on,
more than at any previous time, to spread the culture
of dialogue among religions and civilizations and to
benefit from available mechanisms, especially those
provided by the United Nations and its different
agencies and programmes. We value the central role
of UNESCO in promoting peace and rapprochement
among civilizations, especially through its promotion
of a culture of peace and non-violence, the Action Plan
for the International Decade for the Rapprochement of
Cultures (2013-2022), and the strategic Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace.
We retiterate our support for the efforts of the United
Nations in the spread of the culture of peace, especially
the strategic plan 2013-2018, in promoting education,

14/23

03/12/2015

youth and the media, with a focus on immigration.
Harnessing the United Nations and its agencies in the
promotion of tolerance and peace in order to address
extreme violence and terrorism and promote dialogue
and interconnection among religions and civilizations
is a preventive measure of extreme importance and
scope in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. In reiterating our commitment to the Strategy,
we call for more concerted efforts to counter the
increasing danger posed by terrorist organizations in
many regions, particular;y our pwn . I therefore renew
our call on the international community to step up its
efforts to find radical solutions to current conflicts
and to meet the aspirations of our people to security,
stability and development.
We stress the importance of coordination at all
levels in fighting terrorist organizations, supporting
the countries and their neighbours that are affected
by terrorist groups, and focusing on development and
social and economic progress. We look forward to the
action plan that the Secretary-General will propose
early next year and hope that it will include elements
that meet the aspirations of all nations to stability and
security.
In closing, I wish to express our appreciation for all
efforts aimed at spreading the message of tolerance and
dialogue in our world. We underscore our commitment
to participating in these efforts on the basis of our
historical role and as a follow-up to our efforts to
promote peace and security throughout the world.
Mr. Abdelkhalek (Egypt): Allow me at the outset
to extend my thanks to the President of the General
Assembly for his report, submitted pursuant to General
Assembly resolutions 69/139 and 69/140, entitled
“Promotion of a culture of peace and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace” (A/70/373).
I should also like to thank the delegations of
Bangladesh, Pakistan and the Philippines for their
facilitation of the aforementioned resolutions. We
praise the efforts of the various United Nations entities
to create and promote a culture of peace and engage in
interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
As delineated in the report, the magnitude of global
transformation has given rise to new opportunities
as well as threats. While global trends in certain
areas — such as media, trade and technology — have
brought the international community closer together, it

15-40278

03/12/2015

A/70/PV.66

is beyond doubt that the events taking place in many
parts of the world are a clear manifestation of the
unprecedented challenges we face. The gravity and
complexity of these challenges require the combined
efforts of the international community. These efforts
can succeed only through close cooperation between
governments and civil society organizations.

overcome them determined. A comprehensive approach
should be adopted that is not limited to military and
security aspects but also includes economic and social
development and cultural aspects, notably rectifying
religious discourse, improving the quality of education,
and disseminating a culture of tolerance, acceptance of
others and peaceful coexistence.

Despite the commendable progress that has been
achieved in the realm of the promotion and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, it has
nonetheless become increasingly apparent that
there is a resurgence of xenophobia, intolerance
and discrimination across many parts of the globe.
These phenomena contravene fundamental rights
and freedoms, as well as human dignity. They also
pose a challenge to international peace and security,
development and social stability.

There should be a concerted effort to change the
intellectual structure that reinforces violence and
accuses others of heresy, coercion and terrorism. What
is needed is a new mental structure that can respond
to ideas with ideas and to logic with logic, not with
violence, force and the terrorizing of people. The
promotion of a culture of peace by stressing the notions
of tolerance, respect and understanding among peoples
and mutual coexistence is therefore vital to combating
terrorism. In this regard, we look forward to the plan of
action on preventing violent extremism to be presented
by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly for
its consideration.

It is imperative to recognize that democracy
and the rule of law are incompatible with all forms
of discrimination and intolerance. In this light, the
proliferation of radical and extremist movements in
many societies represent an alarming trend, as these
movements build their political and social platforms on
incitement, hatred and social exclusion. In this regard,
the promotion of a culture of peace and interreligious
and intercultural dialogue across and within societies is
essential to discredit violent and intolerant ideologies.
Increasing incidents of intolerance, discrimination,
violence and negative stereotyping against persons
based on their religion or belief as well as an increased
incidence of religious hatred, are also a matter of
concern.
A clear manifestation of this lies in the insistence by
some to defame religions under the guise of freedom of
expression, which undermines the values of tolerance,
coexistence and mutual respect for others. Equally
alarming are attempts by some to conflate between the
fight against terrorism, on the one hand, with unjustified
discrimination against individuals or groups on
ethnic or religious grounds, on the other. The ensuing
refugee crisis has also raised concerns regarding the
treatment of such refugees, who have become victims
of xenophobia, exploitation and discrimination.
Our societies remain plagued by violence, extremism
and terrorism. It is important to note that any attempt to
eradicate such phenomena must strive to address their
root causes, including foreign occupation, so that these
challenges can be diagnosed effectively and the means to

Intellectuals, cultural leaders, the media and
educators also have a great responsibility to confront
ideas that provoke hatred, promote ignorance, reject
diversity, exclude others and disseminate values of
moderation and tolerance. In this regard, the role of
the media should not solely be confined to relaying
realities in an objective and neutral manner, but also
playing its part in this new cognitive framework by
raising awareness, combating extremist and destructive
ideas and disseminating noble values. It is important
to note that efforts should also be made to prevent the
misuse of modern technologies, particularly social
media and the Internet, to spread incitement and
hatred and to recruit under the guise of false religious
claims, as highlighted in the report. We must ensure
that such technologies are used in the way they were
originally intended — namely, to disseminate culture
and knowledge and enhance positive interaction among
peoples and civilizations.
To conclude, I should like to reiterate Egypt’s
strong support for endeavours throughout the United
Nations system to promote a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue. Only through
a concerted effort of the international community and
continued dialogue can peace prevail and our efforts to
eliminate intolerance, prejudices, negative stereotyping
and discrimination succeed and endure.

15-4027815/23

A/70/PV.66

Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to take part in this morning’s
debate on agenda item 16, “Culture of peace”, which is
an issue very dear to the heart of Morocco owing to the
fact that its objectives coincide with our own foreign
policy, which is based on the principles of dialogue,
openness and tolerance.
My delegation takes this opportunity to express
its gratitude to Ms. Irina Bokova, Director-General
of UNESCO, and Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser,
United Nations High Representative for the Alliance of
Civilizations, for their efforts to disseminate a culture
of peace, dialogue and respect for differences. We also
take note with interest of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/70/373) on the main activities carried out
by the United Nations during the past year to promote
dialogue among cultures, civilizations and religions.
Dialogue among cultures, religions and civilizations
is a fundamental principle underpinning the promotion of
understanding among peoples, tolerance and solidarity
and countering violence, extremism and fanaticism.
As the entire world is aware, a significant number of
initiatives have been undertaken by the international
community, United Nations egancies — UNESCO in
particular — and civil society initiatives to strengthen
objective, transparent and constructive dialogue among
civilizations.
Nevertheless, despite the progress that has
been made, mutual misunderstandings, a lack of
understanding and unfounded prejudices persist and
remain a reality today. Religious intolerance has become
a worldwide scourge and has even intensified in recent
years. Violence and terrorism, which have assumed
alarming proportions, are deplorable and reprehensible
and need to be stopped regardless of their perpetrators,
their motivations or where they occur. Foreseeing the
rampant dangers of intolerance, obscurantism and
terrorism, in June 2007 His Majesty the King alerted
the international community in the following terms:
“The world is grappling with the weakening or
even disappearance of benchmarks and reference
points, characterized by a faltering belief in
religious and human values and by the awakening
of the demons of fanaticism, extremism, violence
and terrorism, and the spreading of myths about a
so-called clash of civilizations.
In our tormented world, it is the duty and
responsibility of all international Powers,

16/23

03/12/2015

enlightened intellectuals and media leaders to
address these dangers to peace, security and
regional and international stability.”
We are all at an historic global, political and
economic turning point. Spaces for dialogue, such
as the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, must
be preserved. It is by remaining within the Alliance
and by continuing to focus our efforts on our initial
objectives — rapprochement among cultures, enhanced
mutual understanding and the fight to prevent
populations and religious beliefs from being held hostage
by minorities that hold extremist ideologies — that we
will be able to achieve our universal goals. It is in that
regard, and through its experience, its ancestral values
and its political will that Morocco is working to preserve
spaces for peace and prosperity in the Maghreb, Africa,
the Euro-Mediterranean region and the Middle East.
Morocco is also working tirelessly and constructively
to establish relationships of good-neighbourliness amd
trust with all of these cultural spaces.
It is in that spirit, and with a view to thwarting the
champions of radicalism, terrorism, dissent, separatism
and obscurantist doctrine, that His Majesty the King
inaugurated on 27 March this year the Mohammed
VI Institute for the Training of Imams, a pilot project
designed to teach imams from Morocco and other Arab,
African or European countries the values of Islam,
moderation, tolerance and openness that have always
been practised in Morocco and constitute the best
defence against deviant extremist behaviour throughout
the world. Morocco has also established a national
programme to integrate a culture of peace into school
curriculums, and organized periodic meetings on a
dialogue among cultures and civilizations that focus
on strengthening the role of the media in disseminating
a culture of peace, tolerance, openness and cultural
pluralism.
The main source of wealth of any country is its
young people, who are best placed to have a significant
impact on their own future if they are given the means
to have do so. Neglected or abandoned young people
can undoubtedly be the greatest source of unrest.
Young people therefore need to remain at the heart
of the priorities of all peace processes so that they do
not fall easy prey to those who would indoctrinate or
exploit them.
In order to improve mutual understanding and
promote the development of values, attitudes and

15-40278

03/12/2015

behaviours centred on non-violence and solidarity,
we must strengthen the involvement of young people
in education and peace processes, and ensure that
the media plays its full role in encouraging collective
awareness-raising, building bridges, promoting
dialogue and silencing hate speech, provocation and
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence.
The Kingdom of Morocco is pleased to co-sponsor
draft resolutions A/70/L.24, entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace” and A/70/L.20, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”, and recommends that they
be adopted by consensus.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Indonesia aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Indonesia
wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/70/373) on the promotion of
a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace.
Indonesia fully supports the work of UNESCO in
the implementation of the Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace and the Action Plan for the International
Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures. Indonesia
also values the work of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations in support of the culture of peace and
dialogue, particularly in the areas of youth, education,
media and migration.
More than 15 years ago this body adopted by
consensus resolution 53/243 on the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. Since
then, the implementation of the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace has become
more pertinent and relevant in today’s world. There are
some basic principles that my delegation would like to
highlight on this matter.
First of all, my delegation stresses the importance
of the Declaration and Programme of Action, which
carries the universal mandate for the international
community, particularly the United Nations system, for
the promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence.
Secondly, my delegation is of the view that the
current work across the United Nations system on a
culture of peace should provide important elements to
the Organization’s ongoing and future work in the area

A/70/PV.66

of conflict prevention, peacebuilding and the promotion
of sustainable peace.
Thirdly, my delegation believes that education,
dialogue and cooperation are the ultimate means to
promote a culture of peace. Education at all levels is
essential, especially in shaping the minds of youth, our
future generation, by cultivating understanding and
respect for religious and cultural diversity. Cooperation
within and across communities and among various
stakeholders at the domestic, national, regional and
international levels should also be enhanced and
developed to ensure that peace and non-violence are
fostered. Therefore, the promotion of a culture of peace
should be mainstreamed in the cooperation framework
between the United Nations and regional organizations
and other relevant actors.
Fourthly, the promotion of a culture of peace could
not be more relevant than in today’s world, where there
is widespread polarization both across and within
communities due to basic identities, including religious,
cultural and ethnic. Such polarization jeopardizes the
potential for the exercise and enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and also impedes
development. With regard to the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1),
given that the Agenda itself stresses that the linkage
between peace and development is inevitable and should
be mutually reinforcing, the global effort to promote a
culture of peace is indeed timely.
Fifthly, my delegation underlines the significant
role of various stakeholders in promoting a culture
of peace. In this regard, the inclusive participation
of all stakeholders is vital to achieving the peaceful
and resilient communities that are needed as
enablers of sustainable development. This is with
particular reference to religious leaders and faithbased organizations in engaging in dialogue at the
grassroots, identifying potential conflicts that may
emerge, preventing extremism, and resolving conflicts.
These stakeholders can act as bridge-builders between
Governments and society towards a lasting peace. The
role of the media has also become more important than
ever in promoting a culture of peace and tolerance by
combating hate speech or incitement against certain
religious or cultural values.
Above all, my delegation is also of the view that
the main responsibility for advancing a culture of peace
rests on the shoulders of Governments. As a country

15-4027817/23

A/70/PV.66

with immense diversity, Indonesia is committed to
promoting a culture of peace domestically, as well as
in the region and the larger international forums. For
Indonesia, the promotion of a culture of peace is indeed
embedded in the vision and mission of its national longterm development plan 2005-2025, which prescribes a
self-reliant, just and democratic and peaceful and united
society. As the country with the world’s largest Muslim
population, Indonesia continues on its path to spread the
message of tolerance and inclusiveness and contributes
to global efforts to counter violent extremism, which
currently represents one of the most serious challenges
to the promotion of world peace and security.
In conclusion, my delegation supports and
co-sponsors the draft resolutions under this agenda
item, and commends the efforts of Bangladesh, the
Philippines, Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran
for facilitating the draft resolutions on this matter.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): At the outset, I wish to
associate myself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Brunei Darussalam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
and I wish to share our views for consultation on the
culture of peace as follows.
My delegation looks forward to the consensus
adoption today of the draft resolutions to promote the
culture of peace, contained in documents A/70/L.20
and A/70/L.24.
My delegation highly values the report of the
Secretary-General (A/70/373), which highlighs United
Nations activities in promoting peaceful and inclusive
societies, environmental protection, an approach to
peace and intercultural dialogue, as well as activities
carried out in connection with counter-terrorism and
violent extremism. Despite the challenges ahead, my
delegation shares the views of the report that the cycles
of deadlock and conflict must be eliminated if we are
to achieve longer-term peace and lasting development.
That will require the political commitment of all
intergovernmental
organizations
and
national
Governments.
As a post-conflict country that was ravaged by
the scourge of war in recent decades, and in working
to rehabilitate its nation, Cambodia envisages the
culture of peace as our core value. This year, my
Government has given increasing priority to young
people as a driving force towards maintaining a culture
of peace in the country. With Internet communications

18/23

03/12/2015

being widespread, we see young people as the future
leaders of countries. Currently, more and more young
leaders have high portfolios both in the executive and
legislative branches of my country. People and youth
are even encouraged to raise issues of concern through
direct contact with the Prime Minister via Facebook
and to provide views on how the Government could
better serve the people and the country. This, I believe,
would contribute to addressing internal conflicts and
thereby bring about peace and stability to societies.
This year, it is with honour that Mr. Hun Many,
a member of the National Assembly and President of
the Union of Youth Federation of Cambodia, among 18
other winners in the world, won an international award
in the Philippines, the GUSI Peace Prize International
2015, becoming the first Cambodian to win the prize
since the Federation was inaugurated in 2002.
In the international contex,t it is unfortunate that
nowadays armed conflicts continue to rage and claim
the lives of both combatants and civilians, including
children in some parts of the world. Violent extremism,
which continues to pose threats to peace and security,
has diminished our hope. It is my view that some
conflicts arise from people being left out, marginalized,
excluded and malnourished. These people can easily
fall into the hands of groups of violent extremists,
organized crime and terrorists. These factors could
result in slowing development. The terrorist attacks that
have occurred recently in some countries of Africa and
Europe add fear to the whole community, and indeed
put our unity to the test.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have been
playing an important role in ending global conflicts
and establishing peacebuilding principles in many
regions. I believe that good governance and the rule
of law are essential preconditions for stability, without
which societies cannot function, let alone flourish. All
Governments need the stability and predictability of
good governance to advance. Such partnerships at all
levels of Government and society will be essential to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and the
broader 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1). I therefore believe that we are
compelled to work towards achieving the 2030 Agenda,
which would put us on the path to equitable sharing
and caring — the building block to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We have a long road to
go, and rigorous actions are needed.

15-40278

03/12/2015

In the wider context, my country believes that
the culture of peace must be cherished in the hearts
of all people, regardless of their religious beliefs.
Confidence-building
measures
and
preventive
diplomacy through multilateral and regional
mechanisms must be established. Likewise, mediating
the interests of all social groups, whether they are
poor, unequal or of any ethnic society, and adopting
reconciliation in a step-by-step process at a variety of
levels will bring about durable peace and security.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
The world today is a crucible of destructive conflicts,
old and new, that are unfortunately the fruit of suspicion
and mistrust arising from divisions between religions
and civilizations that lead to killing, atrocious human
suffering and economic loss. The current trend towards
the growth of xenophobia, religious intolerance and the
dissemination of new extremist ideologies in different
parts of the world, including Africa, justifies efforts to
address disputes and divisions creatively with the aim
of promoting and inculcating a state of mind based on a
culture of peace. These efforts must be pursued.
The terrorist sect Boko Haram is raging in the far
north of my country and must be vigorously combated.
It is an outgrowth of Islamic State, which is plunging
many families in regions throughout the world into
mourning. As the President of my country, Mr. Paul
Biya, has said time and again, a global threat requires
a global solution. My country therefore welcomes the
current international cooperation to eradicate this
scourge, and the inclusion of peace in the post-2015
development programme, in particular in Goal 16.
The International Decade for a Culture of Peace and
Non-Violence for the Children of the World has ended,
but the international community must keep the culture
of peace at the heart of its concerns. We welcome the
recent adoption by UNESCO of the Action Plan for
the International Decade for the Rapprochement of
Cultures (2013-2022), which reflects the commitment
of United Nations institutions to easing social tensions
and fostering openness to others and the acceptance
of difference. These efforts can bear fruit only if they
are nationally enshrined, allowing each person to take
ownership of this ideal.
The challenges to the international community
conerning issues of peace remain significant. It
remains necessary to create platforms allowing the
dissemination of values based on understanding,

A/70/PV.66

mutual respect, tolerance and intercultural dialogue in
order to combat extremism, intolerance, xenophobia,
Islamophobia and other forms of discrimination.
Cameroon is a stakeholder in the plan of action for
a culture of peace and non-violence initiated by
UNESCO. My country has also acceded to the global
citizenship education programme. In Cameroon,
citizenship education is part of the official education
curriculum from primary school, which is compulsory
and free for all, to the last year of secondary school. It
is a form of education that transmits values such as the
understanding of others, tolerance, knowledge of and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and acceptance of difference as a source of wealth. I
also note the important and growing contribution made
by UNESCO clubs of students from different secondary
schools in communicating the values promoted by
UNESCO.
Together with the international community,
every year on 21 September Cameroon celebrates
the International Peace Day, and on 2 October the
International Day for Non-Violence. These are
opportunities to restate the values that are dear to
our Organization. These are joint values, such as
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, conflict prevention,
sustainable socioeconomic development, the promotion
of human dignity and human rights, democracy, the rule
of law, good governance, tolerance, gender equality,
non-violence and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
To be sustainable, peace must be inclusive. That
is why we must promote peaceful coexistence among
different cultures and religions. That is the rationale of
ecumenical interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
which can make a valuable contribution to promoting
social cohesion and harmony. These are the pride of
Cameroon, which is Africa in miniature. Such dialogue
allows us to challenge prejudices and to improve
mutual understanding. I stress the important role of
education and awareness-raising played by the media
and information and communication technologies.
It is certainly true that peace begins in the mind,
but no effort to make manifest a culture of peace
can be long-term without global partnership among
all Member States to achieve the recently adopted
Sustainable Development Goals. When peace is
cultivated through dialogue, tolerance and respect for
others, the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals will allow us to create an atmosphere conducive
to peaceful coexistence among all. I therefore take this

15-4027819/23

A/70/PV.66

opportunity to launch a fervent appeal to all Member
States and relevant United Nations bodies to ensure
that the implementation of the Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace is a driving force in achieving the
post-2015 development agenda.
Peace is broken first in the mind, and that is why it
needs to be entrenched and cultivated there. Cameroon
is constantly cultivating this value in a triptych of
peace, work and fatherland, which is the sacred motto
of my country. We are co-sponsors and support both
draft resolutions under agenda item 16, and call for
their adoption by consensus by the community of
nations meeting in this Assembly. We love peace. We
have a culture of peace. We have a duty towards peace.
Let us act on those.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Peace is impossible in
the absence of respect for international law. Peace is
impossible in the absence of respect for human rights.
Peace is impossible in the absence of freedom. Peace
is impossible in the absence of respect for our common
humanity and inherent dignity. These are harsh facts
reaffirmed every single day in the international
community as we witness the many dilemmas and
challenges plaguing our world today and preventing the
flourishing of a genuine global culture of peace.
The State of Palestine is fully committed to
peace. The establishment of just, viable peace and
true coexistence are among the top priorities of the
Palestinian Government, guiding our course of national
and international action and efforts over the many
decades. Peace has been our strategic choice, political
choice and moral choice, and the Palestinian people
and their leadership have exerted endless efforts and
sacrifices to realize it.
Indeed, we chose the path of compromise decades
ago with the specific aim of achieving peace and justice.
And despite the fact that this has regrettably been to
no avail, and despite the many setbacks and painful
tragedies endured since, we remain committed to this
path for the sake of peace. This remains our chosen path
for resolving all core final status issues of the question
of Palestine. It is our chosen path for bringing an end to
the Israeli foreign military occupation of the Palestinian
land and subjugation of the Palestinian people since
1967, and securing a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace that will end the grave injustice inflicted on the

20/23

03/12/2015

Palestinian people, including the Palestine refugees
from the 1948 Nakba until this day.
This injustice and conflict have confounded and
undermined the United Nations since its inception
and tragically remain unresolved, undermining the
Organization, our international system and efforts to
establish a real culture of peace in the international
community. Yet the Palestinian people remain patient
and resilient in pursuit of their inalienable rights,
including to return and self-determination, and pursuit
of freedom and peace based on international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions.
That patience and resilience is greatly strengthened
by the near-consensus support for Palestine and
solidarity with the Palestinian people from around the
international community, whose commitment to justice
for Palestine is clearly fundamental to the commitment
to realizing peace in the Middle East and globally.
In the past year, Palestine’s commitment to peaceful,
legal means of conduct and resolution of conflict was
further reaffirmed in the decision to accede to the core
instruments of humanitarian and human rights law, as
well as to other international treaties, including the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. We
retain a deep conviction in the primacy of international
law and its centrality for a peaceful, stable and just
world.
We are firm in our conviction that waging war,
entrenching occupation, imposing settlements and walls
and blockades, and denying the rights and humanity
of others will never bring peace and security. Such
policies may illegally establish a specific reality on the
ground, but they neither establish a right nor negate the
rights enshrined in international law. Moreover, such
policies, devoid of legitimacy, cannot enforce peace and
security and are incapable of suppressing the legitimate
aspirations of a people for freedom and their rights.
We insist that a just peace is the only remedy for the
conflict and the violence, deprivation and instability it
engenders. As affirmed in our application for United
Nations membership on 23 September 2011, the State of
Palestine is a peace-loving nation and seeks to promote
friendly relations and a culture of peace with its
neighbours and all members of the global community.
As we witness the extreme distress in occupied
Palestine, including East Jerusalem, due to the illegal,
destructive actions of Israel, the occupying Power,
as well as in the region as a whole, it is clear that we

15-40278

03/12/2015

do not have the luxury to further delay peace and
allow extremists and peace rejectionists to gain more
ground. The Palestinian people can no longer delay
the realization of their rights or accept empty excuses
to rationalize the ongoing violations and indignities,
while the occupying Power is appeased, not even held
accountable for its most flagrant shameful crimes, and
while the prospects for peace are further disfigured and
destroyed.
Time is running out and the window of peace is
rapidly narrowing. There is unanimity that the situation
is unsustainable and a solution must be achieved without
delay and is critical for regional and international
peace. To allow the continuation of this conflict and
the deepening of the human suffering and injustices
caused by it are totally contradictory to the purposes
and principles of the Charter, the international laws that
guide and bind us, and the requirements for building
a lasting peace between the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples and in the region.
In the quest to establish a global culture of peace,
the question of Palestine must remain a priority on the
international agenda. The international community
must urgently act to compel Israel, the occupying
Power, to bring an end to its occupation of Palestine and
oppression of the Palestinian people, and compel it to
respect international law without exception. Moreover,
civilians must be protected and human rights must
be respected. These are vital matters that cannot be
postponed until the end of the conflict. We thus implore
the international community once again, and foremost
the Security Council, to uphold the responsibility to
redress the root causes of this conflict, which continues
to threaten international peace and security.
Establishing a culture of peace requires tackling
even the most difficult of issues, not allowing them
to fester without untold consequences. It requires
upholding political, legal and moral obligations and
we appeal to the General Assembly to do its part to
promote this path as a matter of urgency.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolutions A/70/L.20 and A/70/L.24.
The Assembly will first take a decision on
draft resolution A/70/L.20 entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”.

A/70/PV.66

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Herity (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have become sponsors of A/70/L.20:
Austria, Bahamas, Belarus, Benin, Brunei Darussalam,
Cameroon, Chile, China, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Hungary, Italy, Japan, Jordan, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Morocco, Myanmar,
Peru, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Slovenia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Timor Leste, Tunisia and the
United Republic of Tanzania.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.20?
Draft resolution A/70/L.20 was adopted (resolution
70/19).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.24, entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Herity (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
A/70/L.24: Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Hungary,
Lesotho, Mali, Malta, Mozambique, the Netherlands,
Palau, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Seychelles, South Africa and the United
Republic of Tanzania.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.24?
Draft resolution A/70/L.24 was adopted (resolution
70/20).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

15-4027821/23

A/70/PV.66

Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union on
resolution 70/19, entitled “Promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace”. The European Union thanks
the delegations of Pakistan and the Philippines for
presenting the resolution, and acknowledges that its
text has continued to improve over the years.
Given this positive evolution, we regret this
year’s limited negotiation timeline and the fact that
our primary concerns were not reflected in the text.
In particular, we regret specifically that no changes
have been introduced to the fourteenth and twentysecond preambular paragraphs. We trust that next
year the facilitators will give positive consideration
to our suggestions. In this context, we stress that the
European Union continues to attach importance to
always referring to religion or belief in conjunction, and
that freedom of religion or belief applies to individuals
as rights-holders who may exercise this right either
in community, including in religious minorities, with
others or individually.
Ms. Derderian (United States of America): The
United States firmly supports efforts to promote
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
cooperation. We are pleased to have joined consensus
on resolution 70/19. The United States strongly believes
in encouraging a culture of peace through the promotion
of freedom, justice, democracy and human rights,
rejecting violence and addressing the root causes of
conflict.
We are encouraged by this consensus-based
effort to promote tolerance, dialogue, reconciliation
and respect for cultural diversity. As a multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multi-religious nation, we also believe
that dialogue, understanding and cooperation among
and between individuals from different religious and
cultural backgrounds are important to the development
of peaceful and harmonious relations between groups
and between States.
We understand that resolution 70/19, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, takes note of
the fifth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions held in Astana, Kazakhstan in June 2015. We
thank the Government of Kazakhstan for convening the
international community to promote interreligious and
intercultural dialogue.

22/23

03/12/2015

While we join consensus today on this resolution,
that does not imply that the United States is in full
agreement with the declaration arising from the
fifth Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions, which contains certain terminology and
statements concerning multilateralism and international
cooperation, peace and security, as well as interpretation
of human rights law, which in our view do not reflect
broad international consensus on these issues.
We understand that the resolution also reaffirms the
international community’s recognition that article 19 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
in its entirety provides the international framework for
the protection of freedom of expression. In that regard,
the United States reaffirms its well-known position that
the exercise of the right to freedom of expression should
be afforded the maximum possible protection, and our
support for the freedoms of religion and expression,
including respect for all opinions and beliefs without
regard to their content.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
The representative of Israel has asked to speak
in exercise of the right of reply. I remind him that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to
ten minutes for the first intervention and five minutes
for the second intervention and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Barkan (Israel): The Palestinians may well
have decided on the strategy of peace but are not
implementing it on a practical level. What delays
progress towards peace is their refusal to conduct
negotiations on the two-State solution and their
incitement to violence against Israelis and Jews in their
own media.
Moreover, the statement made here today about the
need for the return of the refugees of 1948 is nothing
but a call for the destruction of Israel. A mild way
of delivering it should not mislead us. The wave of
terrorism that Israel has been facing in the past several
months, and that has already cost 40 Israelis of all
ages, combines religious incitement and nationalist
incitement and is leading Palestinian children to murder
women and children from Israel. That does not support
any culture of peace.
The world’s international law does not give
legitimacy to the duplicity of talking here nicely

15-40278

03/12/2015

about peace but practically working against it on the
ground. The Palestinian Authority must realize that
peace will come only through negotiations and not
through violence. Israel is committed to this ideal and
welcomes unconditional negotiations. The Palestinians
must stop the incitement and turn away from it towards
negotiations. They should not rely on outside compulsion
for making peace because that will not come, and time

A/70/PV.66

is indeed running out for them. We urge them to return
to the negotiation table.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 16.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

15-4027823/23
