A/RES/69/120

United Nations

Distr.: General
18 December 2014

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 79

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 2014
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/69/499)]

69/120. Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection
of victims of armed conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recalling its biennial resolutions on the status of the Protocols Additional to
the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts, including its resolution 67/93 of 14 December 2012,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,1
Reaffirming the continuing value of established humanitarian rules relating to
armed conflicts and the need to respect and ensure respect for those rules in all
circumstances within the scope of the relevant international instruments, pending
the earliest possible termination of such conflicts,
Stressing the need to consolidate the existing body of international
humanitarian law through its universal acceptance and the need for wide
dissemination and full implementation of such law at the national level, and
expressing concern about all violations of the Geneva Conventions of 19492 and the
Additional Protocols,3
Calling upon Member States to disseminate knowledge of international
humanitarian law as widely as possible, and calling upon all parties to armed
conflict to apply international humanitarian law,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of national commissions and
other bodies involved in advising authorities at the national level on the
implementation, dissemination and development of international humanitarian law,
Noting with appreciation the meetings of representatives of those bodies
organized by the International Committee of the Red Cross, together with relevant
_______________
1

A/69/184 and Add.1.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
3
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513, and vol. 2404, No. 43425.
2

14-66966 (E)

*1466966*

Please recycle

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts

A/RES/69/120

partners such as national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, to facilitate the
sharing of concrete experience and the exchange of views on their roles and on the
challenges they face,
Stressing the possibility of making use of the International Humanitarian FactFinding Commission in relation to an armed conflict, pursuant to article 90 of
Protocol I4 to the Geneva Conventions,
Stressing also the possibility for the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission to facilitate, through its good offices, the restoration of an attitude of
respect for the Geneva Conventions and Protocol I,
Taking note of the fact that, in paragraphs 8 and 9 of its resolution 1894 (2009)
of 11 November 2009 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the Security
Council noted the range of existing methods used, on a case-by-case basis, for
gathering information on alleged violations of applicable international law relating
to the protection of civilians, underlined the importance in that regard of receiving
information that is timely, objective, accurate and reliable, and considered the
possibility, to that end, of using the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission established by article 90 of Protocol I,
Mindful of the role of the International Committee of the Red Cross in offering
protection to the victims of armed conflicts,
Noting with appreciation the continuing efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross to promote and disseminate knowledge of international
humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Conventions and the Additional
Protocols,
Noting the special responsibilities of national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies, as auxiliaries to the public authorities of their respective States in the
humanitarian field, to cooperate with and assist their Governments in the promotion,
dissemination and implementation of international humanitarian law,
Welcoming the universal acceptance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949,
particularly in the year of the 150th anniversary of the adoption of the original
Geneva Convention,
Recalling the undertakings of the Thirty-first International Conference of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 28 November to 1 December
2011, at which the Conference reaffirmed the need to reinforce the implementation
of and respect for international humanitarian law,
Welcoming the launch of the initiative by Switzerland, in collaboration with
the International Committee of the Red Cross, to facilitate a process aimed at
exploring and identifying concrete ways and means to strengthen the application of
international humanitarian law, including ensuring the effectiveness of mechanisms
of compliance and reinforcing dialogue on issues of international humanitarian law,
Noting the initiative by the International Committee of the Red Cross to
facilitate a process regarding the legal protection of all persons deprived of their
liberty in relation to armed conflict,

_______________
4

2/5

Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts

A/RES/69/120

Noting also the work undertaken by the International Committee of the Red
Cross in its Health Care in Danger project regarding the protection of the provision
of and access to health care,
Calling upon States to respect and protect the wounded and sick, as well as
health-care personnel and facilities, and medical vehicles in armed conflict in
accordance with their obligations under international humanitarian law,
Noting the serious concern expressed by States regarding the humanitarian
impact caused by cluster munitions, and noting the entry into force of the
Convention on Cluster Munitions5 on 1 August 2010,
Noting also the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty in 2013,6
Welcoming the significant debate generated by the publication in 2005 of the
study by the International Committee of the Red Cross on customary international
humanitarian law and recent initiatives by the Committee, and looking forward to
further constructive discussion on the subject,
Acknowledging the fact that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court7 covers the most serious crimes of international concern under international
humanitarian law and that the Rome Statute, while recalling that it is the duty of
every State to exercise its criminal jurisdiction over those responsible for such
crimes, shows the determination of the international community to put an end to
impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes and thus to contribute to their
prevention,
Noting the amendments to article 8 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, relating to war crimes under the Rome Statute, adopted at the
Review Conference of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala on 10 June 2010,
Acknowledging the usefulness of discussing in the General Assembly the status
of instruments of international humanitarian law relevant to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts,
1.
Welcomes the universal acceptance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949,2
and notes the trend towards a similarly wide acceptance of the two Additional
Protocols of 1977;8
2.
Calls upon all States parties to the Geneva Conventions that have not yet
done so to consider becoming parties to the Additional Protocols3 at the earliest
possible date;
3.
Calls upon all States that are already parties to Protocol I,4 or those
States not parties, on becoming parties to Protocol I, to make the declaration
provided for under article 90 of that Protocol and to consider making use, where
appropriate, of the services of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission in accordance with the provisions of article 90 of Protocol I;
4.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider becoming
parties to the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of

_______________
5

Ibid., vol. 2688, No. 47713.
See resolution 67/234 B.
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
8
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
6

3/5

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts

A/RES/69/120

Armed Conflict and the two Protocols thereto 9 and to other relevant treaties on
international humanitarian law relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflict;
5.
Calls upon States to consider becoming parties to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict;10
6.
Calls upon all States parties to the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions to ensure their wide dissemination and full implementation;
7.
Affirms the necessity of making the implementation of international
humanitarian law more effective, and supports its further strengthening and
development;
8.
Notes with appreciation the adoption at the Thirtieth International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 26 to
30 November 2007, of resolution 3 entitled “Reaffirmation and implementation of
international humanitarian law: preserving human life and dignity in armed
conflict”, in which the Conference, inter alia, reiterated the obligation of States to
take national measures to implement international humanitarian law, including
training the armed forces and making this law known among the general public, as
well as adopting legislation to punish war crimes in accordance with their
international obligations;
9.
Also notes with appreciation the adoption at the Thirty-first International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent of resolution 1 entitled
“Strengthening legal protection for victims of armed conflicts”, in which the
Conference, inter alia, stressed that greater compliance with international
humanitarian law is an indispensable prerequisite for improving the situation of
victims of armed conflict and reaffirmed the obligation of all States and all parties
to armed conflict to respect and ensure respect for international humanitarian law in
all circumstances;
10. Recognizes, taking into account questions raised by States during the
preparation for the Thirty-first International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent and during the debates at the Conference, the importance of exploring
ways to enhance and ensure the effectiveness of mechanisms of compliance with
international humanitarian law, with a view to strengthening legal protection for all
victims of armed conflict, and in this regard welcomes the launch of the initiative by
Switzerland, in collaboration with the International Committee of the Red Cross, on
strengthening compliance with international humanitarian law;
11. Calls upon Member States to actively participate in the Thirty-second
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, to be held in Geneva
in 2015;
12. Welcomes the activities of the Advisory Service on International
Humanitarian Law of the International Committee of the Red Cross in supporting efforts
made by Member States to take legislative and administrative action to implement
international humanitarian law and in promoting the exchange of information on
those efforts between Governments, and reminds Member States of the availability
of the manual on domestic implementation of international humanitarian law;
_______________
9

Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511, and vol. 2253, No. 3511.
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.

10

4/5

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts

A/RES/69/120

13. Also welcomes the increasing number of national commissions or
committees for the implementation of international humanitarian law and their work
in promoting the incorporation of treaties on international humanitarian law into
national law and disseminating the rules of international humanitarian law;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session a report on the status of the Additional Protocols relating to the
protection of victims of armed conflicts, as well as on measures taken to strengthen
the existing body of international humanitarian law, inter alia, with respect to its
dissemination and full implementation at the national level, based on information
received from Member States and the International Committee of the Red Cross;
15. Encourages Member States and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, in transmitting information to the Secretary-General, to focus on new
developments and activities during the reporting period;
16. Encourages Member States to explore ways of facilitating the submission
of information for future reports of the Secretary-General and, in this context, to
consider the convenience of using a questionnaire as drafted by Member States, with
the assistance of the International Committee of the Red Cross and, as appropriate,
in consultation with the Secretariat, for submission to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session
the item entitled “Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts”.
68th plenary meeting
10 December 2014

5/5
