Resolutions adopted on reports of the First Comrni_t_te_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _7

D
The General Assembly,
Believing that communication by means of satellites
should be available to the nations of the world as soon
as practicable on a global and non-discriminatory basis,
Convinced of the need to prepare the way for the
establishment of effective operational satellite communication,
l. Notes with satisfaction that the Inter1;1ational
Telecommunication Union plans to call a spec1al conference in 1963 to make allocations of radio frequency
bands for outer space activities;
2: Recommends that the International Telecommunication Dnion consider at that conference t_hose
aspects of space communication in which internat10nal
co-operation will be required;
3. Notes the potential importance of con:imun\ca~ion
satellites for use by the United Nations and its pnn~1pal
organs and specialized agencies for both operat10nal
and informational requirements;
4. Invites the Special Fund and _the Expan~ed
Programme of Technical Assistanc~, 1_n cons1.;ltat10n
with the International Telecommurncatlon Umon, to
give sympathetic consideration to requests from Member States for technical and other assistance for the
survey of their communication needs ?'nd_ for t~e. ~evelopment of their domestic commumcation facilities,
so that they may make effective use of space communication ;
5. Requests the Internat!onal _Telecommunication
Union consulting as appropnate with Member States,
the U~ited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and other specialized agencies and governmental and non-governmental organizations, su~h as
the Committee on Space Research of the Internat10nal
Council of Scientific Unions, to submit a report ~n the
implementati~n of !hese proposals to the_ Econom1c and
Social Council at 1ts th1rty-fourth sess10n and to the
General Assembly at its seventeenth session;
6. Requests the Committee on ~he Peacef~l Uses
of Outer Space, as it deems appropnate, to rev1ew ~hat
report and submit its comments and recommendations
to the Economic and Social Council and to the General
Assembly.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.

E
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1472 (XIV) of 12 December
1959,
N oting that the terms of office of the members of
the Committee on the Peaceful U ses of Outer Space
expire at the end of 1961,
N oting the report of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space, 1
l. Decides to continue the membership of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space as set
forth in General Assembly resolution 1472 (XIV) and
to add Chad, Mongolia, Morocco and Sierra Leone to
1
Otficial Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 21, document A/4987.

its membership in recognition of the increas~d membership of the United Nations since the Comm1ttee was
established;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to meet not later than 31 March 1962
to carry out its mandate as contained in General Assembly resolution 1472 (XIV), to review the activities
provided for in resolutions A, B, C and D above and
to make such reports as it may consider appropriatc.

1085th plcnary meeting,
20 December 1961.

1722 (XVI). Question of disarmament
The General Assembly,
Noting ·with concern that the continuing arms race
is a heavy burden for humanity and is fraught with
dangers for the cause of world peace,
Conscious 0f its responsibilities, uncler the Charter
of the U nited N ations, for disarmament,
Recalling its resolution 1378 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, in which it called upon Governments to make
every effort to achieve a constructive solution of the
problem of general and complete disarmarnent and
expressed the hope that measures leading towarcls the
goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control would be worked out in
detail and agreed upon in the shortest possible time,
Being deeply concerned that the objectives of that
resolution be achieved as early as possible,

I
N oting with satisfaction the report submitted to the
General Assembly by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America following
their exchange of views on questions relating to disarmament and to the resumption of negotiations in an
appropriate body, 2
l. W elcomes the joint statement of the Governments of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
the United States of America of agreed principles for
disarmament negotiations included in that report;
2. Recommends that negotiations on general and
complete disarmament should be based upon those
principles ;

II
Deeming it essential that negotiations on general and
complete disarmament uncler effective international
control be resumed at the earliest possible time,
Recognizing that all States have a deep interest in
disarmament negotiations,
l. Endorses the agreement that has been reached on
the composition of a Disarmament Committee, whose
membership will be: Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Canada,
Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, France, India, Italy, Mexico,
Nigeria, Poland, Romania, Sweden, Union of Soyiet
Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, Umted
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America;
• !bid., agenda item 19, document A/4879.

8

General Auembly-Sixteenth Senion

2 Recommends that the Committee, as a matter of
the 'utmost urgency, should undertake ne~~tiations with
a view to reaching, on the basis of the JOtnt ?tateme!lt
of agreed principies and taking into account, inter alta,
paragraph 8 of those principies, agreel!len! on ge1;1eral
and complete disarmament under effective mternational
control;
3. Requests that the Committee submit to the Ge~eral Assembly a report on such agreemen~ as soon as. it
has been reached, and in any case subm1t to the D1sarmament Commissiot1, not later than 1 J une 1962, a
report on the progress achieved ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render _the
necessary assistance and provide the necessary serv1ces
to the Committee.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.

1724 (XVI). Question of Algeria

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the question of Algeria,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) o_f 14 Dec~m~er
1960 in which it proclaimed the necessity of bnngmg
to a speedy and unconditional end colonialism in all
its forms and manifestations,
Recalling further its resolution 1573 (XV) of 19
December 1960 by which it recognized the right of the
Algerian people to self-determination and indepeI_J.dence the imperative need for adequate and effective
gua;antees to ensur_e the successful aI_J.d ~ ust implementation of the nght to self-determmatlon on the
basis of respect for the unity and t_erritoria! integrity
of Algeria, and the fi;tct that the Umted Nations has a
responsibility to contribute to:Vards the successful and
just implementation of that nght,
Deeply concerned about the continuance of th'e war
in Algeria,
Taking note of the fact that the two parties concerned
have affirmed their willingness to seek a negotiated and
peaceful solution on the basis of the right of the Algerian peoplc to self-determination and independence,
Regretting the suspension of the negotiations entered
into by the Government of France and the Provisional
Govemment of the Algerian Republic,
Calls upon the two parties to resume negotiations
with a view to implementing the right of the Algerian

people to self-determi~ati<?n ~nd in_dependence _respecting the unity and terntonal mtegnty of Algena.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.

17 40 (XVI). The Korean question

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Reh~bilitation of Korea8
signed at Seoul Korea, on 11 September 1961, and
the supplementa~y report of the Commission4 signed at
Seoul, Korea, on 4 December 1961,
Reaffirming its resolutions 112 (II) of 14 November
1947 195 (lll) of 12 December 1948, 293 (IV) of
21 October 1949, 376 (V) of 7 October 1950, 811 (IX)
of 11 December 1954, 910 A (X) of 29 November
1955, 1010 (XI) of 11 January i957, 1180 (XII) of
29 November 1957, 1264 (XIII) of 14 November 1958
and 1455 (XIV) of 9 December 1959,
Noting that the United Nations forces which were
sent to Korea in accordance with resolutions of the
United Nations have in greater part already been withdra wn, and that the Governments concerned are prepared to withdraw their remaining forces from Korea
when the conditions for a lasting settlement laid down
by the General Assembly have been fulfilled,
Recalling that the United Nations, under its Chart_er,
is fully and rightfulli empowered to take collectt_ve
action to repel aggress1on, to restare peace and secunty
and to extend its good offices to seeking a peaceful
settlement in Korea,
l. Reaffinns that the objectives of the United Nations in Korea are to bring about, by peaceful means,
the establishment of a unified, independent and democratic Korea under a representative form of government, and the full restoration of international peace and
security in the area;
2. Urges that continuing efforts be made to achieve
those objectives;
3. Requests the United Nations Commission for
the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to continue
its work in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly.
1087th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.
• /bid., Si.deenth Ses.sion, Supplement No. 13 (A/4900).
'!bid., Supplement No. 13A (A/4900/Add.1).
