TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

st

MEETING: 11 DECEMBER 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 52 1) . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/.5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/9521 and Corr.1) . . . , , . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1521

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of ;the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 11 December 1969, at 10.30 a.m.

President:

M. V. J. MWAANGA (Zambia).

3. In the process of further consultations held with the
members, it has been decided to make a slight modification
to the third preambular paragraph of that draft resolution. I
shall now read out the new text of the third preambular
paragraph.

tiesent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

“Noting, from the observations in the report, that the
improvement of the situation in Cyprus has continued
during the period under review.”

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 521)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

4. The parties directly concerned have been consulted and
have agreed with the new formulation.2

2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 fram the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/9521 and Corr.1).

5. The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus on
whom I now calt.
6. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): The Council meets again to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus under circumstances that may, on the
whole, be considered as not discouraging. Wehave before us
the report of the Secretary-General for the six-month
period since last June. The report is, as previous ones,
studious, objective and comprehensive, The atmosphere of
peace and calm that has prevailed in the Island since
December 1967 has continued uninterruptedly and there
has been a steady improvement in the situation from
certain aspects of a return to normal conditions of life.
Contacts between Greek and Turkish Cypriots have continued to spread to higher levels, The holding of some
United Nations and other international conferences in
Cyprus, with the participation of Turkish Cypriots, has
greatly contributed to the improvement of the climate. The
United Nations Seminar on Human Rights, held this year in
Nicosia, has in particular been a significant factor in this
improvement process. The General Assembly in a recent
resolution has expressedits appreciation of that seminar.

Adoption of the agenda
l%e agenda was adopted.
ILetter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cyprus (S/9521 and Corr.1)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the usual practice of the Council when dealing with the question now
before it, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece,
pursuant to their requests [S/9.553, S/9551, S/9547/ to
participate in the discussion of the ,question without the
d&t to vote, to take seats at the Council table.
At the invitation
of the President, ’ Mr, Z. Rossides
(Cyprus),
Mr. U. H. Bayiilken (Turkey) and Mr. D. S.
Eitsios (Greece) took places at the Council table.

7. Equally important in this respect has been the plenary
assembly of United Nations Associations which was also
held in Nicosia, as well as other regional international
meetings, bringing the positive United Nations spirit of
friendly co-operation closer to a people who are ready and
eager to receive it. This is perhaps why the holding of such
international conferences in Cyprus have proved a particular success.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the question relating to Cyprus
on the basis of the report submitted to us by the
Secretary-General on 3 December 1969.1 Members of the
Council have also received copies of the text of a draft
resolution, prepared for our consideration in the course of
informal consultations, which is contained in document
Sl9SSO.

8. The report notes the progress towards normalization
which has been achieved in various fields. Thus, for
example, in the field of agriculture there has been a

1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourthYear,
Supplement for October, November and December 1969, document

2 The revised text of the draft resolution Was later issued aS

documentS/9550/Rev.l.

s/9521 I

1

ment, as was expected. They are, one, freedom of move.
ment, and two, deconfrontation.

significantly better co.operation between the Greek and
Turkish Cypriots, resulting in more extensive cultivation,
particularly by Turkish Cypriot farmers, of the lands falling
within the militarily restricted areas and in the return of
Turkish Cypriot landowners to their villages.

16. Regarding the first-freedom of movement-although
the policy of goodwill and conciliation, which the Presi.
dent, Archbishop Makarios, initiated about two years ago in
lifting all restrictions and roadblocks impeding the move.
ment of persons and goods in and out of the Turkish
Cypriot enclaves, has continued to be scrupuIously adhered
to by the Government, the expected positive response from
the other side has not as yet emerged by the lifting of
corresponding restrictions of movement in the enclaves, As
a result, the Secretary-General’s report of 3 June noted:
“Whereas Turkish Cypriots may move freely throughout
the Island except in a few militarily restricted areas”-in
which they are now allowed, as I said before, to cultivate“access to Turkish Cypriot enclaves, a number of Turkish
Cypriot villages and certain roads continues to be denied to
Greek Cypriots”. The Secretary-General also remarked that
“This abnormal situation . . . could mar the present favour.
able atmosphere” [ibid., para. 5.51. The present report
showsthat this situation, regrettably, continues practically
unchanged. Normalization, however, cannot be conceived
as a one-way traffic. It should come from both sides and be
seen in its intrinsic merit as such, not narrowly in relation
to the accompanying advantage it may bring to the one or
the other side. We hope, however, that the appropriate
response may soon come, thus doing away with an
unnecessary anomaly which is incompatible with the
present climate.

9. Also encouraging has been the participation of Turkish
Cypriot farmers in soil conservation and mixed farming
projects financed by the Government and the World Food
Programme,
10. Furthermore, Turkish Cypriot villages will be benefiting substantially from a number of irrigation development projects sponsored by the Government and the
United Nations Development Programme.
11. In the field of public services there has also been
improvement as a result of the arrangements whereby the
Government is able to proceed with the Famagusta water
supply project. Turkish Cypriot co-operation has been
fostered in the provision by the Government of electricity
to a number of Turkish Cypriot villages and in the renewal
or repairs of water systems in severalTurkish villages, in the
Nicosia and Kyrenia districts. However, water resources
generally and the provisions of relevant services, as the
report noted, “continue to pose problems especially since
Greek Cypriots are denied access to Turkish Cypriotcontrolled areas” [S/9521, para. 471. And, in this sense,
also to the personnel required for such repairs. The
situation, however, is markedly improving.

17. As regards the second aspect-deconfrontation-my
Government has all along shown its readiness to co-operate
with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus to
that effect. Last August, in the light of favourable
developments, the Force Commander, General Martola,
proposed certain modest measures of simultaneous relocation of forces with the purpose of lessening the acuteness
and closeness of confrontation along the Nicosia Line; he
proposed that they should move back a little so that they
would not be in sight of each other in a rather provocative
manner. As stated in the report, the Government accepted
the proposals, but the Turkish Cypriots did not agree. Tile
Secretary-General in his observations shows particular
concern over such military confrontation and expressesthe
hope that the Turkish Cypriot leadership will give renewed
consideration to the proposals of the Force, to which the
Government has already agreed. The Secretary-General
points out that “as long as the present close military
confrontation persists tension will inevitably remain high,
and with it the risk of’ accidental clashes” [S/9521,

12. In the economic field, through rapidly increasing
contacts, there are, the report states: “encouraging signs
pointing to a growing awarenessof the desirability of
reversing the trends towards separate economic development” [ibid., pm. 401. This development bears out the
hope expressed by the Secretary-General in his previous
report of 3 June 1969 for such needed reversal of trends so
that: “human and other resourcesof the whole Island may
be fully utilized for the benefit of all Cypriots” [S/9233,
pura. 601.

13. There can be little doubt that separativeness in
economic development, as in other fields, cannot be to the
benefit of either side and is certainly more to the detriment
of the Turkish Cypriots themselves.
14. The Cyprus economy, just as the Cyprus State, is one
unit. Only as such can it go forward to a future of peace
and progress for all its peoples as one undivided whole. This
is both desirabIe and achievable for, as the Secretary
General noted in a number of his previous reports, since
March 1966, the bulk of the people of Cyprus-Greek and
Turkish alike-earnestly desire to live together in peace and
harmony, as they did over the years in the past and are
eager to resume their former amicable relations. This desire
is also evidenced by the prompt co-operation from both
sides where no outside impediments are placed to obstruct it.

para. 771.

18. Having regard to the present improved climate in the
Island, such continued military confrontation at ChWJ
quarters would seem hardly to serveany useful purpose and
would rather be likely to create tension, thereby prejus
dicing the normalization effort and the current talks.
19. I turn now to the intercommunal talks. Those talks
have, no doubt, been proceeding at a slow pace. That 1s
regrettable. But, as both the interlocutors have stated, there
is no impasse, and the talks are conducted with goodwill
and determination, so that the hope of results is not lost. ln

15. Notwithstanding these encouraging developments,
however, two major aspects of normalization, with which
the Secretary-General dealt in his report of 3 June and in
previous reports, have not shown any appreciable improve2

fact, ,the value of the talks does not lie so much in their
expeditious conduct as in their outcome in reaching
agreement on a sound solution.

efforts towards a just and peaceful solution. His renown as
a great world leader in the causeof humanity is the most
valuable assetof the United Nations,

20. Despite the difficulties encountered, it is our sincere
hope that it will eventually be possible to make progress h
the talks towards a just, democratic and workable solution.
My Government is therefore determined to persist in its
policy of goodwill and to continue the local talks in a
constructive spirit.

27. Our sincere thanks also go to his distinguished advisers
and especially the Under-Secretaries-General Dr. Ralph
Bunche and Mr. Rolz-Bennett , for their devoted efforts and
their important contributions. I also wish to make special
mention of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and his assistants,whose diplomatic tact, experience and skill have brought a most
constructive contribution to the work of the United
Nations in Cyprus.

21. ‘The agreed basis of the talks is that of a unitary State.
SPAI a State must, however, be unitary in substance, not

only in name, so that a solution may be reached and the
resulting product may be workable. Workability in any
SohItion is most vital, for without it the solution will not be

28. Before concluding, I should like to place on record the
gratitude of my Government to the outgoing Commander
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus,
General Martola, for the efficient task he performed on the
Island. He takes with him our esteerh for his most
competent command of the Force, and our admiration for
his dedication to duty and to the principles of the United
Nations which he had been caIled upon to serve.He also
takes with him the friendship of the Government and
people of Cyprus and our best wishes for success in his
future endeavours.

viable .
22. Settlements based on division, as experience has
invariably shown, bear the seed of conflict, unavoidably
leading to a more precarious situation and graver threats to
peace. My Government has gone to all lengths to meet the
other side within the framework of a unitary State, It is
ready to do anything within that framework to reach
accommodation. But it cannot possibly go outside that
fram.ework and as my President has stated that “security
zone.” necessary for the unity of the State. For then the
whole structure of a unitary State would crumble, with all
the dire consequences for the people of Cyprus and for the
interests of international peace. To be sound and enduring,
a solution must be consistent with the principles of the
United Nations Charter and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council on Cyprus.

29. We wish once more to place on record our deep
appreciation to those countries whose valuable contributions in military contingents and in voluntary funds make
possible the United Nations peace-keeping operations in
Cyprus.
30. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Turkey.

23. What we wish to achieve, therefore, is an independent
unitary State, free from outside intervention in its internal
affairs and firmly based on conciliation, unity and COoperation between the Greek and Turkish Cypriots, in a
spirit of justice and freedom. In that way the people of
Cyprus, as an integral whole, may go forward on the road
of peace, towards the attainment of their common advancement and welfare within the world community.

3 I. Mr. BAYULKEN (Turkey): Mr. President, let me first
of all thank you and the members of the Security Council
for giving me the opportunity of participating in the
deliberations of the Council on the present agenda item,
32. The Council meets today for the consideration of the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and has before it the report of the
Secretary-General of 3 December 1969 [S/9521].

24. The Secretary-General, in his report, considers the
work of the United Nations Force in Cyprus necessaryin
the present circumstances and recommends the renewal of
the mandate proposing a six-month extension. MY Governme,nt is in agreement with that proposal.

33. It is gratifying to seethat the Council is meeting again
under more or less auspicious circumstances as calm
continues to prevail in Cyprus. In fact, this situation and
the encouraging developments which have taken place on
the Island since the previous meeting of the Council on the
question of Cyprus [1474th meeting] are reflected in
paragraph 2 of the introduction to the Secretary-General’s
report, which I now quote:

25. I take this opportunity to emphasize again our sincere
appreciation of the work carried out by both the United
Nations Force and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. During the last six Years their Patient
and relentless efforts in co-operation with the Government
have resulted in significant progress in the pacification of
the situation in the Island. The case of Cyprus is perhaps
the one case in which the United Nations pacification work
hali been so successful, bringing out the importance of the
United Nations peace-keeping functions and thus helping to
strengthen the Organization as an instrument of Peace.

“The situation in the last six months has remained calm
with only a few incidents causingtension. The continuing
general desire to maintain peaceful conditions has been
clearly evident throughout and there has been a steady
improvement towards a return to normal conditions of
life .”
34. My delegation considers this report of the SecretaryGeneral as an encouraging document. In its paragraphs 34
to 49, the report cites many cases which denote the

26.. In that connexion, I wish also to express once more
our gratitude to the Secretary-General for his genuine
concern about the problem of Cyprus and his dedicated
3

emergence and the strengthening of a desire for a continuous process of improvement in the relations between the
two communities. It will be deduced from these concrete
examples-and I know that this will be noted with
satisfaction by the members of the Council-that the
Turkish community is ready to reciprocate with goodwill
any gesture that does not entail an implicit or explicit
infringement of its constitutional rights and prerogatives.

which is not surprising in view of the most painful period of
long years of strife, bloodshed and deep-seated mistrust
that preceded it, but also because of certain happenings,
some decisions and actions taken on the Island which
were-to say the least-of a disquieting nature. I am afraid
that such developments cannot be construed as contributing to the process of confidence-building in the mutual
relations of the two communities.

35. The events referred to in the report are good and
encouraging examples of the need for mutually considerate
and understanding attitudes on the part of both communities towards each other, and also clearly demonstrate how
much more could be achieved in the near future through
the adherence to such auspicious attitudes.

41. It is not my intention to dwell upon them at length,
However, let me point out that some of them can be found
in the report. As examples I cite paragraphs 20,32,50, 58,
59 and 64. Among them a bill entitled “The National
Guard (Special Orders) Law of 1969”, empowering the
Minister of the Interior to organize a special task force of
the National Guard to assist the police in dealing with the
domestic security situation-as cited in paragraph 20 of the
report-has been passed by the Greek members of the
House of Representatives since the publication of the
Secretary-General’s report. This action brought on a strong
protest by the Turkish community, not only because it was
a violation of the basic articles of the Constitution, but also
becauseit wasa measure likely to increase tension. I think
that in addition to its being a violation of the Constitution,
the serious nature of using military units for police duties,
and its self-evident repercussions on the Turkish community’s security, requires no comment. However, I am
gratified to learn-before I came to this meeting of the
Security Council-through the press reports that Archbishop Makarios, who gave an interview to a Greek
newspaperman, said that this law would possibly not be put
into force.

36. Speaking of the continuing ‘calm and improving
atmosphere in Cyprus, let me say in the same breath how
deepIy we are indebted to, and conscious of, the unceasing
vigilance, understanding and efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, U Thant. We indeed owe much to him and to his
immediate collaborators here at Headquarters as well as in
the field in Cyprus, and to the United Nations Force in
Cyprus. I should like to mention with deep appreciation the
patient, untiring and devoted efforts of the UnderSecretaries-General Dr. Ralph Bunche and Mr. RolzBennett; as well as those of Mr. Osorio-Tafall, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and General
Martola, Commander of the Force. As General Martola is
leaving his command soon, let me say how much my
Government appreciated his services, which were rendered
with great devotion, and the highest sense of duty and
competence. Wishing him well for the years ahead, I want
to assure him that he will be remembered with gratitude by
all concerned.

42. As regards certain statements made by the Greek
Cypriot leaders, I have to mention with regret that there
have been certain recent public statements which could
hardly be considered compatible with the efforts undertaken during the last two years, that is, since 1967, and
especially during the intercommunal talks. Such statements
openly reverted to the theme of enosis.

37. My Government extends its full co-operation, whenever required, to the efforts of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force, and considers its continued existence
and effective operations vitally important for the maintenance of calm and peace, and for the establishment of
conditions that will make possible the complete return to
normal life in Cyprus.

43. But, as I have already stated, I do not wish to
elaborate on those statements because my delegation does
not intend to get involved in an unnecessary argument, and
also because among the promising developments of the last
six months there have been some constructive statements
and helpful press comments which I should like to mention
with satisfaction. I believe that we should all be well
advised to concentrate on those positive developments and
encourage them with all the means at our disposal.

38. The Turkish community also attaches the highest
importance to the maintenanoe of full co-operation with
the Force. My delegation is gratified to note from the
report of the Secretary-General, in paragraphs 16 and 30,
that close liaison and good working relations at all levels
have been maintained between the Turkish Cypriot leadership and the Force,

44, The few examples that I have mentioned point to the
inherent difficulties which exist in the pursuit of normalization and which remind us how much patience, goodwill,
understanding and realism will be necessary if the process
of confidence-building-and, thereby, a complete return to
normal life-is to be achieved. I shall even go further and
say that a spirit of generosity and magnanimity will he
required in order to facilitate and accelerate this vital
process.

39. While speaking about the peace-keeping operations in
Cyprus and the vital role played by the Force in this field, I
should like to emphasize once again the full appreciation of
my Government to the contributing countries without
whose help in manpower and funds the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force could not fulfil its task.
40. In spite of some positive developments in the relations
of the two communities, which I have briefly touched
upon, the balance sheet of the past six months regrettably
leaves much to be desired; not only because the work and
the phase of normalization moves slowly and cautiously,

45. As a point at hand on this subject-which Ambassador
Rossides touched upon a little while ago-1 should like very
briefly to refer to the matter of freedom of movement,
4

mentioned in paragraphs 54 and 56 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, and say that the rather limited response of
the Turkish Cypriots in this matter should be viewed within
the foregoing context, and their reservations should be
considered with the proper understanding. Indeed, the
Turkish community’s minimum requirements of security
should not be summarily labelled by the other party as an
uncooperative attitude and its viewpoints, as referred to in
paragraph 55 of the report, should not be ignored.

have a successful outcome, since the future of Cyprus
closely depends on complete agreement between the two
elements of the Island and on their fair and balanced
participation in all the activities of an independent State.
“To this end, the two communities must display
understanding and tolerance towards one another in order
to prepare the basis for an administration of the State of
Cyprus that would be founded on mutual respect for
their separate identities as national communities. If one
of the parties should develop the illusion that it had a
monopoly of wisdom and reason and expect the other
party to make all the concessions, it must be recognized”
-my Foreign Minister said-“that such a state of mind is
not conducive to achieving a solution”3

46. I think that the suggestion contained in paragraph 56
of the report as to exploring some means “of a pragmatic
nature” could be given consideration by the parties.
47’. On the subject of normalization, we should also recall
that the Turkish Cypriots are still deprived of certain basic
benefits and rights to which they are entitled as citizens of
the Republic of Cyprus, although there have been many
encouraging developments, as is stated in the SecretaryGlaneral’s report and to which Ambassador Rossides also
referred, and I agree that this reality should be borne in
mind when considering this problem.

51. My Government attaches the ,greatest importance to
the intercommunal talks and desires that they should be
successfully concluded as expeditiously as possible. We
believe that the tragic events of the past, which stand out as
a grim reminder, should cause all concerned to intensify
their efforts with renewed determination towards a peaceful and just settlement.

413. My Government’s position in regard to the intercommunal talks is well known, and the Turkish Government continues to give every encouragement and every
possible assistance to the continuation and successful
outcome of these exploratory talks. On this subject, I shall
now quote from paragraph 65 of the report of the
Secretary-General:

52. The PRESIDENT:
of Greece,

I now call upon the representative

53. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (trunslated from French): In
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus in June, the Security Council acted in accordance
with the wish expressed by the representatives of Cyprus,
Turkey and Greece. The three of u,s agreed that the
presence of the Force was useful and made an enormous
contribution to the maintenance of calm and the progressive establishment of order in Cyprus. We realized that, if
the talks then under way between the two segments of the
population were to have any chance of success, this would
occur only in an atmosphere of peace and internal
tranquillity, for which an essential factor is the pacifying
influence of the United Nations Force. Today these
observations are still valid and have just been repeated by
my colleagues from Cyprus and Turkey. I therefore
associate myself with them and assure you that the
Government of Greece is also convinced that the presence
of the Force is necessary in the present circumstances, and I
should like to express the hope that the Security Council
will extend the mandate within the limits of resolution
186 (1964) of 4 March 1964.

“On 23 October Prime Minister Demirel of Turkey,
following his party’s victory at the elections, stressed that
his country wanted to solve the Cyprus problem through
peaceful means, and expressed the hope that the current
intercommunal talks would lead to a positive result. He
felt that no time-limit should be set, and, pointing out
that peace and mutual understanding prevailed in the
Island, emphasized that this was a gratifying development. His Foreign Minister, Mr. Caglayangil, after meeting
with Greek Foreign Minister Pipinellis in the beginning of
October, had expressed similar thoughts, stressing the
necessity and usefulness of continuing the intercommunal
talks.”
4.9. We believe that the talks, at the stage now reached,
provide a basis for the two communities to make further
c:oncrete moves, enabling them to agree on a democratic
constitutional scheme which would in turn pave the way to
a peaceful, just and honourable settlement among all the
parties concerned. To achieve this, we believe that the two
sides-not one side alone-should make further sincere and
sustained efforts in a spirit of reciprocal accommodation
and of give and take.

54. In so doing, I feel bound to add that we are more than
ever convinced that the two parties in Cyprus must
intensify their efforts to ensure that the talks they are
holding will lead to useful results. In the past, I have had
occasion to assure the Council that we on the Greek side
consider the time factor important, and we maintain this
opinion, We accordingly note with satisfaction the resump
tion on the first of this month of the talks between
Mr. Clerides and Mr, Denktash, and we cannot but praise
their determination to continue their task despite the
difficulties which they inevitably encounter.

SO. On this point, with your permission, Mr. President, I
ishall quote from the address of my Foreign Minister at the
,twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly :
“More than a year has elapsed since the beginning of
talks between the two communities of Cyprus. The
purpose of these talks is to seek out and explore the basis
for a return to normal conditions and to constitutional
order in the Island. We believe that this dialogue should

55. Encouraging indications also come from another
source. I am referring to the report of the Secretary-General
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1772nd meeting, paras. 185 and 186.

5

which was distributed on 3 December. After a thorough
analysis of the situation as it has evolved and as it is today,
U Thant ends by saying that he remains convinced that the
Cyprus problem can be settled peacefully if the conflicting
parties have the will and the determination to achieve
agreement.
56. It can, I think, be affirmed without exaggeration, that
this will and determination to settle the problem peacefully
is present’ among all the parties, The Secretary-General’s
report records a number of statements to this effect which,
without minimizing the complexity of the problem, show
the will which exists on both sides to resolve their
difficulties peacefully. The statements from the Turkish
side were particularly noteworthy. For my part, may I
repeat the statement recently made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Greece, Mr. Pipinellis, who said that with
goodwill, patience and continued efforts, the existing
difficulties in the search for a viable solution serving the
interest of the Cypriot people as a whole could be
overcome.

60. Mr. MENDELEVICH
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The position of the
Soviet delegation on the question of Cyprus is well known.
It has been repeatedly set forth in declarations by the
Soviet Government and statements made by its representatives, inter alia, in the Security Council. Regarding this
latest discussion of the question of Cyprus in the Council,
the Soviet delegation deems it necessary to confirm that
that position retains its full validity and significance,
61. The Soviet Union continues to believe that the
question of Cyprus can and should be settled by peaceful
means, in the interest of the entire Cypriot people of both
its constituent national committees. The Soviet Union is
firmly in favour of supporting the struggle of Cypriots for
the full independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of their homeland, the Republic of Cyprus, which, as a
full-fledged State Member of the United Nations, is carrying
on a policy of peace and non-alignment with military blocs.
62. Settlement of the domestic affairs of the Republic of
Cyprus is the business of the Cypriots themselves; they
should settle their domestic affairs themselves without
outside interference. The lawful rights of the Greek and
Turkish communities in Cyprus should be fuhy respected
by everyone.

57. The major crisis of December 1963 and the events
which followed are factors which still weigh on the daily
lives of the inhabitants of Cyprus and create inconveniences
for both sides. This observation emerges clearly from a
reading of the report. It nevertheless seems to us that while
awaiting a general settlement to come from the negotiations
already under way, partial arrangements could be made to
render life easier for all. Thus we believe, like the
Secretary-General, that much remains to be done in respect
of deconfrontation, and particularly in respect of freedom
of movement. We think that the representatives of the
United Nations in Cyprus have reason to believe that the
measures taken to this end will contribute to a greater
improvement in the political atmosphere and facilitate the
talks at Nicosia. In approaching the question from another
point of view, the Secretariat Survey Team arrives at the
same conclusion. 1 refer to its report which appears as
annex I to document S/9521, which indicates that such
measures are necessary, among others, to make possible a
further over-all reduction of the strength of the Force, and
consequently a reduction in the expenditures entailed by its
maintenance at the present level.

63. The Soviet Union is strongly opposed to any attempt
to encroach upon the sovereignty of the Republic of
Cyprus and to intentions, so far as we are aware not
altogether unknown to certain States, to try to solve the
question of Cyprus behind the backs of the Cypriot people,
to the detriment of their vital interests and the advantage of
the imperialist aims of certain Powers belonging to the
military bloc of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The Security Council and the United Nations as a whole
must decisively resist any attempts, intentions or efforts to
subordinate the fate of the people of Cyprus to the
interests of the military plans of that bloc in the Mediterranean basin and the adjacent region of the Middle East.
64. That approach on the part of the Soviet Union on the
question of Cyprus flows from the general course of Soviet
foreign policy as laid down by the great founder of our
State, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, the centenary of whose birth
will soon be celebrated by all mankind. From the first days
of its existence the Soviet State, in accordance with Lenin’s
directions, has pursued a policy of peace and friendship
among peoples and has firmly and consistently spoken out
against the enslavement and oppression of peoples. To this
day the Soviet Union remains a convinced supporter of the
elimination of the vestiges of colonialism in all its manifestations everywhere, in all parts of the world where
colonialism has not yet been totally eradicated.

58. We are well aware of the financial difficulties which
the Secretary-General will continue to face if the Council
renews, as we hope it will, the mandate of the Force. T$at
is why we should like to assure him that, although this is a
heavy burden for Greece, it will maintain its contribution
to the costs of the Force at the same level as in the past. It
is my pleasant duty to reiterate to the Secretary-General
our gratitude for his invaluable contribution to the pacification of Cyprus. We should also like to express our deep
appreciation to those who work with him, both here and in
Geneva, as well as in the field in Cyprus. In this connexion,
I should like to add that we regret the departure of General
Martola. He was impeccable in the discharge of his duties,
and proved to be competent and impartial. He fulfilled his
mission with honour and deserved the confidence which we
all placed in him from the beginning of his term of office.

65. The Soviet delegation cannot but draw attention to
the information contained in the report of the Secretary
General that talks are now going on in Cyprus between
representatives of the Greek and Turkish communities
aimed at settling outstanding problems in their relations.
We regard these talks as within the domestic affairs of the
Republic of Cyprus. We sincerely look forward to the early
successof these intercommunal talks, since only by means
of such talks on the basis of mutual understanding and

59. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the Soviet Union who has asked for the
floor to make a statement before the voting.
6

goodwill will it be possible to create conditions ensuring a
peaceful life and security for all Cypriots, both Greek and
Turkish. At the same time, we think we should point to the
obvious validity of the Secretary-General’s observation in
his report that “the passage of too much time might
h.amper rather than facilitate the settlement” [S/9521,

4 March 1964, namely, that the present functions of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus shall be maintained and
that the existing procedure for its financing shall remain on
a voluntary basis.
71. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers on
my list of representatives who expressed the desire to speak
before the voting. If no other representatives ask for the
floor at this time, the Council will now proceed to vote on
the revised draft resolution contained in document
S/9SSO/Rev.l.

Fura. 75/.

66. The Soviet delegation also considers it necessary to
emphasize once again its deep conviction that, in order to
ensure the complete independence and integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus, all foreign troops should be withdrawn
from its territory and the foreign military bases situated
there eliminated.

72. There are no further speakers. Accordingly, I shall put
to the vote the revised draft resolution.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

67. The Soviet delegation would also like to emphasize
more particularly that, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, all States Members
of the United Nations should refrain from any action likely
to worsen the situation in Cyprus, and that, of course,
#appliesto all States of the world as well.

The draft ri?SolutiOn

was

adopted unanimous@.4

73. The PRESIDENT: Several representatives have asked
for the floor to speak in explanation of vote after the
voting. I shall call upon them in the order in which they
signified their desire to speak.

68. Today the Security Council has before it the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in
Cyprus for the period 3 June 1969 to 1 December 1969,
containing his recommendation that the stationing of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus should be extended for an
additional period of six months.

74. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): In speaking after
the unanimous vote today, I wish first of all to expressmy
admiration for the report which the Secretary-General has
presented to us. In this and other matters we are apt to take
for granted the fact that we can expect a lead from the
Secretary-General. When he reports to us, he rightly and
necessarily speaks in words most carefully weighed. He
speaks with a restraint which gives to his comments and
recommendations additional force, At the same time, he
does not hesitate to state the facts, even when to some they
may be unwelcome or unpalatable. There is a fairness,
firmness and steadiness about his words which carry
conviction and command the greatest respect.

69. In this connexion we must draw attention to the fact
that almost six years have now elapsed since the United
Nations Force first appeared in Cyprus. Such a lengthy stay
of the United Nations Force in Cyprus cannot be accepted
as normal. Although the Soviet delegation is not now
raising the question of their recall from Cyprus, given the
position of the interested parties and, primarily, of the
Government of the Republic of Cyprus, it does consider it
necessary to stress that this United Nations peace-keeping
operation cannot continue indefinitely. By its very nature
the stationing of foreign troops, even United Nations
troops, in the territory of an independent and sovereign
State can be only an extraordinary measure, which should
be stopped at the first opportunity. The Soviet delegation
expressesthe hope that such an opportunity will arise not
later than at the time of the exljiry of this latest six-month
extension of the stationing of United Nations troops in
Cyprus.

75. The report which was presented to us on 3 December
is an excellent example of the invaluable contribution
which the Secretary-Genera1 can make to our deliberations
in the Councils and committees of the United Nations.
What he has said in the report makes it almost unnecessary
to make substantial speecheshere in the Council, since the
report itself speaks to the people of Cyprus and to the
Governments primarily concerned in maintaining peace in
the Island in a way which we in this Council could not
better. In saying that, 1 am sure that I should associate with
our gratitude for the report before us the contribution
which has been made, and is being made, by Ambassador
Osorio-Tafall. We know how well he is trusted by all
concerned. Our hopes for further improvement in the
situation in Cyprus are sustained by our knowledge that he
is there representing us all and maintaining constant,
friendly and constructive relations with all the leaders of
the Island.

70. So far as the draft resolution now before the Security
Council for consideration is concerned, the Soviet delegation deems it necessary to point out, first of all, that this
draft resolution, in connexion with the further six-month
extension of the stationing of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus, reaffirms the provisions of Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 and subsequent decisions
of the Security Council on the question of Cyprus. We
regard that as a key consideration in determining our
attitude to this draft resolution. The delegation of the
Soviet Union is authorized to declare that the Soviet Union
does not object to the extension of the stationing of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus for a further period of six
months, on the strict understanding that this extension will
be effected in full accordance with the provisions of the
above-mentioned resolution of the Security Council of

76. I also take this opportunity to express gratitude for
the report prepared on the Cyprus Force by the Secretariat
Survey Team [see S/9521, annex I].
77. We sometimes hear accusations of financial irresponsibility in the United Nations. There is indeed cause for
4 Seeresolution 274 (1969).
7

instincts and incentives. I believe that those instincts ana
incentives are well at work in Cyprus now.

concern on that ground. I think that some of the criticism
is justified, but it is directed not at the Fecretary-General
but at ourselves, the delegates. Sometimes we, the delegates, call on the Secretary-General to undertake tasks
without giving him the financial means to carry them out.
Too readily, we call for reports and conferences without
adequately considering the cost. But no charge of financial
irresponsibility can be brought against the Secietary
General.

83. For more than a hundred years the people of Cyprus
lived together in friendship. That did not mean that they
were all of the same outlook or religion or character. FQ
from it. The Greeks and the Turks have very different
characteristics, but they are both equally proud of their
traditions and their loyalties. They are both, I am sure
determined to maintain their own social and religieui
systems and beliefs. But they have shown before that their
differences need not be quarrels. They have lived together
for generations in amity in every town and in more than a
hundred villages in the Island. There is no reason why they
should not do so again.

78. Many of us have been greatly disturbed at the deficit
on the Cyprus operation. The Secretary-General has not
failed constantly to warn us of the dangers of allowing that
deficit to persist. But he has not been content merely to
bring the serious situation to our attention. He keeps the
financial situation constantly under close and exacting
review. Now he has followed this up by sending a surveying
team to Cyprus. The team carried out its task with
thoroughness and penetrating good sense. What they have
reported and recommended deservesrespectful and urgent
attention.

84. We already see the human need for reconciliation at
work, and we also see the urge for economic co-operation
so that the welcome prospect of increased prosperity can
extend to every village and every district in the Island, That
is the natural and healthy development which we witness
today; so it already appears from the Secretary-General’s
report. We must encourage and welcome equivalent action
in the political and military spheres.

79. Let me join with others in paying tribute to General
Martola, who is shortly to relinquish his command of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus. For three and a half years
he has commanded the Force with diligent, skilful and
confident authority. British troops have been proud to
serve under his distinguished command. He needs no praise
from us. I know that he regards it assufficient reward that
two years of peace have been won and maintained. During
the six months covered by the Secretary-General’s present
report, there has been no grave incident of intercommunal
disorder. That is the achievement and that is the reward of
the United Nations Force. It is a successfor which we are
all duly and deeply grateful.

8.5. We can do so confidently because we believe that all
concerned, including certainly the Governments of Greece
and Turkey, have deliberately and finally rejected any
intention of military imposition and any attempt to forcea
conclusion by military action, All have recognized that no
other settlement but a political settlement is possible.
86. We cannot review the situation in the Island without
urging that the Greek and Turkish communities in the
Island, and the Greek and Turkish Governments too, should
consequently, with due sense of opportunity and urgency,
now move at once to resolve the problems which are still
under discussion between Mr. Glavkos Clerides and
Mr. Raouf De&ash. We know that there could not be two
more able representatives and skilled negotiators. We pray
that they may be given the encouragement and the support
to find solutions to problems which have so far eluded all
attempts at settlement. The Secretary-General still has to
describe the situation in the Island as “unstable and
uncertain”, to use his words. May all concerned with the
negotiation remember the honoured English maxim:
“Magnanimity in politics is not seldom the truest wisdom.”

80. Let me go on to make a general comment on the
situation in Cyprus. In doing so, I should like to expressmy
admiration for the spirit of conciliation and co-operation
which has been shown in the speeches to which we have
listened this morning. I apply that description to the
speeches by the ambassadors of Cyprus, Turkey and
Greece, and I think I would also use the same words in
referring to the speech made by the representative of the
Soviet Union. I think I can say that, referring perhaps also
to one or two routine or irrelevant references. I speak of
conciliation and co-operation; I realize that that entails for
my distinguished colleague a considerable effort, and I
thank him for the speech he has made today.

87. My Government feels that it is entitled to join in
asking for a renewed and sustained effort to find solutions
for the outstanding problems by reason of the fact that We
have provided for six years the principal military contingent
for the Cyprus Peace-keeping Force, and we have also made
substantial annual voluntary contributions towards the cost
of the force.

81. In the light of the reports we have received, I see the
situation in Cyprus dominated by four factors. The four
factors are human, economic, political and military. The
first two-human and economic-are making for good
relations, for reconciliation and for peace. The other two
factors, political and military, could work the other
way-for separation and segregation and the perpetuation
of dispute and division.

88. I am glad today to be able to announce that we Will
maintain our contingent in the Cyprus Force for the period
of six months. We shall meet all its costs. During the SIX
years of the existence of the Force we have contributed Lf”
amount of altogether $36 million, just over $12 million In
troop costs and nearly $24 million in voluntary financial
contributions. The voluntary contribution we shafl mabe
for the forthcoming period of six months remains at the

82. Political and military barriers can be formidable
indeed, but I believe that the longing of the ordinary people
to be enabled to earn their living quietly and in peace and
equality, and even more the yearning to live together in
mutual understanding, respect and affection, are powerful
8

figure which we have provided for the six months now
coming to an end. Our voluntary contribution for the new
period will be $625,000.

the United Nations Force might incite the parties to reject
the concessions which are indispensable for the successof
the talks.“[1474th meeting, para. 106.1

89. The money we have contributed has been well spent
to buy time and peace. It would be wasted if it were
e)rpended to support delay in negotiation or postponement
of al settlement. We would not wish to waste it. Indeed we
would not agree to waste it.
90. It is with those thoughts in mind that my Government
ConXS forward, as we have done regularly and promptly
before, to make our practical peace-keeping pledge.

96. The financial difficulties entailed in this peace-keeping
operation are once again recalled in the report submitted
for our consideration. In this connexion the suggestions of
the Secretariat Survey Team substantially to reduce the
maintenance costs of the Force have been of particular
interest to us. We can only give our support to the
implementation of these recommendations provided that
the Secretary-General and the parties concerned deem that
possible, as we hope will be the case.

41. Mr. BIZRARD (France) (translated from French): The
Security Council has just adopted a resolution to extend for
a further period of six months the mandate of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus. I should like to explain briefly the
vote of my delegation in favour of the resolution which we
wore happy to seewasadopted unanimously.

97. Once again, the delegation of France has assented to
the extension of the stationing of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus. However, our Council must not lose sight of the
possibility of putting an end to the mandate of the Force if,
as we hope, the situation in Cyprus continues to improve,
which all of the delegations most sincerely hope for.

92. In his report, which deserves the highest praise, the
Secretary-General indicates, as he had already done in June
of this year, that the improvement in the situation in
Cyprus has been maintained. He mentions in particular that
“the atmosphere of mutual restraint and the prevailing
quiet have helped to create a climate of progressively better
understanding between Greek and Turkish Cypriots”
f S/9521, para. 731. Thus, despite certain isolated incidents,
progress towards a return to normal conditions on the
Island has fortunately been confirmed in the period that
hals elapsed, My delegation can but welcome the encourag$ing prospects offered by such an atmosphere of confidence,

98. Finally, in closing I should like to pay a special tribute
to the eminent services rendered by General Martola as the
Commander of the United Nations Force in Cyprus when
he is about to go into well-deserved retirement.
99. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): The
Council has once again voted unanimously to continue the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, this time
until 15 June 1970. This is evidence, I think, not only of
the conviction of all of us that the presence of the Force is
important to the continuance of the present relative quiet
on the Island and conducive to further progress to a
permanent solution, but also, I am sure, of our recognition
of the effective way in which the United Nations Force in
Cyprus has continued to carry out its mandate. No small
credit in this latter connexion is due to the fine performance of the Force Commander, General Martola, who has
served the United Nations and the cause of peace so well
for three and a half years in Cyprus, As he leaves his
position at his own request, we join with others in
extending our grateful thanks and bidding him Godspeed.

913. It is nevertheless regrettable to have to note, once
algain, that despite this progress we see no solution to the
fundamental problems which arise between the two comrrrunities. It is to be feared that this immobility will lead
not to new concessions but to a hardening of the
confljcting positions. With our Secretary-General, we express the fervent hope that the representatives of the two
parties to the conflict will exert every necessaryeffort so
tlhat the negotiations which have been started may lead to a
sinal agreement,

100. We have before us today a particularly interesting
and useful report from the SecretaryGeneral. That portion
of it reviewing developments in Cyprus of concern to the
United Nations is in many respects encouraging. The
indications of greater contacts between the Greek and
Turkish communities and of improvements in such fields as
agriculture, economic activities, and public servicesgive rise
to hope that the periods of pronounced tension and
instability which we all recall are in the past and will remain
there. We regret that comparable progress was not possible
in the areas of freedom of movement and deconfrontation
and we support the continuing efforts to resolve the
problems in these spheres.

94. In the meantime, it seems to us that any measure of
military disengagement on both sides would limit the zones
of confrontation and favour a return to a situation of
lasting peace on the Island. Peace is what Greek Cypriots
and Turkish Cypriots at all levels of the population, and
mainly at the level of the two negotiators who are
responsible for the success of the intercommunal talks,
must determinedly strive for.
95. As the French delegation emphasized here in June
1969 when we renewed the mandate of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus, and I apologize for quoting myself, “the
[Security]
Council cannot perpetuate a provisional arrangement which circumstances may have imposed five years
ago, but which is all too likely to become a pretext for
further delaying a final settlement of the Cyprus problem.
Apart from the heavy financial implications of the operation, there is a risk that a routine renewal of the mandate of

101. We also welcome the fact that the intercommunal
talks are continuing and that both sides evince a desire to
pursue them in a constructive manner. We should be less
than frank, however, if we did not register some concern at
the very slow pace of the talks. While fully recognizing that
rapid and easy progress toward agreement on issues of
major significance and of long-standing duration cannot be
9

activity. I therefore once again urge every Member State,
and particularly those with special responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, as well as
the three Governments most directly involved, to reexamine their positions and to contribute as generously as
possible to the support of the Force.

expected, we had hoped that a broader area of agreement
would have been achieved by this time than apparently is
the case. We urge both participants in the talks, and the
communities for which they speak, to maintain attitudes of
compromise and accommodation. We urge them to examine
their positions and all proposals presented with a view to
what will in the long term be best for the people of Cyprus
as a whole rather than what may seem to strengthen in the
short run the hand of one community or the other, or to
give one or the other a temporary advantage.

106. I also second the suggestion of the survey team that
the Secretary-General consider approaching Member States
“with a view to securing from them contributions or
increases in their former contributions to UNFICYP”
[S/9.521, annex I, para. 581. The fact that only 23 Governments have made pledges in connexion with extensions of
the Force since June 1968 is indeed disturbing.

102. My Government has been pleased to note that the
Greek and Turkish Cypriot negotiators., Mr. Clerides and
Mr. De&ash, have, in fact, throughout the talks, taken a
broad and positive view of their role. We are confident that
they will continue in this manner. as they persist in their
efforts on which so much depends. We are also sure that the
Secretary-General’s able personal representative, Mr. OsorioTafall, will continue to give all possible assistance to the
parties and provide whatever good offices they find useful.

V
1

107. The suggestions outlined by the survey team on ways
in which the Force might be reconstituted or reorganized so
as to enable it to continue effectively to carry out its
assigned task at somewhat less cost deserve, in the view of
my Government, the most serious and careful consideration. Hopefully, any decision on reorganization of forces
could be taken prior to the next troop rotation in March
1970. We would also hope that other suggestions could lead
to prompt actions that would result in significant savings,

103. If the conduct of the intercommunal negotiations is
largely in the hands of those directly involved, there is one
situation on which every Member of the United Nations has
it in its power to have a direct effect. I refer to the financial
situation of the Force, The Secretary-General has again
called our attention to the unsatisfactory situation that
exists and I can only reiterate that my Government fully
shares the concern he has expressed. On this point, we
should like to express our approval of the step taken by the
Secretary-General in appointing the Secretariat Survey
Team to review systematically and thoroughly the financing
of the Force. The team’s report, annexed to that of the
Secretary-General, testifies to the comprehensive review
that the three Secretariat officials assigned this important
task carried out.

108. My Government expects to maintain its support for
the Force during the next period of its life, but it, along
with others participating in this effort, will welcome any il
measures that can be taken to reduce the burden while
maintaining the capacity of the Force to fulfil its mandate.
We note in this connexion that the Secretary-General finds
generally sound the survey team’s suggestions on steps to
achieve savings without impairing the effectiveness of the
Force. We, too, believe that steps along the lines of a
number of those suggested may well be feasible. Perhaps
the Secretary-General will have occasion to report to US
during the ensuing mandate period on developments in this
connexion, as well as any other significant events with
regard to Cyprus which are of concern to us.

104. The report submitted by the survey team obviously
requires careful study; study to be followed by consultations among the parties, the troop and financial contributors, the Secretary-General and other United Nations
officials who are directly involved in operations of the
Force, including the Secretary-General’s representative in
Cyprus and the Force Commander. I do not wish to
comment in detail on the various ideas presented before
there has been sufficient opportunity for such study and
consultation. I should like, however, to clarify one point of
particular concern to my Government.

109. In closing, may I once again expressthe appreciation
of my Government to the Secretary-General and his staff
for the useful report that has been given us, and to the
United Nations Force in Cyprus, including its Commander,
and the Secretary-General’s Personal Representative for
their devoted service. They deserve the full support of all
of us.
110. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): The Secretary-General
states in his report, which is as always lucid and comprehensive, that the situation in Cyprus has remained generally
calm and has continued to develop in a favourable
direction. No major incidents have occurred during the
period under review. In fact, there has been some modest
advance towards normal conditions of life on the Island.
Yet it must be recognized that for the past six months since
the Security Council last considered the matter, no substantive progress has been made on the basic issues which
separate the two communities in Cyprus. This is a matter
for profound disappointment.

105. It has long been the position of the United States
that a multilateral peace-keeping operation such as that in
Cyprus should not be too heavily dependent on any one
Member State. We continue to hold that view and for that
reason continue to believe that a United States contribution
of approximately 40 per cent of the total costs to the
United Nations of the Force in Cyprus is appropriate, and
that the remainder should be met by the other more than
125 Members of the United Nations family of nations.
Moreover, the condition that has been attached to the
United States pledge is not simply a limitation. It is
designed largely to encourage others to make contributions.
It is a maximum pledge, the full value of which can be
realized through co-operation of other members in supporting in tangible fashion this important United Nations

1II. We are, of course, aware of the complexity of the
issues involved in the intercommunal talks, and do net
underestimate the difficulties in the way of a solution, but
10

j
il

I

L

now even the momentum towards a negotiated solution
seems to have come to a standstill. Thus the warning given
by the Secretary-General that the passageof too much time
might hamper rather than facilitate a settlement remains
valid.

countrY and in the service of the United Nations. My
delegation has taken great satisfaction from the many
tributes paid to him by the Secretary-General and by
representatives around this table. It will give me great
Pleasure to report these tributes to my Government.

I1 2. While the basic problems of Cyprus remain unsolved,
the Secretary-General has had no choice but to suggest a
further extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus, the presence of which in a large measure
has been the guarantee for continued tranquillity on the
Island and a prerequisite for any prospect of progress in the
intercommunal talks.

ll9, Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): After listening to the
enlightening statements at the initial stage of our meeting
by the representatives of the interested parties, and after
bating carefuny studied the competent report submitted by
the Secretary-General, the Hungarian delegation confines
itself only to emphasizing a few basic points regarding the
question of Cyprus.

113. Since the Security Council has now decided to
extend the mandate of the Force, I am authorized to state
that Finland is prepared to maintain a contingent with the
Force for the next period, under the same arrangements as
before. Finland is also prepared to continue voluntary
financial contributions for the maintenance of the force on
,the Island. We do so in the expectation that the two parties
,most directly concerned make a major effort to break the
present deadlock, in order to find a peaceful solution to the
problem and bring this peace-keeping operation to a
successfulconclusion as soon as possible,

120. We regard the problem of Cyprus asan internal affair
of the people of Cyprus which consequently should be
solved exclusively by themselves by peaceful means and
without any outside interference on the basis of the
principles of national sovereignty, self-determination and
territorial integrity. That is why we welcomed the cornmencement of the intercommunal talks which we regarded,
and still regard, as a good instrument for arriving at a
solution acceptable to the parties involved. We learnt,
however, with regret that these talks have been interrupted
for a long period resulting in further delay in arriving at a
conclusive settlement of the dispute.

114. With regard to the manner in which the Force is
being financed, I feel bound to reiterate my Government’s
view that reliance on voluntary contributions from a
relatively small number of Member States is unsatisfactory.
We firmly hold the view that peace-keeping operations
based on decisions that the Security Council has taken on
behalf of all Member States should be paid for by all.

121. The facts have clearly shown that such talks have
produced a better atmosphere in Cyprus. Their continuation, therefore, is a matter of the utmost importance and
urgency. Thus, we can hardly be satisfied with the very
moderate, almost staggering, pace of progress, the less SO
because the situation, as we have learned from the report of
the Secretary-General, “remains basically unstable and
uncertain”.

115. My delegation fully concurs with the views expressed
by the Secretary-General, that the solution of this problem
can be achieved only by devising a more adequate method
of financing, or by a substantial increase in voluntary
contributions, both as regards the level of contributions and
the number of contributing countries.

122. Under those circumstances, where the Secretary
General saw no reasonable alternative but to recommend a
further extension of the stationing of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus, we cannot but share his hope that “the
parties will find it possible to exert a determined effort to
expedite the progress of the talks and achieve agreement On
substantive issues”.

116. My delegation also wishes to draw attention to the
very valuable and thorough work that has been carried out
by the Secretariat Survey Team. The team has made some
specific proposals regarding the reorganization of the Force
in order to reduce its cost& These proposals concern the
Finnish as well as the Swedish and Danish contingents and
we note that the Secretary-General has indicated his
intention to consult with the Governments concerned in
putting these proposals into effect.

123. Regarding the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus, my delegation did not
object
to the relevant recommendation, with the usual
understanding that the extension is based entirely on the
provisions of Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964, including the provisions Concerting
the
financing of the United Nations Force in Cyprus.

117. Let me conclude by commending, on behalf of mY
Government, all those who have worked and continue to
work for a peaceful settlement in Cyprus. Nearly six Years
of patient and persistent efforts, in which the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus has played a vital
role, has resulted in a great improvement in the situation in
Cyprus.

124. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names on my
list of speakers who wish to explain their vote after the
vote, and with the permission of the Council, I shall make a
brief statement in my capacity of representative of
ZAMBIA.

118. We, in Finland, take great pride in the fact that for
the past three and a half years the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus has had a Finnish Cornmander. General Martola is now about to retire after a long
and most distinguished career in the service of his own

fouowed the developments in Cyprus. We are gratified to
note from the excellent report of our Secretary-General,
U Tbant, contained in document S/9521 of 3 December
1969, that the situation in Cyprus has continued to
improve since his last report.

125. In a century marked by incessant conflict, the cry for
peace is almost universal. My Government has very closely

I1

126. We welcome the general calm that has characterized
the period under review, noting in particular that there have
been no major breaches of the cease-fire and that those
directly involved in this problem have continued to exercise
restraint and have shown a desire for peace and stability in
the Island.

135. The first is that Cyprus is an independent State, a
Member of the United Nations with full sovereignty and
that it is entitled to and should have complete independence and territorial integrity without outside intervention.
That is the first premise, and we are grateful to those who
mentioned it.

127. It is our firm conviction, however, that the United
Nations cannot indefinitely continue extending the
presence of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus without the necessaryfunds. It is also clear that the
parties directly concerned must with a sense of great
urgency move with deliberate speed to make progress
towards resolving the basic problems dividing the two
Cypriot communities.

136. The second is the need for conciliation, unity and
co-operation among the people of Cyprus, particularly in
their own problems which are matters of their own internal
affairs, and which should be solved between them in an
amicable way. Considering that the Greek and Turkish
people of Cyprus have lived over the ages, over the
generations, in friendliness, peace and amity, asthe United
Kingdom representative, Lord Caradon, has just pointed
out, there is no reason why they should not return to that
friendliness, that peace, amity and co-operation, in a
unitary State as a united people, and we hope that will
come about. In spite of little differences that may appear,
and it is natural that they should appear in the process of
reconciliation, the broad picture that we can see, as the
representative of France has pointed out, is that of
continuing progress, continuing amelioration and continuing conciliation, and this is really the basis of the
solution of the problem. Therefore, a little time is required,
and by time much will be gained in the right direction,
because the problem cannot be solved in any sense of
division, It has to be solved, and there is no other way to
solve it than by conciliation, by unity, and I believe this
will be achieved.

128. Peace is dear, and it therefore goes without saying
that it has to be paid for. In keeping with our policy of pay
as you talk, I have been authorized by my Government to
pledge a further sum of $10,000 as its humble voluntary
contribution to the causeof peace in Cyprus. We shall make
the necessary administrative arrangements to make these
funds available to the Secretary-General as soon as possible.
129. May I take this opportunity to thank those Governments that have made generous voluntary contributions in
support of the United Nations peace-keeping efforts.
130. To those with contingents in Cyprus, we pay tribute.
To the leaders of the parties directly involved, we have the
following to say: “Continue to be of goodwill and never be
accused of being wanting in statesmanship.” To the
Secretary-General and his staff, to the Special Representative, the Commander of the Force, the officers and men, as
well as the civilian staff, we pay a tribute in the following
words, to borrow a phrase used by a well-known Englishman, the late Sir Winston Churchill: “Never in the history
of mankind has so much been owed by so many to SO few.”

137. I also wish to thank my colleague, the representative
of Turkey, for his constructive statement and for the
willingness on the part of his Government to co-operate
towards the positive solution of the problem of Cyprus, I
should like, however, to refer to one or two points which
he mentioned, and to reply to them.
138. First he referred to the paragraphs in the report
which referred to the National Guard, and that a bill had
been introduced,in the House of Representatives to enable
part of the National Guard to be trained for use in casesof
emergency, when it had to go to the assistance of the
police. This is surely completely an internal matter, one on
which no discussion can take place here, the more so since,
as my colleague has said, the President of the Republic has
stated that the law is not going to be used, but that it will
be there in case of need. That disposes of that question.

131. By supporting the draft resolution which has just
been adopted unanimously, extending the stationing in
Cyprus of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force for yet
another period of six months, it is our expectation that by
the expiry of that period sufficient progress towards a final
solution will make possible the withdrawal or at least a*
substantial reduction of the Force,
132. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I call on the representative
of Cyprus, who has asked for the floor in order to exercise
his right of reply.

139. The next point mentioned by my distinguished
colleague from Turkey concerns statements made and
actions that have taken place. I believe he referred to
statements and actions that are not mentioned in the
report. Now with regard to those statements and actions, 1
would say that there are far more statements and actions
which have been of concern to my Government and about
which I have sent a letter to the Secretary-General on
1 December 1969. But we do not wish to enter into this
subject nor do we wish to comment on statements made in
Turkish newspaperspurporting to be coming from Turkish
Foreign Ministry sources, which refer to Turkish intervention in Cyprus, partition and so on. We do not want to refer
to those matters. I think they are extraneous to cur
discussion here; what we are concerned with is simply to

133. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): First, I should like to
thank the members of the Security Council for their
constructive statements on this problem. Also I wish to
extend our thanks to those who have declared their
contributions towards the upkeep of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus.
134. I particularly wish to thank those members of the
Security Council who have more substantively contributed
to this debate on the question of Cyprus by stating two
premises on which we are very much in accord and on
which we believe the problem of Cyprus rests.
12

see how we can help the situation and consider the report
of the Secretary-General.

to a unitary State. The whole question is how the unitary
State will be framed.

140. With regard to the talks, my distinguished friend
from Turkey said that concessions must come from both
sides. Surely, that is what we also say; it appears that each
side feels and thinks that the other side is not making any
concessions. He also referred to what was stated by his
Foreign Minister, Mr. Caglayangil, to that effect in the
general debate of the General Assembly, at its 1772nd
plenary meeting, namely, that concessionsmust come from
both sides. Equally, I can refer to what wassaid in reply, at
the 1780th plenary meeting, by my Foreign Minister,
Mr. Kyprianou, that he is in agreement, namely, that
concessions must come from both sides.

146. In this respect, I would consider it a rather auspicious
augury that three representatives who have worked for the
independence of Cyprus just happen to be, almost 10 years
later, around this table-Ambassador Rossides, Ambassador
Bitsios and myself. And I think that those who have
worked for the independence of Cyprus should not be
expected to speak against the independence of Cyprus. But
the problem is, really, that the independence of Cyprus
should be maintained and within the context of this
independence the two communities should have prosperous, good working relations, keep their identity and not
fear each other, This is the framework for which the two
leaders, Mr. Denktash and Mr. Clerides, are working.

141. May I, in a few words, explain why this phenomenon
exists-each side thinking that the other is not conceding. It
can be gauged by looking at paragraph 63 of the report
concerning the talks, which mentions what Mr. Clerides has
said and what Mr. Denktash has said. What emerges from
those statements and from the present discussion in the
Security Council, the broad picture that unfolds is very
clear: one side wants unity, the other side wants division.
Which of the two is the proper course? I leave it to the
members of the Security Council asMembers of the United
Nations to decide. But it is obvious that this is the real
difference.

147. I do not want to enter into the subject of the talks
because the talks are being carried on by the leaders of the
two communities, As I have said in my statement, my
Government encourages to the fullest possible extent the
continuance of these talks and hopes that they will succeed
in a very short time. In view of the difficult nature of the
problem, I think it is very impractical to expect a solution
in the very near future. But this is the attitude of my
Government: it encourages the talks and gives every
assistance so that these talks may be concluded success.
fully.

142. It is clear that we want a unitary State to be a truly
unitary State-not a divided one, So we cannot go beyond a
unitary State into divisions that would create partition OT
any other concepts which we cannot accept, which are not
workable and which are outside the agreed basis of the
negotiations. Therefore, the concessions that each side
expects from the other are these. the Turkish-Cypriot side
expects concessions to move the whole structure of the
State outside the framework of the unitary State. On the
other hand, the concession that the Greek-Cypriot side
expects is that the Turkish side should come within the
framework of the unitary State, That is the crux of the
problem.

148. As for my statement to the effect that the two sides
should really make concessions,that is true. But, again, this
is the problem: Ambassador Rossides thinks that the
Turkish community has not made enough concessions. The
situation’ as the Turkish community seesit is that they have
made enough concessions and they now expect concessions
from the Greek community. Since we are not going to
settle that problem here, I think it should be left to
Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash to find a way.
149. Another thing I should lie to say-and that I think
Ambassador Rossides would also be ready to accept-is that
when we worked for the independence of Cyprus 10 years
ago-in that work the United Kingdom, Lord Caradon’s
country, was of course just playing a role and the Turkish
community’s representatives were present-we did our best
to bring about, and to contribute to, the framing of an
independent State. I think that Ambassador Rossides will
recall that the Turkish representative at those talks in
London made many, many gestures of concession and
facilitated the happy, successfulconclusion of the work.

143. I hope that on this question, which is the real, the
cardinal, the basic question, accommodation will be found
within the concept of the unitary State, considering that
Mr. Denktash in his reply agrees that it should be a unitary
State. So I say this is a hopeful sign that we shall have an
accord-I hope so-in the not too distant future on which is
fundamentally and basically sound, namely, a solution
based on conciliation, co-operation and unity.

150. The question, as we see it, is the maintenance of
independence, and I think that in the treaties that brought
about the independence of Cyprus it was also prescribed
that there should be no union, no partition. There was a
balance between divisiveness and union. So, therefore, in
the search of the Turkish community to bring about
co-operation with the Greek community, I think that the
continuance of independence is very primordial, very
important; furthermore, the Turkish community’s desire to
have a secure and honourable life within the State of
Cyprus should not be considered as being divisive. I think
that the most difficult and dangerous point is another

144. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the representative of Turkey who wishesto speak in exercise of the right
of reply.
145. Mr. BAYULKEN (Turkey): It is not so much in the
exercise of the right of reply that I take the floor at this
very late stage-I am also thinking of the responsibilities I
shall be shouldering in about 20 minutes for an important
social event. I only wish to say that I would agree with
Ambassador Rossides when he says that goodwill is the
necessary thing. As regards his remarks on the unitary
State, the leader of the Turkish community did not object
13

,J:

.

divisiveness which may give away the independence of
Cyprus. These were the points I wanted to make.

through division. That is the fundamental premise on which
such a solution can be found.

151. I am very grateful to the members of the Security
Council who spoke so constructively about the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus. As I said, my Government believes sincerely that
the continuation of the Force is very necessary.

155. Whatever troubles we have had in Cyprus during the
last 10 years were due to the untoward and uncalled
for
division that has come about. Before that there was rr.0
trouble. That is the real basic premise, So, we both have the
in
same purpose, a life of security, peace and progress
Cyprus. I believe we shall achieve it, in accordance with
what the Charter prescribes under its principles, and under
the accepted pattern that a unitary State provides. That
is
the main point on which I should like to close the debate,
on a note of hopefulness that, with this discussion, we may
move forward, in the proper way, with the talks. In this
respect, I should like to mention that the question of union
does not enter into the talks. The difficulty about the talks
lies in the opposing positions between unity or division.
That is where the trouble lies-in Cyprus,

152. So far as the contributions are concerned, 1 should
like to say a few words, especially as some members just
referred to this fact. As is seen in the report, Turkey ranks
in fifth place among the contributors. In fairness, however,
I think it should be also remembered that since 1963 the
Turkish Government has supplied the Turkish community,
for their survival, with about f6’to 2.7 million annually. I
hope that when the question of contributions is being
considered this part of the Turkish contribution might also
be kept in mind.

156. The PRESIDENT: The list of speakers is now
exhausted. Before I adjourn the meeting, I should like to
announce that the Council’s next meeting is scheduled
to
take place on Monday, 15 December 1969, at 3 p.m.,
to
begin consideration of the complaint submitted by Guinea
and contained in document S/9528 of 4 December 1969.

153. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Cyprus who wishesto speak in exercise of right of reply.
154. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I shall be very brief.
Having listened to what my colleague from Turkey said, I
want to assure him that the security of the Turkish
Cypriots will be found through co-operation and unity, not

The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

0.50

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)
