UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2261”

MEETING:

19 DECEMBER

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/226 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda ,...............................................

1

The question of South Africa:
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 473 (1980) (S/14167 and Add. 1);
Report of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421
(1977) concerning the question of South Africa on ways and means of
making the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more effective
(S/14179) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

“.

-_-- .-

,

--

SlPV.2261.

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined’with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2261st MEETING
Held in New York in Friday, 19 December 1980, at 5 p.m.
Mr. Donald F. McHENRY
(United States of America).

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2261)

1. Adoption of the agenda

2. The question of South Africa:
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 473
(1980) (8114167 and Add.1);
Report of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the question of South Africa on ways
and means of making the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa more effective
(S/14179)
The meeting

intractable problems to have faced our Organization
for many years, namely, the situation in theRepublic
of South Africa and the dangerous policies pursued by
the Government of that country, both domestically
and internationally. It is an honour for me to address
the Council in my capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established by resolution 421
(1977) in order to introduce the report of the Committee, submitted in accordance with paragraph 11 of
resolution 473 (1980).

was called to order at 5 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 473 (1980)
(S/14167 and Add.1);
Report of the Security Council Committee established
by resolution 421(1977) concerning the question of
South Africa on ways and means of making the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa
more effective (S/14179)

1. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before- them the following documents: 5114167 and
Add. 1, containing the report af the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Council resolution 473
(1980), and S/14179, containing the report of the
Security Council Committee established by resolution 421(1977) concerning the question of South Africa
on ways and means ‘of making the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa more effective.
.
2. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): The Council is
meeting today in order to deal with one of the most

3. Given the great significance attached by the Council to the question of the arms embargo against South
Africa, the topicality of the issues involved and the
general concern over the need for a strict implementation of the embargo, the Committee devoted considerable attention to an analysis of the difficulties
which had impeded the full and universal application
of the embargo, outlined in resolution 418 (1977).
The Committee devoted 14 meetings to the consideration and adoption of its report. The report therefore
represents the culmination of intensive discussions
and sustained efforts to arrive at a general consensus,
with very few reservations.
4. The report consists of three sections. Section I,
an introduction, deals with the objectives and scope of
resolution 418 (1977) and with the obligations of
States that derive therefrom. It also outlines the terms
of resolution 421 (1977), under which the Committee
was established. Section II of the report is entitled
“Problems encountered in the implementation of the
embargo”. It relates the existence of serious breaches
of the embargo and of clandestine operations designed
to circumvent it. That section also deals with the
legislative and other measures taken by States and
how far those measures comply with the arms embargo. Lastly, it describes the questions raised in
connection with the phraseology of resolution 418
(1977) and the interpretation of some of its key provisions. Section III, part A, contains formal and concrete conclusions with regard’ to the operation and
effectiveness of the present arms embargo. Those
conclusions were unanimously adopted by the Committee. The recommendations submitted by the Committee in section III, part B, for the consideration of
the Council are designed to put an end to the loopholes and to illegal acts of “sanction-breaking”.
They aim at reinforcing the embargo, making it more
comprehensive and creating a tangible structure for
its implementation. Among other things, the recommendations deal with the questions of “dual-purpose”

equipment, spare parts for military items in the possession of South Africa, the transfer of technology
and licences for the manufacture of arms in South
Africa, nuclear collaboration
with South Africa,
enforcement measures by States in the implementation
of the embargo, imports of weapons from South Africa
and so on.
5. Although the experience gained by the Committee
during the period which has elapsed since its establishment may be disappointing
in some respects, it has
been most useful in showing the way to a more effective
embargo in the future. Breaches and violations do
exist, and little can be done to stop them unless decisive
action is taken, at both the national and the intemational levels. The conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report address themselves specifically
to this problem and aim at laying down a new basis
for the future work of the Committee. There is no doubt
that a great deal will depend on the manner in which
the Committee
is able to discharge the tasks in the
future, and on the means which will be put at its disposal. In that connection, the recommendations
of the
Committee
emphasized
the need for a clear and
organized system to be adopted in setting up the necessary infrastructure to service the Committee.
6. Before concluding
this part of my statement,
I would take this opportunity to express once again my
appreciation to all the members of the Committee for
their co-operation in bringing our work to a successful
conclusion. I am particularly grateful to the two ViceChairmen, Ambassador Muiioz Ledo of Mexico and
Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger, for their invaluable
support. The assistance provided to the Committee by
members of the Secretariat through all stages of its
work and their devotion to duty merit a special commendation, which I wholeheartedly
wish to place on
record.
7. May I now assume my role as the representative
of Bangladesh and offer, very briefly, the views of my
delegation on the report.
8. We have fully participated in the deliberations of
the Committee,
and the entire report has our fullest
concurrence. As a matter of fact, the Government of
Bangladesh has in effect taken measures much more
stringent than those envisaged in the recommendations of the Committee
regarding South Africa, and
needless to say, our views on the abhorrent practice
of apartheid are well known. In this context, I would
crave the indulgence of the President and of the Council to speak again at another appropriate time.
9. Mr. President, since this may be the last meeting
in which my delegation is participating
as a member
of the Council, we should like to pay a tribute to
you as a diplomat and as a man. I recall your very
personal involvement
in the endeavour to find a just
solution to the problems of Zimbabwe, Namibia and
apartheid,. and your friends have ample reasons to

share with you the satisfaction you derive from this.
With you and your able deputy, Ambassador vanden
Heuvel, we have spent many long and anxious hours,
and it has been an unforgettable experience to share
the humane and sometimes emotional approach to the
many problems-political,
social and economicwhich confronted us. We shall cherish those moments
of warm friendship, which will endure. Our sincerest
thanks are offered also to your able colleague, Ambassador Petree, and all your other colleagues in the
United States Mission for their co-operation
and
understanding.
10. I take this opportunity to recall the contribution
of Ambassador Parsons, the representative
of the
United Kingdom,
who presided over the Council’s
deliberations
in November.
With him too we have
shared anxious moments, and we have found in him
a very wise and warm-hearted friend who has given
and enjoyed rec.eiving confidence and respect. As
fellow members of the Commonwealth,
Bangladesh
and the United Kingdom have many common values.
I shall, on my departure from the Council, miss
Sir Anthony but I am sure I shall not be deprived of
his wisdom and experience whenever I seek it.
11. I should also like to recall with great ‘fondness
the fruitful association that my delegation developed
with Ambassador Bishara of Kuwait, Ambassadors
Clark and Harriman of Nigeria, Ambassador N’Dong
of Gabon, Ambassador Palacios de Vizzio of Bolivia
and Ambassador
Hulinskjr
of Czechoslovakia.
Together with them, we have sought to resolve the
complex issues of war and peace.
12. In this connection I cannot but recall the close
relationship that my delegation developed with Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger and Ambassador Slim
of Tunisia, with both of whom my country has fraternal
ties and a community of interests. We have worked so
closely together in our common causes.
13. With Ambassador Lusaka of Zambia we have
shared undivided devotion to the cause of the people
of southern Africa in general and Namibia in particular,
as well as to other causes.
14. Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, who is leaving with
us, has been a wise and good friend. His exceptional
expertise in matters of international economic relations
has always been a source of inspiration and strength
to the Group of 77 and the world at large.
15. I cannot but express my nostalgia for the effective
and fruitful co-operation that we developed with Ambassador Mufioz Ledo of Mexico. With his rich and
varied experience as a scholar and a successful politician in his country, and with his vibrant personality,
Ambassador
Mufioz
Ledo
introduced
another
refreshing element into the Councils deliberations.
16. My friend Ambassador Yango from the Philippines has been kind and helpful, and,his wide range of

experience in law and other cognate matters has
always added a new dimension to our deliberations
on all critical issues.

peace and security. My delegation expresses its full
and unstinted support to you, Mr. Secretary-General,
in all your efforts.

17. I had the great honour of serving in another
station with my good friend Ambassador Algard of
Norway. I had aiso the great honour of serving as
an ambassador in his country. I have always regarded
Ambassador Algard as a valiant champion of the
Charter, and it has been my great honour to work
very closely with him on many thorny issues. During
my assignment in Norway I learned how deeply
Norway and other Nordic countries are committed
to the cause of humanity.

24. In conclusion, we sadly note that the political
scene of the world today is far from~rosy. Wars are
raging in sensitive areas of the globe; political tensions
in other places are high; international
laws are flagrantly violated; many innocent individuals have lost
their freedom and are held captive against their will,
through no fault of their own. The poor are getting
poorer, but we cannot lose hope and relax. Great
challenges face the Council in 1981 and we pray that,
as usual, it will face them with courage and an
indomitable will. All our good wishes and prayers are
with the Council for success in the coming year.

18. Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal, who
will also be leaving the Council, has left a deep and
abiding imprint on me through his wise counsel and
help.

25. Mr. MUNOZ
LED0
(Mexico) (interpreration
from Spanish): Mr. President, this is an excellent
opportunity
to congratulate you on the skilful and
flexible way in which you have been guiding our work.
You have succeeded in facilitating and expediting our
consideration of complex issues, an achievement that
in our day is a considerable one.

19. My friend from the German Democratic Republic will, I am sure, continue to play a useful role with
his usual thoroughness and equanimity.
20. I recall the understanding
and co-operation
always shown me by Ambassador Troyanovsky of the
Soviet Union. His profound knowledge of the intricacies of international
relations has been of great
help to me.

26. We also express our gratitude to Ambassador
Parsons of the United Kingdom for his very intelligent
and skilful work during the month of November.

21. I express my gratitude to Ambassador Leprette
of France for his friendship and understanding. I have
personally learned a great deal through my association
with him on matters of international peace and security.

27. I have asked to be allowed to speak in order to
comment, however briefly, on the importance of the
submission, before the end of the year, of the report
of the Committee
established under resolution 421
(1977) on the arms embargo against South Africa.

22. Ambassador Ling Qing has joined us recently,
but his deep sense of history, combined with his
experience,
has impressed
us. His predecessor,
Ambassador Chen Chu, who is not here today, is
fondly remembered for his personal charm and friendship. I not only have known them personally, but
also had the privilege of serving in their great country,
China. We wish the Chinese people peace. All our
good wishes are with them in their forward march to
progress and prosperity.

28. For months we worked very hard, hearing testimony,
gathering information
and preparing
the
document that is being submitted today, one that
commanded the consensus of all members of the Council. The meeting of the minds in the chapter containing the conclusions and recommendations
is of
considerable
political
importance
because wideranging agreement was reached on matters which,
until a short time ago, had given rise to controversy
and even to confrontation.

23. I cannot conclude without paying a tribute-my
warmest personal tribute-to
the chief executive of the
United Nations, Mr. Kurt Waldheim.
Combining
in
himself the wisdom and sagacity of a diplomat an&~
scholar and the sensibility of a kind human being, the
Secretary-General
has given the necessary direction
to the world community,
as he has put- in his personal
efforts for the maintenance of international
peace and
security. He has also not been oblivious of the heartrending cries of those hapless millions whose life is
spent in deprivation and poverty. While he has called
upon all countries, rich and poor, big and small, to
help him safeguard the principles and objectives of the
Charter, he has not failed to speak out when the need
has arisen, to remind the Powers of their primary
responsibility towards the maintenance of international

29. My delegation intends to comment in detail on
the contents of the report when the debate begins at
the start of next year. None the less, I did not want to
miss this opportunity to emphasize the significance of
the present meeting since, in the course of informal
consultations,
we repeatedly insisted that the document should be viewed by the Council in a public
meeting and as soon as possible. We feel that the
seriousness of the work done by the subsidiary bodies
of the Council, to which we entrust difficult fixedterm tasks, should meet with an appropriate response
from the Council through the prompt consideration
and approval of the reports submitted.
30. No consideration of a tactical or circumstantial
nature should induce us to depart from a duty to be
3

consistent. This is a duty which obliges us to implement our own resolutions and makes it possible for us
to advance towards the objectives we have set ourselves: a true commitment on the part of States to put
an end to the excesses of South Africa and to the
complicity which sustains the racist regime, to end the
apartheid regime and to bring about the full exercise of
the sovereign rights of the people of Namibia.

bargo that they had supported originally when resolution 418 (1977) was adopted. They have sought and
created loopholes in the arms embargo.
38. The supporters of the status quo in South Africa
have enabled the racist apartheid regime to maintain
its repressive laws and violence against the black
majority inside the country. They have also enabled
South Africa to maintain the military occupation of
Namibia and the perpetration of repression therein.
The arms which have been given to South Africa
have enabled Pretoria to commit repeated acts of naked
aggression against the front-line States, in particular
Zambia and Angola. Those who arm South Africa must
know that the arms so provided have been used to
kill our people and to destroy our property. The flow
of arms and related material to South Africa constitutes a threat to the maintenance of international
peace and security, not only in Africa but also in the
world as a whole.

31. I cannot fail to express gratitude to Ambassador
Kaiser of Bangladesh for the very kind words with
which he referred to my delegation’s participation in
the work of the Committee. It was really his own
qualities, his talent and experience, as well as the
highly intelligent and prompt manner in which he
allocated the tasks among the members of the Committee, that made possible the results we achieved.
32. One last word to underscore the deep feelings
that we all share as we approach the date when some of
our dearest and most respected colleagues will be
leaving the Council. To all of them we express our
lasting friendship and our gratitude for all that they have
done and for the contribution they leave behind.

39. There is also ample evidence indicating that illicit
transfers of arms and related material of all types to
South Africa continue to take place by devious
routes. All these violations of resolution 418 (1977)
have been rampant amid public proclamations of
innocence on the part of some Western countries.

33. In conclusion, I should like to express the hope
that in the coming year the Council will be able, with
greater resolve and effectiveness than in the past, to
face the tasks that await it and that promise to be
particularly difficult.

40. The Council’s commitment to the enforcement
of a comprehensive mandatory arms embargo should
not be doubted. It was in the spirit of enforcing the
arms embargo that it adopted resolution 421(1977) for
the purpose of ensuring the full implementation of the
arms embargo by closing possible loopholes used by
some unscrupulous international “actors”. Despite
this effort some members of the Council have deliberately created difficulties for the Committee established under resolution 421 (1977) by according
different interpretations to resolution 418 (1977). They
have even opposed the strengthening of the Committee’s secretariat so as to enable it better to service
the Committee.

34. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): I wish to make a few
preliminary remarks on the issue of the arms embargo
against South Africa. My delegation will speak in
more detail when the report is considered in full by the
Council at a later date.
35. The Council is meeting pursuant to a decision
taken at the last summit of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), held in Freetown, Sierra Leone, in
June this year. That decision reflects the burning
desire of the OAU to address the question of South
Africa.

41. In our view, as a first step, the working procedures of the Committee also need to be reviewed
to ensure that the Committee is made more effective.
As in the former Committee on Sanctions,l the Committee should institute a system of summoning representatives of countries which violate the embargo to
appear before it. It should not be content with correspondence, most of which gives no proof that the
details of complicity in dealings with South Africa
reflect the true picture of the state of relations. A
system of verification and independent investigation
must be established quickly in the workings of the
Committee. Excessive reliance by the Committee on
secondary sources, in the view of my delegation,
undermines its ability to discharge its responsibilities.
A cue can be taken from the workings of the Security
Council Commission established under resolution 446
(1979).

36. One of the major disappointments of the OAU
on the question of South Africa relates to the arms
embargo. It will be recalled in this connection that the
Council adopted resolution 418 (1977) on the imposition of an arms embargo against South Africa unanimously. To us that unanimity meant that all countries,
especially the members of the Council, would follow
scrupulously the provisions of that resolution.
37. To our great disappointment and frustration, we
even have among the members of the Council States,
albeit few, which continue to flout the embargo. This
minority of the membership has arrogated to itself
the right to arm South Africa through clandestine
manceuvres. They have assumed a leading role among
some Western countries in selling arms to South
Africa. Certain of these States, and the corporations
under their jurisdiction, have violated the arms em4

,

42. My delegation wishes to express grave concern
at another aspect of clandestine ways of supplying
arms and related material to South Africa. This is
especially so in the area of nuclear collaboration by
the same Western industrial nations. The delegation
of Zambia has stated on many occasions, here and
elsewhere, that nuclear collaboration with South Africa
constitutes the greatest threat to international peace
and security.

.‘”

humanity and a threat to international peace and
security. The Security Council has repeatedly
demanded that the Pretoria authorities put an end to the
policy ofapartheid and grant all citizens of South Africa
equal and full political and other rights, including the
opportunity of taking part in determining their future.
48. In its resolution 473 (1980), the Council recognized the legitimacy of the struggle of the South
African people for the elimination of apartheid; it once
again called upon the South African regime to take
measures immediately to eliminate the policy and
practice of apartheid and to cease violence against the
African people, as well as to release all political
prisoners. The Council also called on all States strictly
and scrupulously to implement resolution 418 (1977),
which imposed an arms embargo against South Africa,
and to “enact, as appropriate, effective national
legislation for that purpose”.

43. My delegation has been alarmed further by the
trust which some Western countries have in South
Africa’s nuclear programme, believing that it will be
for peaceful purposes only. From all indications, South
Africa cannot be trusted with nuclear capability,
because it would use that power for military purposes.
Moreover, experts have argued that the conversion
from peaceful nuclear programme to military use is not
a complicated process, even for the South Africans.
We believe that South Africa must be denied the
technology and material for developing nuclear programmes which are a threat to international peace and
security.
44. Finally, my delegation wishes fully to endorse all
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977). We believe that those recommendations constitute a solid framework within which a
comprehensive mandatory arms embargo against
South Africa can be made to work effectively if there is
sufficient political will to do so among those Western
countries that have hitherto assisted South Africa.

49. However, the racist regime of Pretoria, clearly
defying the United Nations decisions, continues
stubbornly to pursue the policy of apartheid and to
deprive the oppressed people of elementary political,
economic and civil rights. Massive repression continues to be directed against all those who oppose the
inhuman system of apartheid. Quite recently a court
in Pretoria passed sentences on nine freedom fighters,
including three death sentences-which aroused
protests from all honest people the world over.
50. In violation of Security Council decisions which
condemn the policy of establishing bantustans in
South Africa, the Pretoria regime continues that policy,
which is designed further to strengthen the domination
of the white minority. The latest example of that is
the recent establishment of the bantustan of Ciskei.

45. I wish to conclude for now by paying a special
tribute to Ambassador Kaiserof Bangladesh, the Chairman of the Committee, the other officers of the Committee and the entire Committee for their dedication
in the preparation of the report. My delegation’s
appreciation goes also to the Secretary-General for his
report on the subject.

51. In attempting to preserve the system of aparfheid in South Africa and to keep Namibia in a state of
colonial dependence, the Pretoria racists continue to
expand their aggressive actions against neighbouring
independent African States which lend support to the
national liberation struggle of the people of South
Africa and Namibia. The Council has repeatedly come
out in support of the independence, national unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia and has demanded the
withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia and the
transfer of power to its people. Those decisions also
have not been complied with to date.

46. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Soviet
delegation believes that the report of the Committee
on the arms embargo against South Africa, submitted
today to the Council, is of great significance and
requires the most serious attention. That report was
prepared by the aforementioned Committee pursuant
to resolution 473 (1980). It entrusted the Committee
with the task of redoubling its efforts to se-cure full’
implementation of the arms embargo against South
Africa. The Committee was also entrusted with the
task of submitting recommendations to the Council
on measures to close all loopholes in the arms embargo,
to reinforce it and make it more comprehensive. That
Council decision was a correct step in the chain of
measures designed to put an end to the shameful policy
and practice of apartheid pursued by the racist regime
of South Africa.

52. The reason for such a situation, as was once again
recently emphasized in decisions adopted by the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, is to be
found in the fact that some member countries of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Israel
and other States have not ended their co-operation
with the racist regime of South Africa in the military
and nuclear spheres and have not seen to it that
corporations and institutions under their jurisdiction
refrain from such co-operation.

47. As is well known, in its many decisions the United
Nations has branded apartheid as a crime against
5

59. The Council has repeatedly dealt with the racist
policy of oppression and aggression in South Africa,
which is the source of a constant threat to international
peace and security. By disregarding all the decisions
and appeals of the world Organization, the Pretoria
regime has further intensified its policy of terror and
aggression. One of the latest examples of this is the
arbitary death sentences imposed by that regime on
three South African patriots, in violation of all human
rights.

53. During the work of the Committee and in the
preparation of its report it was also pointed out that
the reason why the arms embargo against South Africa
was ineffective was the absence of political will on the
part of a number of States and the covert and overt
circumvention of resolution 418 (1977). It was also a
consequence of arbitrary attempts to interpret that
resolution so as to find loopholes which allow activities
in violation of its provisions.
54. The Soviet delegation supports the useful recommendations in the report of the Committee. We must
close all the loopholes so as not to allow a further
buildup of the military-industrial potential of South
Africa. When we bear in mind the aggressive nature of
the racist regime in South Africa and the threat to
international peace and security posed by the very
existence of that regime, there is special significance in
the recommendations contained in the report on the
need to end all forms of co-operation with South
Africa in the nuclear sphere.

60. The reason why the apartheid regime continuesto
this day to dare to disregard United Nations decisions
and to oppose the overwhelming majority of world
public opinion can be found in the continuing support
given to Pretoria by imperialist States and monopolies.
This applies first and foremost to economic, military
and nuclear co-operation with South Africa by some
Western States.
61. On the issue of nuclear co-operation, in paragraph 68 of its report, the Committee notes that:

55. The Council has repeatedly warned South Africa
that if it does not comply with the Council’s demands,
the Council will consider the possibility of taking the
more effective measures provided for in Chapter VII
of the Charter. The Soviet Union is in favour of
the adoption of sanctions against South Africa, as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter, in their full
scope. That is the most effective way to ensure that
South Africa will comply with United Nations decisionsson granting independence to Namibia and on
eliminating the system of apartheid in South Africa
itself.

“The majority view was that South Africa was
striving to produce nuclear weapons in collaboration
with Western States. The acquisition by South
Africa of any nuclear capacity posed a significant
threat to the countries in the region and to intemational peace and security.”
62. The necessary conclusions are quite unambiguous. An immediate end to any type of co-operation
with the heinous apartheid regime, a co-operation
which only encourages it in its policy of disregarding
United Nations resolutions, and its complete international isolation. should compel Pretoria to forswear
its policy of apartheid.

56. The Soviet delegation believes that the Council
should as soon as possible continue its consideration
of the report of the Committee and hopes that it will
take all the necessary measures to force South Africa
to respect and implement the decisions of the United
Nations.

63. The measures proposed in the report are a first
step in- that direction. They should be supplemented
with comprehensive binding measures in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter, as was once more
demanded by the General Assembly a few days ago in
its relevant resolutions.

57. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
Russian) The Security Council
has before it the report of the Committee established
by resolution 421(1977) on ways and means of making
the arms embargo against South Africa more effective.
In resolution 473 (1980), the Council requested the
Committee to recommend measures which might close
the loopholes in the arms embargo, reinforce and
make it more effective.

(inrerpretation

from

64. On the most diverse pretexts, some imperialist
circles are opposing the application of sanctions against
South Africa. In this regard, reference is made to socalled legal difficulties and it is also asserted that
sanctions are not the appropriate method of obtaining
political goals. It is, however, well known that NATO
circles are most irresponsibly and in disregard of all the
lessons of history, continuing to discuss the possibility
of declaring sanctions against socialist countries, and
with one goal in mind: the revival of the policy of the
cold war.. Apparently, for such sanctions all the reservations that those same imperialist representatives
put forward in the present case fall by the wayside.
Here it is clear to everyone that sanctions against the
racist apartheid regime, which is condemned by the
overwhelming majority of the Member States, are
something that those imperialist circles simply wish
to prevent.

58. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic takes a positive view of the work done by
the,Committee on its report. We believe that the conclusions and recommendations in the report are the
minimum necessary to make the arms embargo against
South Africa more effective. This applies in particular
to the ban on any type of nuclear co-operation,
including an. embargo on all types of multipurpose
armaments for civilian or military use and all forms of
co-operation with South Africa which might serve to
increase its military potential.
6

65. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic believes that, particularly on the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the existence of the apartheid regime as a last
bastion of the colonial, racist past in southern Africa
is a serious challenge to world public opinion, a
challenge we should meet accordingly.

72. I cannot conclude without expressing my profound conviction that this remarkable workcould not
have been accomplished, under conditions of which
we are aware, without the tact and skill of my good
friend Ambassador Kaiser, without the dedication and
perseverance he has shown, without his competence
and knowledge. May he find in these remarks an
expression of our fraternal thanks and our sincere
appreciation of, and great esteem for, his efforts and
the invaluable contribution he and his delegation have
made to the work of the Council during its term of
office. I should like to say how touched I was by the
kind remarks he made about me during his statement
today. I am all the more pleased to congratulate him,
since Ambassador Kaiser represents a fraternal
country with which Tunisia has always had the best of
relations-exemplary and privileged relations.

66. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
In conformity with resolution 473 (1980), the Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) has in the
time allotted prepared the report requested of it, which
has just been introduced by the Chairman of that
Committee, Ambassador Kaiser, the representative of
Bangladesh.
67. That report, which provides an exhaustive
analysis of the situation, contains a whole series of
recommendations that could make the mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa more effective.
We have studied that excellent report with all the
seriousness appropriate to so grave a subject. We
listened very attentively and with much interest to the
introductory statement just made by Ambassador
Kaiser, as well as to the initial comments of our other
colleagues.

73. We extend the same thanks and appreciation to
the two Vice-Chairmen of the Committee-my good
friends Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger and Ambassador Muiioz Ledo of Mexico, whose outstanding
contribution to the preparation of the report was of
decisive importance.
74. I should also like to associate myself with the
words of commendation addressed to the Committee’s
secretariat, and in particular to Mr. Rifai, for the
efforts he made.

68. It is not our intention today to consider in detail
the implications of a complete and total arms embargo
against South Africa, which we cannot dissociate from
the over-all situation stemming from the inhuman
policy of apartheid practised by the Pretoria racist
regime. At this stage we shall confine ourselves to
highlighting a few aspects which should provide food
for thought.

75. As this year comes to an end, please allow me to
extend my best wishes to you, Mr. President, to all
my colleagues, and to the Secretary-General; and to
those whose terms of office are concluding, my heartfelt regrets and best wishes for future success.
76. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (in?erpretutim
from
As the hour is late and we shall have an
opportunity to return to the topic now before the.
Council, I shall not reiterate my delegation’s position
on the important and very interesting report before us.
However, I should like to pay a tribute to the Chairman
of the Committee, Ambassador Kaiser, who had some
very kind words for me which touched me deeply.
I wish also to convey my thanks to the Vice-Chairman,
Ambassador Muiioz Ledo and Ambassador Oumarou,
for the constructive spirit in which they have conducted
the work of the Committee since the beginning of the
year.
.
.:
77. If, as is to be hoped, this is the last meeting of the
Council before the end of the year, I shall conclude this
brief statement by saying the following.

French):

69. In spite of the mandatory embargo decreed by
resolution 418 (1977), we have observed that Pretoria
is still able to obtain weapons-increasingly sophisticated weapons. What we are in fact faced with is the
transfer of advanced technology. We have also seen
that there are still numerous and varied sources of
supply and that the channels used towards that end are
as complex as they are numerous. Lastly, we have
noted that Pretoria is now, because of the assistance
it receives from its allies and partners, able to set up
on its own a genuine arms industry.
70. It should be recalled here that the arsenaloffered
to South Africa is intended solely for the intensification
of repression and oppression against the peoples of
South Africa and Namibia; It therefore serves the
policy of continued outright aggression against neighbouring African countries.

78. The year’s end always has a touch of melancholy
to it and that is indeed my feeling this evening. I am
influenced by the fact that next year we shall be
deprived of the presence of several very distinguished
members of the Council. You yourself, Mr. President,
are reportedly to leave us. I. hope to have another
opportunity to pay a tribute to you, but let me say
now that all the regrets of the French delegation

71. These considerations should not escape us
when we are called upon to reach a decision on
the recommendations contained in the Committee’s
report, which seem to us to be conducive to strengthening the arms embargo against South Africa.
7

89. We have just been informed that during the night
of 1‘I- 18December the south of Lebanon was the target
of a dastardIy and serious act of aggression which
resulted in casualties among innocent victims and
caused great material damage. According to the
information available to me, that attack was part of a
premeditated and co-ordinated plan between Israel and
the de facto forces. I cannot fail to point out here that
at the very time the Council was meeting to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and to call upon the parties concerned to co-operate with the Force, somewhere in
that region Israel and its collaborators were preparing
another odious attack on Lebanon.

accompany you in your departure. We have admired
the exemplary way in which you have discharged your
duties as Permanent Representative of the United
States; you have carried out an important task for
your country and have made a major contribution to
the cause of peace. You will not be forgotten.
79. Let me also say how very much we have appreciated the role played by our five colleagues who will
be leaving the Council at the end of this year. I have
been honoured with their friendship and have benefited
as well from their experience, advice and competence.
These two years with them have been enriching to me,
and I am deeply grateful for them.
80. To you, Mr. President, and to our colleagues from
Bangladesh, Jamaica, Norway, Portugal and Zambia,
allow me to convey my warmest best wishes for
personal happiness and for continued success in your
respective careers.

90. Israel’s response to the deliberations of the Council is an insult to the international community.
91. I have just been informed that the SecretaryGeneral has today made a statement on the subject to
the press. With your permission, Mr. President, and
with the indulgence of the other members of the Council, may I request, despite the lateness of the hour, that
you give us more information on these grave incidents. Perhaps the Secretary-General himself could help us by
providing a little more information on what has just
occurred.

81. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom):
I simply wish to express similar sentiments, although
I shall do it with less elegance, perhaps, than my
French colleague has just done.
82. First, I would like to thank very warmly those
delegations which were good enough to say nice things
about the conduct of the presidency last month by
my delegation.
83. I would like to bid a very fond farewell, but it
oniyextends-as far as this horseshoe table is concemed-to our excellent friends and colleagues from
the delegations of Norway, Portugal, Zambia, Bangladesh and Jamaica. I would like to say an especial
word of thanks to Ambassador Kaiser for the totally
undeserved but very kind words that he addressed to
me. All I can say is that, if I had been expressing
my own sentiments towards him, I would have spoken
similarly but less eloquently.
84. And finally, Mr. President, although I know you
do not welcome compliments, I would like to say.that
you and all those in the United States delegation who
will no longer be with us after 20 January take with you
the very best wishes for the future from the whole
British delegation.
85. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representatives
of Bangladesh, Mexico, Tunisia, France and the United
Kingdom for the kind words they addressed to me.
86. There are no further speakers. As hasbeen agreed
among the members of the Council, consultations will
be held in January, with a view to continuing theconsideration of this agenda item.

92. The PRESIDENT: If the Council has no objection, I shall call on the Secretary-General.
93. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Before answering the question put to me by the representative of Tunisia, may I be permitted to thank the representatives of the outgoing members of the Council
who have expressed their appreciation of my efforts
and those of my colleagues in the Secretariat. May
I reciprocate those feelings most warmly and thank
them for their unfailing co-operation and support.
94. Allow me also, Mr. President, to say how greatly
I have appreciated your understanding, your unfailing
courtesy and all the help you have extended to me and
my colleagues during your tenure of oflice here at the
United Nations. I extend to you my warmest best
wishes for the future.
95. I am deeply concerned by the outbreak of
serious incidents over the last 48 hours in south Lebanon to which the representative of Tunisia has just
referred,
96, During the night of 17-18 December, a number
of houses were destroyed by explosives in seven
villages in the UMFIL area of operation. In the village
of Brashit, which is located in the Irish sector, three
civilians were kiiled, four seriously wounded and
others injured. The Irish battalion deployed patrols to
the south and west of the village, which came under
fire, as did an armoured personnel carrier, which
was being moved to assist in Brashit.

87. I call on the representative of Tunisia.
The situation

in the Middle East

88. hlr. SLIM (Tunisia) (interpreiationj?mz
French):
I should like to say a few words before the meeting
adjourns.
8

97. The Israeli forces have denied any involvement
in these incidents. However the radio station of the
de facto forces stated that both they and the Israeli
forces were involved. From the evidence available,
UNIFIL
believes that the incidents were well planned
and co-ordinated.
98. On 18 December, in a separate incident in the
Norwegian sector, a 15-year-old boy was kidnapped
outside the village of Kafr Hamman by persons
believed to be members of the de facto forces. He was
later found killed, with eight shots through the stomach
and chest.
99. During the night of 18 to 19 December, there
were exchanges of fire in the western and eastern
sectors. In the former, de&to
forces tired 12 rounds
of artillery into the Tyre pocket and into the village of
Al-Mansuri,
in the Dutch area. The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) returned six rounds of mortar
fire. In the eastern sector, the de facto forces tired
approximately
400 rounds from the Majayoun
area
towards Hasbaiya, using artillery, mortar and tanks.
The PLO returned the fire, using approximately
55 rounds of artillery and mortar. UNIFIL
also observed considerable activity by the Israeli defence
forces, helicopters and jet aircraft in the Nabatiyeh
and Khardala areas.
100. In the course of the exchange of fire in the
north-east sector, a Norwegian soldier was seriously
wounded near Ebel Es-Saqi.

104. First, only today [226&h meeting], in connection
with the statement made. by the representative
of
Israel [2259th meeting], we expressed the view that
that statement was nothing more than a smoke-screen
or a manoeuvre to distract us. We were quite correct
in our warning, but it must be stated quite bluntly
that we had not expected that Israeli diplomacy would
take such a hypocritical,
cynical form.
105. Secondly, one further warning was borne out-a
warning made by the Soviet delegation the day before
yesterday [2258th meeting], in the discussion of the
renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL.
At that time we
pointed out that the danger for Lebanon stemmed
precisely from the aggressive policies of Israel towards
that country. Now we can all be convinced of that.
106. Thirdly, it appears to me that in view of the
seriousness of the situation, the full extent of which is
not entirely clear at the present time, we should be
acting correctly if the President were to propose as a
minimum to the members of the Council, in view of the
fact that the week-end is upon us, that they stand by
so as to make it possible, if necessary, for the Council
to meet immediately
in order to take steps to counter
the aggressive actions of Israel.
107. Mr. LUSAKA
(Zambia): The year is not yet
concluded, since we still have 12 more days to go.
Also we have just heard a very sad report on Lebanon,
although it is not yet conclusive. Further, I do not think
we have finalized our programme of work in relation
to the report of the Security Council Commission
established under resolution 446 (1979).

101. I strongly deplore these latest acts of violence,
which follow closely upon the renewal of the UNIFIL
mandate, a fact that was stressed by the Ambassador
of Tunisia. It will be recalled that, in my statement
to the Council on 17 December [225&h meeting],
I pointed out that the level of armed activity in the
UNIFIL
area was inconsistent both with the resolutions of the Council and with the assurances that had
been given to the Force.

108. Is my understanding therefore correct, Mr. President, that it is possible that the Council will meet
before 31 December? If my understanding is correct,
then such an occasion will offer my delegation a
favourable opportunity
for replying to the very kind
and generous words extended to us by some of our
colleagues, as we leave the Council at midnight bn
3 1 December.

102. I once again appeal to all concerned to desist
from actions which inevitably lead to violent reactions
and instead to co-operate with UNIFIL
in the fulfilment of its tasks. I hope that members of the Council
in a position to bring their influence to bear willexercise
that influence with the parties, with a view to restoring
and maintaining
peaceful conditions in southern Lebanon and to helping UNIFIL
to fulfil its mandate.

109. The PRESIDENT:
The President is fully at the
disposition of the Council with regard to this and any
other subject that the Council wishes to discuss.
.T
110. I would say that it is my intention to adjourn
the meeting, without pursuing this subject at this time.
It would,seem to me that we are in danger of engaging
in a protracted discussion without having gone through
the proper procedures.

103. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russiari): From the
report we have just heard from the Secretary-General
‘and also from information
which has reached us
through the media, it is obvious that the Security
Council-and
primarily Lebanon-are
faced with yet
another aggressive act on the part of Israel. In that
connection, we should like to say the following.

The meeting

rose at 6.20 p.m.

NOTE
I Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATTONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde mtier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventcs, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

JIOJIYYZITh

H3AAHWI

OPrAHEI3Al~liZIOIi~EAZiHEHHhIX

HAIWH

?%$AZUiHl3oprWtN3~USiA 06’beAHfSenHblS HauxR MO?tWO
KyIIHTb
B KHRXKHbIX
MW&L*
3xxax x arexTc-rxax ao *cex paxonax brxpa. Hasonxre cnpasxn 06 x3natruxx. x
Batnest KnsmuoM xaraaxxe xax nxmx~e no aapecy: Opranrrsattuff 06menxnexxbtx
HasxR, Cexyxx no npo~$%xa xartaxxx, Hbro-Hoprc xnx Xexexa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en lib&as y cams distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations; New York

00300

i

83-614624eptember 1986-&OS0
