II,

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3483 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, 31/63 of 10 December 1976 and 32/194 of 20 December 1977,
Noting the letter dated 26 September 1978 from
the President of the Third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea to the President of the General
Assembly 15 regarding the decisions reached at the
seventh session of the Conference, held at Geneva
from 28 March to 19 May 1978 and in New York
from 21 August to 15 September 1978,
Having considered the decision of the Conference,
as conveyed in the letter from its President, that its
eighth session should be convened at Geneva on
19 March 1979 for a period of six weeks and that
the Conference should be empowered to decide at the
end of its eighth session to hold further meetings in
1979 under arrangements to be determined in consultation with the Secretary-General, should the Conference feel at that stage that a decision to that effect
would enable it to advance its work,
Taking into account the recommendation made by
the Conference that the General Assembly should
again study measures to ensure stability and continuity
for the secretariat personnel recruited for the Conference,
l. Approves the convening of the eighth session
of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea at Geneva for the period from 19 March
to 27 April 1979 and empowers the Conference, if
the progress of its work warrants, to decide at that
stage to hold further meetings under arrangements
to be determined in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to make available appropiate facilities to that end;
3. Reiterates its authorization, originally given in
paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 31/63,
to the Secretary-General to continue to make the
necessary arrangements, provided under paragraph 9
of Assembly resolution 3067 (XXVIII), for the efficient and continuous servicing of the Conference in
1979 and of subsequent activities as may be decided
upon by the Conference, as well as to take appropriate
measures to ensure stability and continuity for the
secretariat personnel recruited for the Conference.
51st plenary meeting
10 November 1978
33/18.

Observer status for the Agency for Cultural and Technical Co-operation in the
General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the Agency for Cultural and
Technical Co-operation for co-operation between the
United Nations and the Agency,
l. Decides to invite the Agency for Cultural and
Technical Co-operation to participate in the sessions
and the work of the General Assembly and of its subsidiary organs in the capacity of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution.
51 st plenary meeting
JO November 1978
15 A/33/270 and

Corr.I.

33/27.

15

Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity, 16
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion
of co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity and the practical measures taken for their implementation, in particular resolution 32/19 of 11 November 1977,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth
ordinary session, held at Khartoum from 18 to
22 July 1978,11
Taking note especially of the statement made by
the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at the 10th plenary meeting of the General
Assembly, on 27 September 1978, 18 particularly on
matters of concern to the two organizations,
Taking further note of the meeting between the
General Secretariat of the Organization of African
Unity and the secretariats of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system on assistance to liberation movements, held at
Geneva in August 1978, and particularly of the recommendations adopted at that meeting,
Noting with satisfaction the excellent co-operation
that has developed between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity in areas of common
endeavour,
Aware of the special needs of the newly independent
African States, particularly with regard to the consolidation of their national independence, their endeavours towards social and economic betterment and
the adverse impact on their economies of the current
international economic situation,
Gravely concerned at the deteriorating situation in
southern Africa arising from the continued domination of the people of the area by the minority racist
regimes, and conscious of the need to provide increased assistance to the peoples of the region and to
their liberation movements in their struggle against
colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Aware of its responsibilities to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
States in southern Africa to help them to cope with
the situation caused by the acts of aggression against
their territories by the apartheid regime in South Africa
and the illegal racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia,
Recognizing the importance of taking effective steps
to give the widest possible dissemination of information relating to the liberation struggle of the peoples
in southern Africa,
Recognizing the need for continuous liaison, exchange of information at the secretariat level and
technical co-operation on such matters as training and
16 A/33/253 and Corr.1 and 2.
17 See A/33/235 and Corr.I, annex II.
1 8 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-third
Session, Plenary Meetings, 10th meeting, paras. 2-63.

16

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

research between the Organization of African Unity
and the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity and commends his
efforts in strengthening such co-operation;
2. Notes with deep appreciation the increasing
participation of the Organization of African Unity in
the work of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies and its constructive contribution to that work;
3. Commends the continued efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote multilateral cooperation among African States and to find solutions
to African problems of vital importance to the international community and takes note with satisfaction
of the increased collaboration of various United Nations agencies in support of those efforts;
4. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to eliminate colonialism,
racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
5. Recognizes the importance of continued close
association by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies, where appropriate, with the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity to promote social and
economic development and to advance intra-African
co-operation in this vital field;
6. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations to work closely with the Organization of African
Unity towards the establishment of the new international economic order in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly;
7. Reiterates its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts, on behalf of the international
community, to organize and mobilize special economic
assistance programmes to various African States experiencing grave economic difficulties due to abnormal
political, humanitarian and geo-economic circumstances;
8. Calls upon all Member States, regional and
international organizations and organizations of the
United Nations system to give favourable consideration to those special economic assistance programmes
and accord them full and generous support;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Organization of African Unity informed periodically
of the response of the international community to
those programmes and to co-ordinate efforts with any
similar programmes initiated by the Organization of
African Unity;
10. Requests the Secretary-General and the organizations within the United Nations system to ensure
that adequate facilities continue to be made available
for the provision of technical assistance to the General
Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity as
and when required;

11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at the political, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with
regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and, in

this connexion, draws attention once again to the
Assistance Fund for the Struggle against Colonialism
and Apartheid established by the Organization of African Unity;
12. Calls upon the United Nations bodies, in particular the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council, the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Jndependence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid
and the United Nations Council for Namibia, to continue to associate closely the Organization of African
Unity with all their work concerning Africa;
13. Calls upon the United Nations Development
Programme, in particular, to arrange for the meeting
between the Organization of African Unity and the
organizations within the United Nations system to be
held in New York during the twenty-sixth session of the
Governing Council of the Programme, in June 1979,
and requests that the meeting deal with relations between the Organization of African Unity and the organizations within the United Nations system as well
as assistance to liberation movements;
14. Reiterates its invitation to the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the
United Nations system to continue and expand their
co-operation with the Organization of African Unity
and, through it, their assistance to the liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
report on the implementation of the present resolution
and on the development of co-operation between the
Organization of African Unity and the organizations
concerned within the United Nations system.
68th plenary meeting
1 December 1978

33/28.

Question of Palestine
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions 3236
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 3375 (XXX) and
3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975, 31/20 of 24 November 1976 and 32/40 A and B of 2 December I 977,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, 1
!)

Having heard the statement of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian
people/ 0
I. Expresses its grave concern that no just solution
to the problem of Palestine has been achieved and
that this problem therefore continues to aggravate the
Middle East conflict, of which it is the core, and to
endanger international peace and security;
tn Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/33/35
and Corr. I).
20 Ibid., Thirty-third Scss1·io11, Plenary Mectini:s, 59th meeting,
par::s. 73-112.
