S/2021/1109

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 December 2021
Original: English

Mission of good offices in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2587 (2021), requested me to submit a
report by 3 January 2022 on my good offices, in particular on progress towards
reaching a consensus starting point for meaningful results-oriented negotiations
leading to a settlement. In that resolution, the Council encouraged the leaders of the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities to provide written updates to my
mission of good offices on the actions that they had taken in support of the relevant
parts of the resolution since its adoption, in particular with regard to paragraphs 6, 7
and 9, with a view to reaching a sustainable and comprehensive settlement, and
requested me to include the contents of those updates in my report. (The updates
submitted by the two leaders are contained in annexes I and II to the present report.)
In paragraph 5 of that same resolution, the Council called on the two leaders to submit
to me by 15 December 2021 an action plan, in coordination with the Technical
Committee on Gender Equality, to increase the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in peace talks and to provide direct support and
encouragement to civil society organizations to enhance intercommunal contact and
trust-building. The Council further asked me to include that action plan in the present
report.
2.
The present report is focused on developments from 19 June to 15 December
2021. It provides an update on the activities carried out by my mission of good offices
under the leadership of my Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus, Elizabeth Spehar, who
ended her term in office on 30 November, and her successor, Colin Stewart, who
formally assumed his duties on 6 December. The report also includes an update on
the consultations conducted by senior United Nations official Jane Holl Lute on my
behalf until the end of her engagement on Cyprus in early fall 2021, as well as the
informal lunch that I hosted with the Greek Cypriot leader, Nicos Anastasiades, and
the Turkish Cypriot leader, Ersin Tatar, in New York on 27 September.

II. Background and context
3.
Since my previous report on my mission of good offices ( S/2021/634),
confidence in the possibility of securing a negotiated settlement continued to fall on
the island from an already low level. Public debate focused on the divergent positions
of the sides regarding the basis of the talks, including in the lead -up to and the

21-19605 (E)

110122

*2119605*

S/2021/1109

aftermath of the informal lunch that I hosted for the two leaders on 27 September.
The negative rhetoric continued throughout the reporting period, with no harmonized
messages that could resonate positively with both communities.
4.
Internal political developments on both sides created additional challenges, with
the two communities becoming more skeptical that any progress could be achieved.
Furthermore, certain steps taken, in particular with respect to the fenced -off part of
Varosha, contributed to deepening mistrust, both between the sides and among the
two communities.
5.
The epidemiological situation due to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic continued to fluctuate on both sides of the island. Following the decision
of 2 June of the Greek Cypriot leader and the Turkish Cypriot leader to synchronize
the two sides’ respective COVID-19-related measures at the crossing points, the
Technical Committee on Health continued to assess the situation and share
epidemiological data on a biweekly basis, with agreed restrictive measures applied at
the crossing points being adjusted accordingly. This close and fruitful cooperation has
been welcomed across the island.
6.
In addition to adverse effects on public health, the COVID -19 pandemic
continued to have a significant socioeconomic impact, including in the form of rising
unemployment, decreased purchasing power and far lower tourist arrivals, with a
particularly marked impact on the economy in the north.
7.
Deputy Special Adviser/Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Cyprus and Head of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
Spehar conducted regular meetings with the representatives of the Greek Cypriot and
the Turkish Cypriot leaders, supported by my mission of good offi ces. During these
meetings, the representatives discussed confidence-building measures and exchanged
views on ways to restart and revitalize the work of the technical committees, as called
for by the Security Council in recent resolutions. In the context o f almost weekly
meetings with the Greek Cypriot negotiator, Andreas Mavroyiannis, and the Turkish
Cypriot special representative, Ergün Olgun, constructive efforts were made to
address the health and economic response to the pandemic. Other issues of impor tance
were also addressed and discussed, such as the crossing points, irregular migration,
increased criminality in and adjacent to the mixed village of Pyla and challenges to
the completion of projects by the technical committees. Project proposals submit ted
to the European Union-funded facility, implemented by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), to support the work of the technical committees
were also regularly discussed.
8.
While progress towards reaching an agreement on confidence-building
measures was limited, the regular meetings and intervening contacts provided an
important avenue for discussion on issues of concern, including with a view to
building trust and common ground. The staff of my mission of good offices also met
weekly with the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot coordinators of the technical
committees to keep the dialogue open, discuss the above topics and explore ways to
improve the functionality of the committees and address challenges.
9.
On 20 July, the Turkish Cypriot leader announced a decision that the military
status of approximately 3.5 per cent of the area of Varosha would be lifted. He also
encouraged Greek Cypriot property owners to apply to the Immovable Property
Commission to settle their property claims in accordance with international law. The
President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, pledged the support of Turkey for the
decision. Those statements and developments on the ground triggered strong
objections from the Greek Cypriots, who stressed that the activitie s in Varosha
violated relevant Security Council resolutions, including 550 (1984) and 789 (1992),
as well as previous statements by the President of the Security Council on Varosha.
2/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

For reference, my most recent report on UNFICYP (S/2021/1110) describes
developments on the ground that were observed.
10. The United Nations also responded to developments related to Varosha. On
21 July, I expressed my deep concern about the announcements by the Turkish Cypriots
and Turkey with respect to Varosha and called on all parties to refrain from unilateral
actions that provoke tensions and may compromise the ongoing efforts to seek common
ground between the parties towards a lasting settlement of the Cyprus issue. Following
consultations on 21 July, the Security Council issued a presidential statement on 23 July
(S/PRST/2021/13), in which it, inter alia, condemned the announcement, expressed its
deep regret regarding those unilateral actions that ran contrary to its previous
resolutions and statements and called for the immediate reversal of the course of action
and the reversal of all steps taken on Varosha since October 2020.
11. With respect to the regional situation, the current reporting period was
characterized by a renewed uptick in tensions, including with respect to planned
hydrocarbon- and energy cooperation-related activity and maritime zone claims in the
eastern Mediterranean, and heightened rhetoric between guarantor powers Greece and
Turkey.
12. The religious leaders of Cyprus remained united and sustained their
commitment to peacebuilding and reconciliation within the framework of the
Religious Track of the Cyprus Peace Process, under the auspices of the Embassy of
Sweden. They continued to meet, including virtually, and work together to advance
religious freedom and human rights despite the challenging climate which has
prevailed since the inconclusive closure of the Conference on Cyprus in mid -2017.
13. Representatives of Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot political parties
maintained their regular meetings under the auspices of the Embassy of Slovakia .
Deputy Special Adviser Spehar gave an address to the political party representatives
on 25 November. Due to the improved epidemiological situation on the island during
the reporting period, they were able to partially return to in -person discussions. This
step was welcomed by the representatives, who had repeatedly stressed the
importance of personal contacts to bolster cooperation. They were also able to return
to meetings in a subcommittee format, enabling more detailed discussions on
potential joint confidence-building activities to be carried out by the political parties.
In their joint statements on substantive topics, the political parties continued to urge
the two leaders to demonstrate the necessary political will to resume substantive
negotiations towards a just and lasting solution to the Cyprus problem.

III. Status of the process
14. Until the completion of her assignment, Ms. Lute pursued discussions with the
leaders of the two communities and their representatives, as well as representati ves
of Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
She was also in contact with representatives of the European Union. United Nations
engagement with the parties on track 1 efforts also included contacts on the margins
of the General Assembly in September. On 27 September, I invited the two leaders to
a luncheon to discuss the state of play in efforts to reach common ground. Both leaders
lent their support to my offer to appoint an envoy to pursue the search for common
ground. While their substantive positions on a settlement remain far apart, the two
leaders indicated an interest in continued engagement. As the views on the role and
mandate of an envoy differ, efforts continue to ascertain the modalities that would
best support them in the search for a way forward.

21-19605

3/27

S/2021/1109

IV. Status of the process: activities of my mission of good offices
15. Deputy Special Adviser Spehar and my mission of good offices continued a
proactive outreach programme with the two leaders, political parties, and civil society
organizations and actors. They also held regular meetings with European Union
officials, representatives of the World Bank and members of the diplomatic
community. These discussions covered issues related to the peace p rocess, the
negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the advancement of confidencebuilding measures and the resumption and revitalization of the work of the technical
committees.
16. Deputy Special Adviser Spehar held several high-level meetings with visitors,
including with the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission, Josep Borrell,
on 24 June; the President of Poland, Andrzej Duda, on 7 October; and the Secretary
of State of Spain for the European Union, Juan González-Barba Pera, on 25 October.
On 28 September, Deputy Special Adviser Spehar and my mission of good offices
received a delegation from the World Bank, including to discuss the work done on the
socioeconomic impact of a settlement through a gender lens.
17. Mr. Stewart, upon assumption of his duties and arrival in Cyprus, had separate
introductory meetings with the two leaders. On 14 December, despite the polarized
political environment and the epidemiological situation, both leaders attended the
small end-of-year reception organized by the mission and had a warm informal
exchange. This was the first time the two leaders met on the island this year.
18. On 15 December, Deputy Special Adviser Stewart met with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain, José Manuel Albares Bueno.
19. During the reporting period, the Technical Committees on Cultural Heritage,
Crime and Criminal Matters, Health, Broadcasting, the Environment, and Economic
and Commercial Matters remained particularly active, while committees that had
hitherto been dormant, such as the Technical Committees on Gender Equality and
Crisis Management, resumed their work. At the same time, other challenges – such as
the composition of certain committees, the resignation of members from others and
disagreements over terminology to be utilized – had a further impact on the activities
of other committees, including the Technical Committees on the Environment and
Education, and halted or slowed down several ongoing projects that were nearing
completion. This situation has also meant that discussions on possible new initiatives
and projects have taken longer than usual.
20. Nevertheless, certain successes recorded towards the end of the reporting
period, in particular with the Technical Committee on Broadcasting and
Telecommunication, appear to have given some impetus to finding a way forward in
addressing the issue of terminology that has stalled ongoing projects in certain
committees. Successes include the Committee’s work on the 700 MHZ frequency
band and 5G. Another notable exception to the downward trend was the Technical
Committee on Cultural Heritage, which continued its weekly meetings and successful
delivery of conservation work and designs. At the 2021 European Heritage
Awards/Europa Nostra Awards ceremony in Venice on 23 September, the Committee
received the Grand Prix in recognition of the restoration work it had carried out, the
cooperation between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots that the Commit tee
represented and its dedication to the preservation of historic monuments on the island.
A follow-up event was held in Nicosia on 8 November 2021, attended by
representatives of the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage, the United Nations,
the European Union, the diplomatic community and civil society supporters of the
Committee’s activities.
4/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

21. The Technical Committee on Health sustained frequent interaction between the
two co-chairs and experts, who exchanged information on COVID-19-related
responses, as well as epidemiological information regarding the situation on both
sides, on a biweekly basis. In line with the leaders’ agreement of 2 June 2021, the
Committee continued to synchronize and progressively adjust the two sides ’
respective COVID-19-related measures concerning the crossing points and, on
10 July, 23 September and 18 November, issued press statements through the United
Nations Spokesperson in Cyprus announcing adjustments to the epidemiological level
and the restrictive measures to be employed.
22. While the rate of transfer of European Union-approved vaccines to the Turkish
Cypriot community remained low, the Technical Committee on Health continued to
be instrumental in overseeing the transfer of the vaccines between the two sides. As
at 15 December, according to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and
Control, 1,956,023 doses had been received by the authorities of the Republic of
Cyprus, of which, according to the Technical Committee on Health, 234,038 doses
had been transferred to the north. Work to provide Turkish Cypriots equal access to
the European Union Digital COVID Certificate is ongoing but has continued to face
significant challenges.
23. The Technical Committee on Education met once during the reporting period
and faced challenges in the development and implementation of projects due to issues
of terminology in documents produced by the Committee. However, the “Imagine”
peace education project was launched on 8 November to mark the restart of activities
for the 2021/22 academic year after a break due to COVID-19-related restrictions.
The project is being implemented by the Association for Historical Dialogue and
Research and the Home for Cooperation, with the support of the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany and the United Nations. Several projects stalled due to
disagreements on terminology, and no progress was made on conducting a joint
review of school materials, including textbooks.
24. While a website developed by the Technical Committee on the Environment has
not yet been launched, due to disagreements over terminology, joint environmental
visits were conducted with the support of UNDP and the European Union support
facility to the technical committees, and several projects and activities are currently
under discussion. The Technical Committee on Humanitarian Matters met
intermittently but made limited progress regarding project implementation. The
Technical Committees on Crisis Management, Crossings and Culture met after a long
hiatus, and the latter held a productive meeting following new Turkish Cypriot
members being appointed during the reporting period.
25. In addition to the continued exchange of information on crime in both
communities through the Joint Contact Room (also known as the Joint
Communications Room), the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters
was in discussions to organize a seminar on combating violence against women. In
response to the Security Council’s call for an action plan to, inter alia, increase the
participation of women in peace talks, the Technical Committee on Gender Equality
reached a convergence on a set of practical recommendations addressing three main
questions: how to ensure the full and meaningful representation of women; how to
engage with civil society, including women’s organizations, to solicit their views; and
how to ensure the inclusion of a gender perspective in a future Cyprus settlement
process. While the draft recommendations were welcomed by the two leaders in their
essence, agreement on a joint action plan in line with the request of the Council was
unfortunately not reached, with both sides submitting their own versions of the plan
on 15 December.

21-19605

5/27

S/2021/1109

26. The Technical Committee on Economic and Commercial Matters met and
sought to advance its agreed priorities. On 19 November, thanks to the extensive work
carried out by the Technical Committee on Broadcasting and Telecommunication over
the past two years, the Turkish Cypriot leader and the Greek Cypriot leader confirmed
agreement on a project that will make way for the introduction of 5G across the island.
The project will remove television broadcasting systems from the 700 MHz frequency
band, enabling the transition from analogue to digital broadcasting, with the support
of the European Union, and allowing the allocation of the 700 MHz frequency band
to 5G mobile services.
27. Between 13 and 15 September, Deputy Special Adviser Spehar hosted a series
of events for the co-chairs and members of the technical committees to allow them to
meet (some for the first time in person) or to get reacquainted. The final event in the
series also saw the Greek Cypriot negotiator and the Turkish Cypriot special
representative in attendance.
28. On 16 November, Deputy Special Adviser Spehar addressed the seventeenth
annual Cyprus Summit, organized by The Economist, on “Current challenges and
opportunities in the Cyprus issue”, highlighting the importance of keeping the “thread
of dialogue” going on the island, as well as in the broader region, including in the
business realm. She also touched on the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact
assessment, which highlighted the costs of a non-settlement and made the case for
working immediately, island-wide, to increase gender parity in the contributions to
and the rewards of economic development, now and once a settlement is reached. On
2 October, Deputy Special Adviser Spehar participated in a panel discussion entitled
“Grass-roots peacebuilding: entrepreneurship, research and creativity ” as part of the
2021 Cyprus Forum, a panel which contributed to showcasing positive examples of
cooperation on the island across a variety of actors and sectors, including those
involving youth.
29. During the reporting period, my mission of good offices continued to work
together with UNFICYP on entrepreneurship and environmental peacebuilding
initiatives and supported activities to highlight and address environmental challenges
in the buffer zone and throughout the island, including through outreach to civil
society. Staff from my mission of good offices participated in the second United
Nations Youth Champions for Environment and Peace programme.

V. Observations
30. The passage of time continues to complicate efforts to find a mutually
acceptable solution in Cyprus. I note with concern that, during t his recent period, the
positions of the communities appear to have become more entrenched and further
apart. Since the Conference on Cyprus ended inconclusively at Crans-Montana,
Switzerland, in 2017, I have met with the leaders several times, most recentl y at the
informal lunch that I hosted in New York on 27 September. These meetings, including
those involving the guarantor powers, such as the informal five -plus-one meeting 1
held in Geneva in April 2021, as well as my ongoing contacts with all stakeholde rs,
have kept communication lines open and provided me with the opportunity to speak
openly and directly with those concerned. The Deputy Special Adviser, as well as
senior management at United Nations Headquarters, have also maintained continuous
contact and dialogue with all parties. In these efforts, I remain guided by relevant
Security Council resolutions that have established the United Nations parameters.
__________________
1

6/27

An informal meeting of the Greek Cypriot leader, the Turkish Cypriot leader, the guarantor
powers and the United Nations.
21-19605

S/2021/1109

31. My mission of good offices also helps to preserve dialogue at various levels and
promote a rapprochement between the communities, engaging in preventive
diplomacy to guard against further worsening of the climate. Important work was
done with the sides to provide support to the technical committees as they considered
additional confidence-building measures and engaged on addressing serious problems
on the island, including, as a priority, the negative impacts of the COVID -19
pandemic. The regularity of the meetings hosted by the Deputy Special Adviser
between the Greek Cypriot negotiator and the Turkish Cypriot special representative
and of related discussions spearheaded by my good offices mission is positive,
particularly in the light of ongoing challenges to constructive dialogue. Given the
continuing absence of fully fledged negotiations, the le aders’ presence at the
14 December reception in Nicosia sent a positive signal to the broader public. I
encourage the two leaders and their representatives to continue engaging with each
other and with the United Nations in this vein.
32. On the work of the technical committees, and with several exceptions, such as
the notable accomplishments of the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage, the
November announcement by the Technical Committee on Broadcasting and
Telecommunication and the beneficial role played by the Technical Committee on
Health in the context of the pandemic, I continue to consider that these bodies remain
significantly underutilized. I welcome the restart of the “Imagine” peace education
programme but note with concern the lack of progress on other projects under the
auspices of the Technical Committee on Education, as well as in other technical
committees, which could contribute considerably to rapprochement and
peacebuilding, particularly among the young. It is regrettable that no progress was
made on the Security Council’s request to address impediments to peace by
conducting a joint review of school materials, including textbooks, as a contribution
to trust-building between the communities.
33. I welcome the regular exchange of epidemiological information and
coordination within the Technical Committee on Health on COVID -19-related
measures. Despite the harmonization of measures and adjustment of restrictions at the
crossing points, important challenges remain, including regarding the proportional
transfer of European Union-approved vaccines. While discussions are ongoing to
provide Turkish Cypriots full and equal access to the European Union Digital COVID
Certificate, progress has been slow, and more efforts are needed as a matter of priority.
34. The continued absence of substantive negotiations and the positioning of the
sides regarding the basis of a settlement in Cyprus have begun to affect the work of
the technical committees. Despite the calls by the Security Council for the Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders to provide the necessary political support and
overall guidance to free the technical committees from obstructions to their work and
enable them to function effectively, decisions on activities and projects proposed by
the committees, in some cases, began to mirror the lack of common ground on the
way forward with respect to the peace talks.
35. In this context, I strongly urge the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders
and their representatives to work together on confidence-building measures and to
continue revitalizing the work of the technical committees so that they can fulfil their
potential in positively affecting the daily lives of Cypriots, also in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2587 (2021). I urge the leaders and their representatives
to move beyond present challenges, including those related to terminology, and
instead to provide practical and political support and guidance to all the committees,
with a view to enabling the full reinvigoration of their work. These mechanisms of
dialogue and rapprochement are of particular importance and can, in the absence of
fully fledged negotiations, rekindle hope among the population that progress between
the parties can indeed still be made.
21-19605

7/27

S/2021/1109

36. The work carried out by my mission of good offices has helped to convey the
message that laying a foundation for peace requires people, in particular youth, to
interact, engage in dialogue and build trust. The idea of cooperation on sports to bring
young people together and promote interaction between the two communities via
sports activities, including possibly through the establishment of a technical
committee on the matter, continues to be worth considering.
37. There is a risk that the deepening of disparities between the two economies may
start eroding the basis for important convergences achieved in the past, hence the need
for more concerted efforts to tackle the economic fallout from the pandemic and other
factors, while also promoting greater economic ties and increased intra-island trade.
It is important that risks associated with the two economies further drifting apart be
understood and acknowledged so that appropriate mitigating measures can be
devised.
38. I reiterate my concern over developments in the fenced-off area of Varosha. The
position of the United Nations on Varosha remains unchanged. I recall the statements
by the President of the Security Council on the matter, as well as relevant Council
resolutions, notably resolutions 550 (1984) and 789 (1992), and I underscore the
importance of adhering fully to those resolutions.
39. I am concerned about the rising tensions in and around Cyprus and the broader
eastern Mediterranean region. I stress again that natural resources in and around
Cyprus should benefit both communities and constitute a strong incentive for the
parties to find a mutually acceptable and durable solution to the Cyprus problem. I
urge restraint by all parties and call for serious effort to be made to defuse tensions.
40. I encourage the parties to follow international best practice on the participation
of women at decision-making levels in conflict resolution and peace processes, as
highlighted in consecutive Security Council resolutions since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). I urge the parties to ensure the inclusion of at least 30 per
cent women in any of their future delegations to talks, as well as in other bodies
related to the talks, and to explore ways to ensure the effective participation of
women, including at the grass-roots level, in the peace process, along with the
inclusion of a gender perspective in a possible resumed negotiation process. With
regard to the action plan requested by the Security Council, I commend the Technical
Committee on Gender Equality for its work and urge the leaders to agree, as a matter
of priority, on a joint action plan. I also urge the leaders to implement the
recommendations set out in the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessment to
address existing barriers to the full economic participation of women, not only to
benefit women today, but also to ensure that a future peace agreement will more
equally benefit both men and women in Cyprus.
41. I echo the Security Council’s support for greater civic engagement and trustbuilding and urge the leaders to encourage contact and cooperation more explicitly
between the two communities. The leaders should aim for a more inclusive peace
process, as per recent international best practice, and should involve underrepresented
groups, including women, minorities, youth and persons with disabilities, in
discussions pertaining to the Cyprus problem and in any resumed peace talks. I
emphasize the important support role of the two United Nations missions on the
ground in this regard and their mutually reinforcing activities.
42. I encourage the leaders to look to the future with pragmatism. As can be seen
from the written updates annexed to the present report, the positions of the sides
remain far apart. A continued lack of political progress has significant implications
for all Cypriots. I call on all parties to refrain from any unhelpful actions and to
actively seek solutions through dialogue. Without decisive action, continuing
dynamics in and around Cyprus and electoral timelines could render future efforts to
8/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

reach a mutually agreeable settlement to the Cyprus issue unattainable. The parties’
display of flexibility and firm political will is of paramount importance. I urge the
parties to engage constructively on finding and building common ground, with a view
towards a resumption of meaningful peace talks. A United Nations envoy to lead this
engagement could provide critical support in this respect.
43. I would also stress the importance of all Cypriots engaging actively in shaping
the future of the island and call on the guarantor powers to do their utmost to support
efforts to ultimately bring the Cyprus issue to a settlement and bring peace and
prosperity to all Cypriots. I would like to express my gratitude to Ms. Spehar for her
dedication and commitment to discharging the responsibilities entruste d to her as my
Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus over the past five years and welcome the arrival
in Cyprus of Colin Stewart, who has now taken up these duties. I also express my
appreciation to Ms. Lute for conducting consultations on my behalf and to all the
women and men serving in my mission of good offices in Cyprus for their continuing
good work.

21-19605

9/27

S/2021/1109

Annex I
Written update by the Greek Cypriot leader to the Good
Offices Mission of the Secretary-General, pursuant to and
in accordance with UNSCR 2587 (2021)
This submission is made in response to the encouragement in UN Security
Council Resolution 2587 (2021), to “the leaders of the two communities to provide
written updates to the Good Offices Mission of the Secretary General on the actions
they have taken in support of the relevant parts of this resolution since its adoption,
in particular with regard to paragraphs 6 and 7 and 9, with a view to reaching a
sustainable and comprehensive settlement”.
The present update includes all developments relevant to the effort to resume
the peace process in the framework of the Good Offices Mission of the UNSG,
irrespective of their inter-state or inter-communal character. References to
communities are without prejudice to the Republic of Cyprus as a Member State of
the United Nations and references to UNFICYP are made without prejudice to the
Republic of Cyprus as the host country of the Force.

I. Efforts to resume the peace process
Since the inconclusive closing of the Crans Montana Conference on Cyprus in
July 2017, where we came closer than even before to a strategic agreement, our efforts
have concentrated on the resumption of the peace proc ess from the point that it was
left in Crans Montana.
To this direction, an agreement in principle was reached between the leaders of
the two communities in August 2019 to build the resumption of the negotiations on
the Joint Declaration of 11th February 2014, the prior convergences achieved and the
6-point framework presented by the UN Secretary General in Crans Montana.
This agreement was confirmed at a trilateral meeting with the UNSG the
following November in Berlin, paving the way for an informal 5+ 1 meeting of the
parties, which would eventually take place in Geneva in April 2021, under difficult
circumstances, given the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic but also the
escalation of tension on and around Cyprus.
It is therefore extremely disappointing that the fundamental shift of the Turkish
Cypriot position, with the encouragement of Ankara, from reunification of Cyprus
based on a Bizonal Bicommunal Federation with political equality, to a recognition
of 2 states, did not allow an agreement at Geneva to continue within the UN
framework.
This was also accompanied by a rejection of the UN Secretary General ’s
proposal at Geneva for the appointment of a Special Envoy who would try to help the
two sides find common ground for resumption. Instead , the Turkish Cypriot leader
put forward preconditions for participating in any negotiation that are clearly outside
the existing UN framework.
At the same time, Turkey’s illegal and provocative activities in the territorial
sea, the continental shelf and the EEZ of Cyprus, the violations of the military status
quo along the Turkish forces ceasefire line and Strovilia, as well as their illegal
actions in the fenced area of Varosha, in defiance of the UN Security Council
Resolutions and decisions, undermining any prospect for the resumption of
negotiations, have created an extremely negative political climate.

10/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

This is a trend which gets extremely worrisome as Ankara does not refrain from
launching at every opportunity threats for use of military force on and around Cyprus,
exhibited inter alia through the upgrading of the illegal airport at Lefkonoiko, where
now Turkish drones are stationed, in an obvious effort to create a military advantage
in Cyprus and in the region, while of course increasing the risk of destabilization.
As the current situation entails grave threats for Cyprus and the region, we have
at several occasions expressed our deep concern and asked for the support of the
international community. While we have also expressed readiness to engage with
constructive approach in any discussion that would help the resumption of the
negotiations process, within the framework of the Good Offices of the UN Secretary
General, as the best way to break the impasse.
Our participation at the informal trilateral meeting in New York last September
was exactly in this spirit. First and foremost, by accepting unequ ivocally the
appointment of a Special Envoy, who, through deliberations with both sides and
within a specific period of 3-4 months, as the UN Secretary General had suggested in
Geneva, would lead to the resumption of meaningful and substantive negotiations ,
within the UN framework.
Furthermore, by reminding that since the inconclusive closing of Crans Montana
we have further elaborated on a number of aspects, mainly in order to respond to
certain concerns expressed by the Turkish Cypriots and always withi n the existing
framework.
In particular, we proposed the decentralization of the exercise of powers,
through which the appropriate balance between the enhancement of the constituent
states’ essential role and the unhindered functioning of the state can b e achieved. We
expressed at the same time our willingness to consider the option of a parliamentary
system with rotating and ceremonial head of state, acknowledging the importance of
symbolism.
More recently, we extended an invitation to the Turkish Cypriots to rejoin the
state institutions established by the 1960 Constitution of the Republic of Cyprus, thus
fully implementing mutatis mutandis its relevant provisions. It goes without saying
that such an invitation is not meant to be an alternative to the agreed basis of the
settlement, as set out in UN Security Council Resolutions. On the contrary, it is
exactly in this framework that the proposal is meant to integrate the Turkish Cypriot
community into their place in the state pending the settlement, in p articular if a
strategic agreement is reached, and thus fully participate in the evolution of the
Republic of Cyprus into a federal state.
We believe that such an arrangement could be the answer to the question of what
happens in the case where negotiations produce a strategic agreement but we still
have to go through a transitional period during which the detailed text of the
comprehensive agreement would be agreed and put in referenda; and eventually put
into effect.
This proposal could be assessed as part of the package of game-changer CBMs
proposed by us last December (i.e. Tympou airport and Varosha administration to UN,
Famagusta port under EU administration of Customs and Additional Protocol
implemented in a non-discriminatory way by Turkey, proportional share of
hydrocarbons exploitation’s revenues in escrow account to the benefit of TC
community, provided an agreement with Turkey on EEZ delimitation is in place).
Such bold decisions would render the move forward irreversible and in effect
answer to the Turkish Cypriot demand for reassurances that they “will stand to gain
from participating at the negotiations” and will not (as they prefer to frame it) “remain
in limbo, in case of collapse”.
21-19605

11/27

S/2021/1109

For substantive negotiations to resume with realistic prospects of success
though, it is imperative to create an environment conducive to constructive and in
good faith negotiations. And while we are prepared to go the extra mile via
Confidence Building Measures, we need on the one hand the Turkish Cypriot sid e and
Ankara to reciprocate and on the other hand the UN to play their role with resolute
and confidence.
In this regard, we see as an absolute necessity, bearing also in mind that a second
informal 5+1 meeting was agreed in Geneva but has not yet materia lized, the
appointment of a Special Envoy, who would be ready to facilitate a serious discussion
about the next step and the resumption of substantive negotiations. In our view, the
above outlined ideas can contribute to meaningful and substantive negotiat ions, in an
interdependent and parallel way (or perhaps a cross-negotiation of the six main issues
included in the UN Secretary General’s framework), which will address all concerns,
while respecting the existing framework.
It was our belief that during the informal meeting in New York there was an
understanding on the appointment by the UN Secretary General of a Special Envoy,
yet this was later deconstructed during the drafting of the statement. It was
unfortunate perhaps, that the statement was not issu ed immediately after the meeting
and was left to be finalized later.
As negative this development as it might have been, it shall not deter us from
maintaining the discussion and facilitated by the Good Offices finding a way to put
the process back on track. Despite the enormous difficulties we are facing, we remain
deeply committed to this end. Our vision of a peaceful Cyprus lies firmly within the
established framework and a settlement of a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation with
political equality, as set out in the relevant United Nations Security Council
Resolutions.
As we strive for a meaningful and fruitful process, we need the support of the
UN and the UN Security Council in particular to impress upon all parties the need to
refrain from any acts that could undermine the prospects of resumption of
negotiations. In view in particular of the offensive moves by Turkey in Varosha and
in the EEZ, as well as the further militarization of the island with a drone base in
Lefkonoiko, a naval base in Trikomo and the further expansion of the Turkish military
in the Karpas peninsula. Instead, what we need from all parties is support for the UN
process with the aim to establish peace, stability and prosperity in Cyprus and in our
region.

II. Effective mechanism for direct military contacts
Given the tension on and around Cyprus, including threats for use of military
force emboldened by the upgrading of military capacity in the occupied areas, the
necessity for the establishment of a mechanism for dir ect military contacts, between
the opposing forces in Cyprus, facilitated by UNFICYP, becomes urgent.
Even more so, taking into account the continuous violations of the relevant UN
Security Council Resolutions, in Varosha and the obstructions and interfe rence on
behalf of the Turkish occupation forces with UNFICYP duties, rendering the latter
unable to perform its mandated tasks.
The calls by the UN Security Council to the parties involved to engage in the
discussion testify to the urgent need to prevent further deterioration. In this direction,
the government of the Republic of Cyprus presented a proposal already in December
2019, outlining a framework for a mechanism for direct military contacts between the
opposing forces, namely the National Guard and the Turkish occupation forces, at the
12/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

level of their Commanders, facilitated by UNFICYP at respective level, in accordance
with its mandate, as prescribed by the UN Security Council Resolution 186 (1964).
The government of the Republic of Cyprus stands ready to engage in further
discussion, while in the meantime expects a firm and decisive stance on behalf of
UNFICYP that would effectively deter further provocations by the Turkish
occupation army.

III. Committee on Missing Persons
The work of the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus remains a
fundamental aspect of the peace process and therefore, the support of all parties is
indeed considered a conditio sine qua non.
In this regard, we would like to stress once more the importance of access to
information from relevant archives of countries and organizations that had a military
or police presence in Cyprus in 1963, 1964 and 1974, thus rendering the Committee
more effective.
In particular, the Turkish military archives, especially of the period around 1974.
Turkey has the obligation to exercise due diligence and provide information from its
archives in good faith, to help determine the fate of missing persons in Cyprus.
Access to military archives would inter alia provide information regarding
primary locations of burial of missing persons, as well as secondary locations given
that a great number of remains were relocated, rendering the efforts of the Committee
extremely difficult.
As pointed out numerous times in the past, it is indeed critical to grant access to
information on these archives and obtain pertinent information to the question of the
fate of missing persons, which constitutes one of the grave humanitarian c hallenges
of the conflict.

IV. Technical Committees
Since their establishment in 2008, the Technical Committees continue working
under the UN auspices, in the framework of the efforts for a settlement of the Cyprus
problem. Based on the set of principles agreed by the leaders on 8th of July 2006, the
Technical Committees’ work on issues that affect the day-to-day life of the people
was envisaged as complementary to the concurrent negotiations on substantive issues,
in pursuit of a comprehensive settlement.
Thus, in the absence of substantive negotiations, the Technical Committees
continue their work, without of course substituting or altering the framework of the
political process. The respect of the agreed modus operandi is of critical importance
now, taking into account the Turkish Cypriot effort to impose their 2 -states approach,
which lies totally outside the agreed UN framework.
Restoring COVID-19 status quo ante at the crossing points last summer, which
facilitated enhancement of inter-communal contacts, was also expected to help the
Technical Committees’ work. Indeed, the Technical Committee on Health, which
spearheaded efforts to address the challenges posed by the COVID -19 pandemic,
concluded the first phase of the project on the identification and distribution of
mosquito vectors to address the risk for disease transmission, funded by the Support
Facility under EU Regulation 389/2006 and started the implementation of its second
phase.

21-19605

13/27

S/2021/1109

Other major projects are waiting to also be finalized and/or approved in the
framework of the Support Facility to the Technical Committees. In particular, the
Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment recycling proposal by the Technical
Committee on Entrepreneurship and Commercial Affairs presented in June , as well
as the website of the Technical Committee on Environment and the Lessons Plans by
the Technical Committee on Education, the finalization of which has been delayed by
a discussion on aspects mostly related to the Facility ’s framework rather than the
proposals themselves.
Beyond the framework of the Facility, it is a positive sign that all Technical
Committees had either virtual, hybrid or physical meetings during the reporting
period, despite the adverse circumstances due to the pandemic. There wer e also few
events organized by the Technical Committees. Notably, The Technical Committee on
Environment organized well-attended field-trips of experts on sites of environmental
interest, focusing on the thematic area of biodiversity and nature protection. Whereas
the Technical Committee on Crisis Management organized a seminar on wildfires in
early summer and a seminar on floods in autumn for experts from both communities
to exchange information and valuable experience.
The Technical Committee on Education also held the launch event of the
bicommunal “Imagine” project in early November, while in collaboration and synergy
with the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters, works on the
Prevalence, Correlates and prevention of conventional bullying in schools and
cyberbullying project, consisted of research to collect systematic data on stereotypes,
prejudice and other factors of bullying.
Under the auspices of the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters,
the Joint Contacts Room, has systematically been facilitating exchange of information
regarding crimes. As an established and trusted channel for exchange of sensitive
information, JCR is an extremely useful tool in our efforts to address certain
challenges arising from the status quo that are related to crime, as well as relevant
aspects of more complicated issues, like the multifaceted phenomenon of irregular
migration. On the latter, a preliminary discussion has already taken place with the
synergy of a number of relevant Technical Committees (i.e. Crime and Criminal
Affairs, Humanitarian Affairs, Gender Equality) and the contribution of experts, in
order to identify sectoral challenges of criminal as well as of humanitarian nature.
The Technical Committee on Gender Equality also worked on an Action Plan
including Recommendations to increase women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace talks and to provide direct support and encouragement to civil
society organizations to enhance inter communal contact and trust-building, as
requested by the UN Security Council in its Resolution 2587 (2021). Although the
Action Plan was not finalized due to the difficulty to converge on agreed language
(i.e. the language of the Resolution) regarding the settlement process per se, the draft
Recommendations have been incorporated in separate submissions of the leaders on
the 15th December 2021, in response to the respective request of the UN Security
Council.
The Technical Committee on Telecommunications confirmed an understanding
initially reached in 2019 with mutual reassurances that would allow the clearance of
the 700MHz frequency band from analogue transmissions and the unhindered rollout
of 5G services.
Last but not least, the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage has maintained
its impressive volume of work, which was acknowledged and celebrated through the
2021 European Heritage Awards / Europa Nostra Awards. In particular, the Technical
Committee was 2021 Grand Prix Winner and a Laureate in the Category “Dedicated

14/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

Service to Heritage”, a distinction among 24 winning achievements in the field from
18 European countries that will hopefully pave the way for further achievements.
We will of course keep supporting and encouraging the Technic al Committees
to use all tools available, especially the Support Facility funded by the EU in the
framework of the Regulation 389/2006, in order to continue and enhance their work,
as an invaluable contribution in creating a more positive political environ ment, in the
framework of their mandates and their complementary role to the substantial
negotiations in the context of the settlement process.

21-19605

15/27

S/2021/1109

Annex II
Actions taken by the Turkish Cypriot Side in support of the
relevant parts of Security Council Resolution 2587 (2021)
adopted on 29 July 2021
I. Actions Taken in Support of Reaching a Sustainable and
Comprehensive Settlement
Our new vision: realistic basis for the island of Cyprus
I am strongly committed to the new Turkish Cypriot vision for a sustainable
settlement in Cyprus, which I began to put forward when I was serving as the Prime
Minister of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Since my election as
the fifth President of the TRNC, I have been sharing my new vision, which is a
solution based on the inherent sovereign equality and the equal international status of
the two existing States on the island. The establishment of a cooperative relationship
between the two on this basis is a requirement of the indisputable principle of
“equality” and would provide mutual benefits for the two Peoples on the island while
contributing to the much-needed security, stability and cooperation in the Eastern
Mediterranean.
Drawing from the lessons learnt from half a century of failed and exhausted
UN-led negotiations, it is imperative that an equilibrium is established between the
Turkish Cypriot Side and the Greek Cypriot Side, not only at the negotiating table,
but, most importantly, outside.
The necessity of leveling the playing field for a successful outcome has become
more apparent from the statement of Mr Nicos Anastasiades, the Greek Cypriot
leader, delivered in September at the 76th Session of the United Nations General
Assembly in New York. In delivering his rather hostile and provocative statement at
a platform where Turkish Cypriots could not voice their views, the Greek Cypriot
leader openly admitted his vision of Greek Cypriot superiority over the Turkish
Cypriot People by presenting the 100% Greek Cypriot state as the master of the island,
whilst conveniently putting a glossy cover over the usurpation of the 1960
bi-communal partnership Republic of Cyprus and the repeated refusal of the Greek
Cypriot side to share power and prosperity with the Turkish Cypriot side, their
sovereign equal. It is this obsession of having superiority that has obstructed an
equality-based settlement on the island for decades, which remains to be the first issue
that needs to be addressed.
The 1960 partnership Republic of Cyprus is not the “Republic” that
Mr Anastasiades purports to represent. That State, which was destroyed by the Greek
Cypriot side, lasted for 3 years only. What exists today on the international arena
instead is a hijacked state, composed of Greek Cypriots only, devoid of its
constitutional set-up, where almost half of the Articles of its Constitution have been
suspended under the guise of the “doctrine of necessity”. It is undisputed that what is
presented as the “Republic of Cyprus” is a Greek Cypriot state with jurisdiction,
authority and sovereignty that ends at the crossing points to the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus.
While one side maintains its intransigent stance based on a claim that it is the
sole legitimate authority that represents the entire island of Cyprus, unjust isolation
has been imposed on the Turkish Cypriot Side that continues to be treated as a subject
‘community’ of the “one hundred per cent” Greek Cypriot state. The Turkish Cypriots
are not a subject ‘community’, but a People that has been forced into establishing its
16/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

own state because of the usurpation of the partnership state it established with the
Greek Cypriot partner in 1960 and because of the reluctance of the Greek Cypriots to
share power and prosperity with Turkish Cypriots. As such the Turkish Cypriot State
is at least as sovereign as that of the Greek Cypriots’.
As their President, I represent the State that the Turkish Cypriot People have
established after undergoing many years of atrocities, threat of extermination through
genocide, exclusion and being left without a status for years. TRNC, with its own
fully-functioning, democratically-elected Government, Parliament and Judiciary,
possesses all attributes of a modern State. Despite the un just isolation it has been
under, even in the fields of sports and culture, TRNC, with her young and educated
population, continues to prosper.
Factual and legal realities clearly show that it is the inherent equality of the
Turkish Cypriot Side and the Greek Cypriot Side that entitles each to enjoy the same
rights and status, both internally and externally. Since the Greek Cypriot polity is
claiming full sovereignty, equality and the needed political equilibrium on the island
necessitates that any relationship between the two Sides should be based on their
sovereign equality and equal international status.
My People deserve to live in peace and harmony as would any other distinct
People. On the island, the Turkish Cypriot People want to establish good nei ghbourly
relations and to cooperate with their Greek Cypriot counterparts. While doing so, my
People want to preserve and protect their existence, distinct identity, equality and
sovereignty.
In full respect to the will of my People, my vision is to work towards a
cooperative relationship with the Greek Cypriot side based on inherent sovereign
equality and equal international status. At a time when bi-zonal, bi-communal
federation as a basis for a solution has been exhausted, I will continue my engagement
with the UN to explore whether or not common ground exists before formal
negotiations can start. At the same time, I remain committed to establishing
institutional cooperation with our Greek Cypriot counterparts.
This commitment does not entail engaging in negotiations for the sake of
negotiations. Open-ended negotiations that lasted for decades on the same, repeatedly
failed basis without an outcome resulted in the continuation of the suffering of the
Turkish Cypriot People under isolation, while further bolstering the Greek Cypriot
Side’s intransigent stance.
I met with the UN Secretary-General, Mr António Guterres, on 25 June 2021 at
the UN Office in Brussels. The fact that the meeting was held on the same day as his
meeting with the Greek Cypriot Leader was an important sign that the UNSG will
continue to respect equality, and maintain a fair and balanced approach in the way he
has done during the 5+UN informal meeting in Geneva. During the meeting, I told
the UNSG that I remain committed to continuing our discussions aimed at exploring
whether common ground exists between the two Sides that would enable the start of
new formal negotiations for a fair and sustainable settlement in Cyprus. To that end,
I expressed my readiness to rise to the challenge to square the circle, and to spend all
the effort necessary to solve the Cyprus issue that has been occupying the UN agenda
since 1963.
At that meeting, I reiterated the six-point proposal I tabled in Geneva outlining
the new vision, fully supported by Turkey that will break the deadlock in the decadeslong failed negotiations. Furthermore, I expressed my determination to engage in
negotiations on a new basis with a view to establishing a cooperative relationship
between the two existing States, upon the formal acknowledgement of our inherent

21-19605

17/27

S/2021/1109

equal rights with the Greek Cypriot side, securing the sovereign equality and equal
international status of the two Sides.
I also shared with the UNSG my conviction that in the Cyprus context, past
experiences have shown that negotiations do not yield results unless equilibrium is
established between the two Sides, and when equality is only recognized at the
negotiating table. Also, I confirmed that negotiation on the old failed asymmetric
basis in Cyprus has long been exhausted and it is now clear that this model cannot
yield a sustainable result.
Following the acknowledgment and securing of our sovereign equality and
equal international status, I shared my commitment with the UNSG that I am ready
to engage in formal negotiations that will focus on substance, including the future
relationship between the two independent States, property, security and border
adjustment, as well as relations with the EU.
Moreover, I noted that the Greek Cypriot stance against the acknowled gment of
the equal inherent rights of the Turkish Cypriot Side serves to block the initiation of
formal negotiations and called upon the UNSG for his intervention in this issue. I also
underlined the importance of the work of the Technical Committees as a bottom-up
track 2 process and shared my commitment to initiate new concrete proposals to
contribute to the daily lives of people from both Sides. I reiterated to the UNSG the
four principles my Special Representative, together with the Greek Cypriot
Negotiator, agreed before proposing a measure as confidence-building measures as
part of the bottom-up process to be
(a)

mutually agreed;

(b)

mutually beneficial;

(c)

respecting the equality of the two Sides; and

(d)
other.

not involving or implying the extension of one side’s authority over the

While I expressed satisfaction about some positive results (for example, in
making all the crossing points operational as they were in the pre-COVID-19 period),
I said I was ready to continue to take up additional tangible, practical confidencebuilding measures in line with the bottom up approach the UNSG has proposed in
Geneva.
At the same time, I expressed concern about the proposals advanced by the
Greek Cypriot Leader in Geneva, as they violated the agreed principles for CBMs,
were top down, and required addressing issues related to substance that can only be
tackled as part of formal negotiations. Therefore, any proposal to be considered as a
confidence building measure should be prepared in full respec t to the four principles
that the Sides agreed under the auspices of the UN.
Concerning UNFICYP, I reiterated to the UNSG the indispensable principle of
peacekeeping operations which requires the consent and approval of the conflicting
parties. In the absence of the consent of both Sides in Cyprus, UNFICYP “risks
becoming a party to the conflict”, as stated in the United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations Principles and Guidelines. Also, respect to the equality of the two Sides
necessitates that UNFICYP works with the Turkish Cypriot Side and formalizes the
modalities of its operations in the TRNC. This could be done in the form of a Status
of Forces Agreement (SOFA) or through another mutually acceptable format.
Another major development in the reporting period has been the opening of the
pilot area in the closed part of Maraş (Varosha). On 20 July 2021, the 47 -year old
military status of a section of the closed part of Maraş was modified. As a result of
18/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

this change, access to the properties by the former inhabitants in what has been turned
into a civilian area by the decision of the TRNC Council of Ministers, is made
possible, through the Immovable Property Commission, that is recognized as an
effective domestic remedy by the European Court of Human Rights. T he Immovable
Property Commission can now grant all three remedies in this area, namely restitution
and/or compensation and/or exchange.
Our opening of Maraş, which remained a symbol of the status quo, has become
a sign of change in Cyprus. With this move, the closed part of Maraş, located in the
Famagusta region, is gradually being incorporated into civilian life, in full respect to
the rights of its former inhabitants.
During this period, I had another bilateral meeting with the UNSG in the
margins of the UN General Assembly in New York on 25 September 2021. At this
meeting, I shared the underlying reasons of the current impasse at the political level.
I reminded the UNSG that the Greek Cypriot Side rejected all UN-initiated settlement
plans, while refusing to recognize the sovereign equality and equal international
status of the Turkish Cypriot Side on a par with their own sovereignty claims and
international status. It is clear that the Greek Cypriot leadership ’s only aim is to
maintain its usurped status claiming to be the sole owner of the island by managing
the status quo and using the failed negotiating process to this end.
I called upon the UN and the international community to establish the needed
equilibrium on the island by empowering the Turkish Cypriot Side in order to prepare
the ground for a sustainable political settlement.
As a first step, I explained to the UNSG that this necessitates the lifting of the
inhuman and unjustified economic, social and sporting restrictions imposed on the
Turkish Cypriot Side.
Secondly, I told UNSG that since the top-down political settlement process is at
an impasse, the ongoing bottom-up process aimed at bettering the daily lives of
Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots needed to be enhanced and made more effectiv e.
This bottom-up process is currently continuing through the Technical Committees.
This process is reinforced by the active engagement of the Turkish Cypriot Special
Representative and the Greek Cypriot Negotiator, through a mechanism created by
the former SRSG Elizabeth Spehar, which enables the sides to discuss and agree a
number of non-political confidence building measures that help build confidence and
contribute to the daily lives of people from both Sides.
There are three key requirements that need to be in place to enhance the work
of the Technical Committees and make them more effective, that is
– the four principles agreed by the Special Representative and the Negotiator on
confidence building measures have to be respected,
– revision of the composition of the 12 Technical Committees to include people
with authority from both Sides so that they can secure prompt and substantive
decisions from their authorities on issues addressed by the Technical
Committees, and
– the support of the political leaderships to the work of the Technical Committees
has to be secured.
As I explained to the UNSG in New York, while the political settlement process,
the work of the Technical Committees and any CBMs are all interlinked, the
difficulties at the political level should not obstruct dialogue and meaningful
cooperation channels which aim at addressing issues faced by people from the two
Sides in their interaction. Moreover, the maintenance of this channel and its
enhancement could contribute to the preparation of the ground for a new formal
21-19605

19/27

S/2021/1109

negotiation process to start, together with the creation of a culture of cooperation
between the two sides. I concluded my meeting with the UNSG by asking for his
contribution to support this channel if the bottom up proces s is to serve the purposes
of confidence building and the preparation of the ground for a sovereign equality based comprehensive settlement.
Despite the negative atmosphere created by the extremely disappointing speech
of my counterpart at the UN General Assembly, I participated in good faith in the
tripartite lunch the UNSG hosted in New York on 27 September 2021. I took this
opportunity to reiterate my vision and to encourage the establishment of institutional
cooperation between the two sides aiming at the creation of confidence-building and
the further development of the work of the Technical Committees for the preparation
of the ground.
During the lunch, in order to carry out the efforts to explore whether or not
common ground exists, there was an agreement with the UNSG’s suggestion to
appoint a Personal Envoy, who would continue this exercise between the two sides
and the representatives of the three Guarantor Powers. I emphasized at this meeting
the pressing need to foster “out of the box” thinking instead of tried and failed ideas
and processes. The agreement on the appointment of a Personal Envoy was also
reflected in the draft press statement the UNSG shared with the parties after the
informal tripartite lunch. Nevertheless, the Greek Cypriot Leade r subsequently
retracted from this agreement, leading to delays in the appointment of a Personal
Envoy to this day.

II. Actions Taken in Support of Confidence Building as well as
Promoting Contacts and Reconciliation
Confidence Building issues and measures
I consider that the work of the Technical Committees provides a powerful tool
for cooperation by creating an atmosphere of reconciliation, co -existence and
confidence between the two Sides on the island. We, as the Turkish Cypriot Side,
firmly believe that the enhancement of a genuine working relationship between the
two Sides contributes to the improvement of the daily lives of the Turkish Cypriot
People and the Greek Cypriot People while supporting the building up of confidence
and the development of a culture of cooperation.
As you are well aware, a new mechanism has been established by the then UN
Special Representative Elizabeth Spehar last February, and a forum was created to
tackle the challenges, requests and proposals introduced by the t wo Sides in order to
ease the lives of both Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots. Within the framework of
this forum, the Turkish Cypriot Special Representative M. Ergün Olgun, and the
Greek Cypriot Negotiator Andreas Mavroyiannis hold regular weekly meetin gs with
the facilitation of the UN Special Representative. The Turkish Cypriot Coordinator
and the Greek Cypriot Coordinator of the Technical Committees also hold their
separate weekly meetings to prepare the ground for the meetings of the Special
Representative and the Negotiator under UN auspices. This mechanism works on the
basis of a win-win approach on issues of mutual interest to both parties. The weekly
meetings also contribute to the work of the 12 Technical Committees as the necessary
political decisions are taken in that format, paving the way for the Committees to
discuss the technical aspects and modalities in relation to implementation.

20/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

1.

Technical Committees
The Technical Committee on Health has continued to address the everchanging challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. This work included
cooperation in the fight against COVID-19, promptly exchanging epidemiological
information, addressing urgent requests concerning medical emergencies, facilitating
the delivery of vaccines and the synchronization of the two sides’ respective
COVID-19 measures concerning crossings.
At the same time, the Technical Committee on Health managed to finalize the
first phase of the project on the identification and distribution of mosquito vectors to
address the risk for disease transmission, through public awareness and exchange of
views and information on necessary measures to protect public health. The Technical
Committee on Health also issued a flyer and a video recording of the first phase of
the project. They are currently implementing the second phase of this important
project.
The Turkish Cypriot Side proposed synchronization of vaccination certificates ,
which includes COVID-19 vaccination information and test details, that are issued by
the Turkish Cypriot Side, Ada Pass, and a similar pass issued by the Greek Cypriot
Side, Safe Pass, with a view to expediting the procedures applicable at the crossing
points.
The most challenging issue, which also adversely affects the freedom of
movement of the Turkish Cypriot People, is not being able to register their already
administered and approved vaccinations to obtain the required vaccination certificates
for travel purposes. This issue remains on the agenda of the Technical Committee on
Health as the two Sides have not yet found a practical solution to this very important
humanitarian issue.
The Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage has continued to hold its
regular weekly meetings and to implement its projects successfully to ensure the
protection of cultural heritage monuments on both Sides of the island for the future
generations to come. During this period, the Technical Committee on Cultural
Heritage completed its conservation work at the Salamis Archaeological site and at
the Zuhuri Mosque, and started conservation work at the Ottoman-era Tuzla Hamam
and the Orunda Mosque. Additionally, preparations for the projects of 10 mosques in
South Cyprus and 10 churches and other various monuments in the North are either
completed or ongoing.
In addition to being awarded the European Heritage Award/Europa Nostra
Award in the category of dedicated service to heritage, the Technical Committee on
Cultural Heritage also received the Grand Prix Laureate in the category for
“Dedicated Service to Heritage by Organizations and Individuals”.
The Technical Committee on Environment is finalizing the website designed
to bring experts from both Sides to exchange views and experiences on environmental
issues. In this reporting period, the Technical Committee on Environment org anized
two field visits starting from the South and then moved to the North. Also, the
Committee discussed ways of cooperation to tackle the threats arising from climate
change and to form a joint action plan to address this common problem. The Technical
Committee has been tasked by the Special Representative and the Negotiator to work
on the UN’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals and to identify those goals that can
be pursued, and, if necessary, adapted to the island of Cyprus.
The Technical Committee on Education has re-launched the “Imagine”
project and resumed training activities for this year which had been stalled due to the
pandemic. The Technical Committee continued its work on the Pilot Project on

21-19605

21/27

S/2021/1109

Educational Materials which will be finalized following official approvals from the
relevant Departments.
The Technical Committee on Education, in collaboration with the Technical
Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters, prepared a joint project, entitled
“Prevalence, Correlates, and Prevention of Conventional Bullying in Schools and
Cyberbullying”, which is pending final approval from the two Sides. Furthermore,
preparations for the implementation of this project, which aims at collecting
systematic data on stereotypes, prejudice and other factors of bullying are continuing.
Work on identifying risks and protective factors and using this information in training
for teachers is also continuing.
The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters has continued to
actively carry out its daily duties in the Joint Communications Room (JCR) located
in the Buffer Zone. The official personnel from the respective Police Departments
assigned to the JCR have continued to exchange information on various issues related
to crime and effectively processed applications coming from each Side. In this
reporting period, as the Turkish Cypriot Side, we handed over 2 suspected criminals
to the Greek Cypriot Side through JCR. The Committee also continued its
collaboration with other Technical Committees on projects under its mandate. During
this period, due to the rising number of criminality in the village of Pile/Pyla, UN
proposed a JCR-like mechanism to be formed at this village. As the Turkish Cypriot
Side, upon consultation with our security departments, we pro posed to form a new
JCR or a branch of JCR located in Lefkoşa/Nicosia, with the same modalities and
mandate. We also proposed this new JCR to be placed at the UN post in the village.
We are expecting the positive response of the Greek Cypriot Side to proce ed with this
new arrangement as soon as possible.
The Technical Committee on Economy and Commercial Matters actively
continues to engage with their Greek Cypriot counterparts to tackle the negative
impact of the pandemic on the economies of the two Sides. The Committee is also
tasked to work on further economic cooperation for the post-pandemic period.
It is a known fact that trade across the Green Line is yet to reach the desired
level. One of the main impediments is the absence of financial transactions between
the banking systems of the two Sides, The Committee is looking into ways of
overcoming this problem.
As the Turkish Cypriot Side we also proposed to solve long-standing issues,
such as the crossing of Turkish Cypriot registered commercial vehicle s and processed
food to the South. In order to enhance Green Line trade, we also proposed to set up a
joint laboratory within the buffer zone to be jointly managed by the two Chambers of
Commerce.
The Technical Committee on Economy and Commercial Matters is also working
on a feasibility project for the recycling of electronic waste in collaboration with the
Technical Committee on Environment.
After a long time, the Technical Committee on Crossings has had its first
meeting during this reporting period. It is a known fact that there is always a
congestion at Metehan/Ayios Demetios crossing point. The Turkish Cypriot Co -Chair
proposed to discuss how to handle this issue, but her Greek Cypriot counterpart put
forward a series of preconditions even to discuss this practical matter, which affects
the daily lives of both Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots.
The Technical Committee on Humanitarian Affairs agreed to organize a
campaign to raise awareness about the difficulties faced by the elderly. The
Committee also has been discussing other humanitarian issues that affect the lives of
Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots.
22/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

The Technical Committee on Crisis Management has organized a seminar on
forest fires in June. Following the presentations of the two Sides, 5 i ssues were
identified as future fields of cooperation. The said 5 issues are as follows:
– Compilation of an inventory which will include natural disaster risks,
– Regular meetings of experts from the Department of the Forestry of the two
Sides,
– Formation of fire breaks,
– Establishing direct contact with the UN with regards to the fires in the buffer
zone, and
– Providing information and training for the public.
Also, in October and November, the Committee organized a seminar on floods
and worked on how to cooperate and assist each other in the case of floods affecting
either Side.
The Technical Committee on Broadcasting concluded an agreement that will
make the way for the introduction and usage of 5G across the island. According to
the agreement reached between the Turkish Cypriot Side and the Greek Cypriot Side,
TV broadcasting systems will be removed from the 700 MHz frequency band;
transitioning from analogue to digital broadcasting, with the support of the European
Union; allowing the allocation of the 700 MHz frequency band to 5G mobile services.
This important agreement was concluded by the Turkish Cypriot Special
Representative, Mr. M. Ergün Olgun and the Greek Cypriot Negotiator, Mr. Andreas
D. Mavroyiannis, with the facilitation of the Special Representative and Deputy
Special Adviser of the United Nations Secretary-General on Cyprus, Ms. Elizabeth
Spehar.
Efforts are being made to make the Technical Committee on Culture work
more actively in the coming period. In line with the improved conditions within the
scope of combating the pandemic, the evaluation of the proposals made by the two
Parties regarding cultural activities in the new period has begun. We have already
appointed a new Chair and strengthened the Committee with two new members. These
changes have already given new momentum to the work of the Committee.
As the Turkish Cypriot Side, we attach great importance to gender issues and
therefore to the work of the Technical Committee on Gender Equality. In the
coming period, we would like to bring gender sensitive issues to the agenda of the
Committee and to develop projects on raising awareness on this topic, including the
use of gender sensitive language. The Technical Committee worked intensively on
the preparation of an Action Plan on the effective participation of women to the peace
process, in line with the call of the Security Council. After a very intensive period
with the facilitation of UN, the Sides reached an agreement on substance, but due to
the insistence on the usage of terminology which prejudges the outcome of the
common ground exercise the joint action plan is yet to be completed.
Despite this the Turkish Cypriot Side has submitted an action plan to the UN
Good Offices Mission of the UNSG which reflects the agreements reached in the
Technical Committee on Gender Equality on substance in a way that does not
prejudice the position of either Side in the political process.
We support the Sustainable Development Goals and we deem it very relevant
to the work of the Technical Committees in general. We strongly support the
introduction of these Goals to these works and already tasked the Technical
Committee on Environment to work on those 17 topics. We hope that in the upcoming

21-19605

23/27

S/2021/1109

period, our Greek Cypriot counterparts will respond positively and we can start
introducing these Goals to our process.
On irregular migration, we give great importance to this global challenge and
propose to form an effective mechanism that includes the relevant Technical
Committees, with the participation of the competent authorities, to effectively
cooperate on this matter that adversely affects the island. The Greek Cypriot Side
regrettably wanted to limit deliberations of this issue within the limits of the Technical
Committees. Dealing with this complicated and serious issue requires people with
authority who have the capacity to reach directly to the decision -makers, who can
share sensitive information and intervene as necessary. We hope that in the upcoming
period, our Greek Cypriot counterparts will choose close cooperation instead of
political blame game to address this humanitarian issue that affects both Sides.
2.

The Committee on Missing Persons
In the reporting period, TRNC authorities continued to support the Committee
on Missing Persons (CMP) which has been instrumental in addressing this sensitive
humanitarian issue.
Information at the disposal of the Turkish side on possible burial sites has
already been shared with the CMP in 1998. Since then the TRNC has been forwarding
any new information that comes to light. As far as further search for documentary
information about possible burial sites is concerned, TRNC authorities have given
access to CMP to conduct investigations in a number of state archives. Furthermore,
the Archive Committee, established in 2016, has been responding to the specific
requests of the CMP by resorting to relevant archives, with a view to locating
additional burial sites. During the reporting period, the Turkish Cypriot Member ’s
Office of the CMP had access to aerial photos dating from 1974, analyzing 78
different coordinates in 55 different regions.
After CMP identifies possible burial sites, it proceeds with exhumatio ns
according to a work plan. In order to assist CMP, TRNC authorities continued to make
the necessary arrangements so that CMP can have access to any suspected burial site
throughout the TRNC. In this context, CMP has been continuing its work in 30
additional military areas where access has been granted in June 2019, where
excavations will be conducted according to the excavation planning of the CMP.
Work, which has been interrupted due to COVID-19 measures, has resumed and
the Committee continued its work in all areas, including the military areas, subject to
the applicable COVID-19-related measures. In 2021, CMP excavated 70 areas in the
TRNC, 6 of which are in military areas. 6 of the excavations in the TRNC are
continuing, and 1 of these excavations is in a military area.
TRNC continues to support CMP financially. Annual financial contributions to
the budget of the Office of the Turkish Cypriot Member of the CMP in the amount of
approximately EUR 1,000,000 per year are supplemented by additional contribu tions.
Additional contributions to date have reached EUR 433,000. EU ’s total contributions
in the amount of EUR 30,700,000 are from the funds the European Union, earmarked
for the economic development of Turkish Cypriots. CMP’s work can be accelerated
with additional funding.
CMP also identified 16 additional missing persons during the reporting period,
7 of whom were Turkish Cypriot missing persons and 9 were Greek Cypriot missing
persons, as well as 5 Greek Cypriot deceased and 1 Turkish Cypriot deceased who
were not on the CMP’s official missing persons list. Thus, a total of 22 individuals
have been identified during the reporting period.

24/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

3.

Hellim/Halloumi
Hellim/Halloumi is a common traditional cheese product that belongs to both
Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots. On 12 April 2021, the European Commission
proceeded to adopt two legislative instruments, one registering Hellim/Halloumi as a
Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) and the other purporting to enable its trade
across the Green Line. In enacting the instruments, the European Commission went
against its stated policies of ending the isolation on Turkish Cypriots through
economic development, the law, the facts on the ground and the equality of the two
sides, and disregarded the legitimate concerns expressed by the Turkish Cypriot Side
and the relevant stakeholders.
With the two legislative instruments concerning Hellim/Hallomi, the EU has
surrendered to the Greek Cypriot policy of extending its authority and jurisdiction
over the Turkish Cypriot Side, which is not only totally unacceptable and illegitimate,
but also against the principle that neither side may claim authority or jurisdiction over
the other side. Each side knows where their authority and jurisdiction, indeed their
sovereignty, starts and ends – that is, at the crossing points. The crossing points
through which movement of persons and goods are regulated are clear indicators of
this reality.
In the workings of the European Commission, which includes trade of goods to
the EU through the Green Line, the European Commission has been the counterpart
of the TRNC authorities and producers. With the recent changes concerning
Hellim/Halloumi, however, the European Commission, as a potential facilitator, was
removed from the equation and Turkish Cypriots were put in a position whereby they
are subordinated to the Greek Cypriot administration.
The practical consequence of this arrangement has been yet another example of
discrimination against the Turkish Cypriot People. Greek Cypriot produc ers,
producing 85% of Hellim/Halloumi in the South, have already started benefiting from
the PDO Registration, upon the commencement of the application of the PDO
Regulation on 1 October 2021, with the relevant control body granting them the
necessary PDO listing on time. By contrast, the same control body refrained from
even contacting its counterpart Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce to start the
same process in the TRNC and to sign an agreement to work out the necessary
arrangements in detail. Furthermore, no steps have been taken to ensure the crossing
of Hellim/Halloumi for trade to the EU across the Green Line. Even though the
relevant instrument entered into force on 12 April 2021, there has not been an
appointment of the delegated body for health and safety, which needs to start
gathering the scientific evidence for a favorable Commission Decision concerning
animal health status in the TRNC, and then monitor residues and inspect milk
processing establishments.
On 26 October 2021, I wrote to Mrs Ursula von der Leyen, the President of the
European Commission, to express in no uncertain terms that I will not accept any
discrimination and injustice towards my People. I underlined that in a period where
efforts have concentrated on exploring whether comm on ground exists and building
confidence between the two Sides, the actions and decisions taken by the EU have
caused significant damage to the process.
Reminding the President of the EU’s undertaking to ensure there is a ‘workable
arrangement’ on the Island for Hellim/Halloumi for Turkish Cypriot producers and
Greek Cypriot producers alike, I asked for her intervention to facilitate the signing of
an agreement between the control body and the Turkish Cypriot Chamber of
Commerce, and reminded her of our position on the appointment of a health and safety
body, in accordance with the established method used under the Green Line

21-19605

25/27

S/2021/1109

Regulation by the European Commission, or alternatively jointly b y the two Sides. In
my letter, I emphasized that taking action would serve to repair the unjust and
discriminatory situation that was created by the decisions concerning
Hellim/Halloumi and to contribute to the building of confidence on the island.
4.

Isolation and Restrictions
There has not been any change in the Greek Cypriot policy of imposing isolation
and restrictions on the Turkish Cypriot People, which has been continuing since 1963.
This obstructionist policy aims to adversely affect Turkish Cyp riots in several areas
ranging from direct trade to direct flights, from cultural to sporting events, as well as
representation at the international forums.
The economic discrepancy between the two Sides remained wide in the
reporting period. The Turkish Cypriot Side continued to seek technical and financial
assistance from numerous organizations in order to tackle the negative effects of
COVID-19, but such moves did not produce any results despite the assistance the
Greek Cypriot Side received for this purpose. This has exacerbated the
socio-economic disparity between the two Sides. In the reporting period, there has
not been any development to ensure better implementation of the Green Line
Regulation. As the Turkish Cypriot Side, we have already put forwa rd concrete,
mutually beneficial and practical proposals in order to help both Sides ’ economies
during these difficult times caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

5.

Hydrocarbons
Hydrocarbon resources around the island of Cyprus belong to the Turkish
Cypriot People and the Greek Cypriot People. This fact is accepted by both Sides on
the Island, and all relevant and involved parties. Despite our constructive proposals
since 2011 for cooperation regarding exploration, exploitation and monetizing on
those resources, the Greek Cypriot Side continued its aggressive stance and preferred
to pursue their provocative activities.
The announcement of the Greek Cypriot Side to resume their unilateral and
illegal activities, in total disregard to the rights of the Turkish Cypriot People and the
maritime claims of the Republic of Turkey, is yet another blow to the security,
stability and cooperation, not only in Cyprus but also in the entire region. In response,
TRNC and Turkey will continue to protect their rights and are d etermined to proceed
with our own hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation activities leaving the door
open to cooperation as co-owners.
As one of the co-owners of hydrocarbon resources off the island of Cyprus, the
Turkish Cypriot Side continues to urge the Greek Cypriot Side to refrain from
engaging in unilateral acts that destabilize our region. The Turkish Cypriot proposal
for the establishment of a joint ad hoc committee providing for the joint management,
exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons resources, respectively in 2011, 2012,
and 2019, continues to be the way forward. In the proposal of the Turkish Cypriot
Side dated 13 July 2019, which is still on the table, the purpose of the joint committee
to be established, with the facilitation of the UN, is foreseen to seek common consent
on the planning, decision making and implementation of current and future
hydrocarbon activities.
Further to the proposal of the Turkish President to convene a regional
conference on hydrocarbons, I, as the President, am ready to participate in such a
conference on an equal status with the Greek Cypriot Side.

26/27

21-19605

S/2021/1109

6.

Maraş/Varosha
One of the most significant developments regarding Maraş/Varosha in the
reporting period has been the decision of the TRNC Council of Ministers announced
on 20 July 2021 to change the status of a designated portion of the closed part of
Maraş/Varosha into a civilian area. This move is directed towards enabling the former
inhabitants to be granted by the ECtHR-sanctioned Immovable Property Commission
(IPC) all three remedies regarding property claims. Despite all the efforts of the Greek
Cypriot leadership to prevent their people from applying to the IPC, to date, there are
42 applications concerning the designated civilian area. According to the statement
of Növber Ferit Veçhi, the President of the IPC, on 30 November 2021, the number
of applications to the IPC concerning the Maraş/Varosha region has increased from
280 in February 2020, to 338 on 12 November 2021, reaching 410 by 30 Novemb er
2021. This development shows that the Maraş/Varosha initiative of the Turkish
Cypriot side has been well received by the former inhabitants of the area.
The policy of the Turkish Cypriot Side regarding Maraş/Varosha constitutes also
a confidence building measure geared towards the rights of the inhabitants of the area
in line with the calls of the relevant international actors and bodies.

21-19605

27/27
