S/2015/870

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 November 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 27 of Security Council
resolution 2230 (2015), in which the Council requested me to continue to inform it
of progress in the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and to bring to its immediate attention any
serious violations of the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of the
Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei Area, of 20 June 2011 (S/2011/384,
annex). The report provides an update on the situation in Abyei and on the
deployment and operations of UNISFA from the issuance of my previous report
(S/2015/700), on 11 September 2015, to 31 October 2015, as well as on progress
made in the implementation of the additional tasks mandated under Council
resolution 2024 (2011) relating to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. It recommends, for the consideration of the Council, an additional six month extension of the Force’s mandate.

II. Security situation
2.
The security situation in the Abyei Area remained calm during the reporting
period. No clashes occurred between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities,
with the rainy season helping to keep the two communities apart for much of the
period.
3.
UNISFA continued to implement its robust and multifaceted conflict
prevention and mitigation strategy from its rain y season deployment bases. It
conducted 2,301 day and night special patrols and undertook 356 escorts. Company
operating bases remained deployed in Dokura and Abyei in the central sector;
Marial Achak, Athony, Banton, Tajalei and Agok in the southern secto r; and Farouk,
Diffra and Todach in the northern sector. The mission also facilitated 25 Joint
Security Committee meetings with community leaders in the Abyei Area.
4.
The Government of the Sudan continued to maintain approximately 80 to
110 oil police personnel inside the Diffra oil complex in northern Abyei, in violation
of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and multiple Security Council resolutions. In
addition, as first observed on 23 August, the Sudanese authorities continued the
earthwork excavation in Diffra, designed to improve the oil installation defences, in
15-19473 (E)

131115

*1519473*

S/2015/870

the presence of approximately 30 armed policemen. UNISFA requested that the
construction be stopped, as the building of security infrastructure and the presence
of armed policemen were in violation of the Agreement. However, Sudanese
national monitors maintained that UNISFA had no right to prevent a civilian
company from carrying out work in Sudanese territory, and that any attempt to stop
the work would be a breach of the sovereignty of the Sudan.
5.
The Sudanese national monitors offered to withdraw the armed police,
provided that UNISFA ensured area security for the earthwork. The mission
informed them that this was not possible, as the construction work was being
undertaken pursuant to a unilateral decision of the Government of the Sudan and
had not been approved by the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. No security
activity was to be undertaken by either party unilaterally. To date, approximately
57 km of digging has been completed, carried out by a civilian firm with civilianoperated machinery guarded by armed policemen. On 29 September, a UNISFA
patrol observed that the digging activity had been temporarily suspended owing to
flooding. The digging remained suspended at the time of reporti ng.
6.
On 8 October, UNISFA received a letter from a Sudanese representative of the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee informing it of a contractual agreement between
the Government of the Sudan and a foreign company to drill 19 water wells in
northern Abyei. In the letter, the representative also requested that UNISFA provide
protection and security for the workers and equipment. The communities that would
benefit from the project include Al Askar, Dari, Mekines, Goli, Al Shamam, Abu
Gazala and Al Radiyah. On 30 September, drilling commenced in Dari and Mekines,
with approximately 15 armed security guards observed on site, in violation of the
Agreement. UNISFA is not in a position to provide security for the drilling
operation, as it is unilateral and has not been agreed upon by the Committee.
7.
On 1 September, UNISFA troops on patrol in the general area of Baloom, in
the northern sector, arrested two Misseriya men in possession of two AK -47 rifles,
two rifle magazines and 54 rifle cartridges. The patrol team disarmed the men and
handed them over to community leaders. On 21 October, UNISFA troops disarmed
one Dinka man found carrying an AK-47 rifle in the general area of Agok. The man
was disarmed by the patrol team, and his weapon was taken to the Athony comp any
operating base for destruction. On 26 October, a UNISFA patrol found unexploded
ordnance near a water point in the Dari area, close to Diffra town. The item was
removed by Ethiopian light field engineers and the United Nations Mine Action
Service verified that the item was a partially detonated smoke grenade, reportedly
used by the local community for fishing purposes.
8.
With regard to seasonal migration, UNISFA troops reported Misseriya herders
heading towards the Abyei Area slightly earlier than usual for the start of the new
dry season. At the same time, some 150 displaced Ngok Dinka households were
observed returning from Agok to their villages of origin, including Tajalei, Todach,
Dungop and Noong, to prepare their land for the dry season. Owing t o this season’s
relative lack of rain, rivers and water reservoir sources were significantly lower than
they would normally be at that time of year, sparking concern that water table levels
would not be sufficient to see local communities through the dry season,
particularly in northern Abyei. UNISFA has finalized its dry season deployment plan
and has started the preparatory activities for its implementation.

2/12

15-19473

S/2015/870

9.
In order to fulfil the requirement for UNISFA to ensure security and confiscate
weapons and ammunition in the Abyei Area, the Mine Action Service developed a
mission-specific weapons and ammunition management policy. The policy provides
guidance on standards for weapon and ammunition storage and destruction. The
Mine Action Service also developed standard operating procedures for the safe
handling, storage and destruction of weapons and ammunition. On 22 October,
UNISFA troops handed over to the Mine Action Service 71 small arms and four
grenades that were in their custody. The first batch of weapon s stored in the mission
headquarters camp in Abyei will be destroyed in November, once the Service’s
destruction facility has been finalized. The Mine Action Service route verification
clearance teams and integrated clearance teams were mobilized into the mission’s
area of operations in September, to prepare for operations in the dry season. Those
teams will facilitate safe movement for mission personnel and local communities.
10. Despite the absence of law and order institutions in the Abyei Area, the
UNISFA police component continued its efforts to address the security vacuum in
order to ensure the maintenance of law and order by enhancing the capacity of the
community protection committees and conducting independent and joint community
interactive and observation patrols with UNISFA personnel. During the reporting
period, no serious criminal activity was reported.
11. On 2 and 3 September, the Senior Police Adviser of UNISFA visited Khartoum
to discuss with senior Sudanese officials law and order chall enges in the absence of
the Abyei Police Service and the establishment of community protection committees
in northern Abyei. During his visit, he met with the Sudanese Co -Chair of the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee, the Chief of Joint Operations and the C hief of
International Relations in the Ministry of Defence and the Deputy Director -General
for Police in the Ministry of the Interior. While the Senior Police Adviser’s
interlocutors conveyed appreciation for the mission’s operation of UNISFA police
team sites in northern Abyei to complement the military patrols, they expressed
reservations about the capacity of the community protection committees to manage
law and order without assistance from an established police service. Some
interlocutors stressed that the Government of the Sudan would recognize only the
Abyei Police Service and that, in the absence of its formation, UNISFA police
should seek support from Sudanese national monitors to address any serious law and
order issues. Without political support from the Sudan, the establishment and
operationalization of community protection committees in northern Abyei have been
delayed. Nonetheless, UNISFA plans to continue engaging with both Governments
on the issue.
12. During the reporting period, UNISFA police conducted 75 independent and
joint security observation and community interactive patrols with the military in the
northern sector (Diffra), the central sector (Abyei -Central) and the southern sector
(Agok). UNISFA police co-located with the local community protection committees
in the central and southern sectors to mentor, advise on law and order techniques
and improve efficiency during routine duties. UNISFA also developed a logistical
support plan to implement its mandated activities under resolution 2205 (2015) and
profiled another 75 Ngok Dinka members who had volunteered as community
protection committee members.

15-19473

3/12

S/2015/870

III. Political developments
13. As part of its plans for the dry season, UNISFA continued efforts to promote
grass-roots-level dialogue between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities. In
that regard, the mission held a series of separate meetings in September with leaders
from both communities regarding the establishment of a common market, based on
the desire of the two communities to resume trading activities and as a step towards
building confidence, mutual understanding and peaceful coexistence.
14. The consultations culminated in a joint meeting between the two communities
in Todach, an area between Abyei town and Diffra, on 7 October. The joint meeting
was the first face-to-face dialogue held between the Misseriya and the Ngok Dinka
communities to discuss issues of common concern since the assassination of the
Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief in May 2013. While the two delegations found
common ground on several issues, they did not reach agreement on the market’s
precise site and location. The Ngok Dinka representatives requested that the market
be established at Goli or Baloom Junction, in northern Abyei, while the Misseriya
representatives stated that their communities would support the market initiative
only if it were based in Abyei town. Both communities viewed the common market
initiatives as an opportunity to establish their presence in areas from which they
were then absent. Both communities nevertheless agreed that UNISFA should
continue the initiative and bring them together through separate mediation. The
mission is currently engaging separately with the communities in an attempt to
narrow their differences and achieve compromise, before bringing them together a
second time.
15. During the reporting period, UNISFA also helped to facilitate the attendance of
an Ngok Dinka delegation at a conference held in Aweil, South Sudan, from 17 to
19 September, on soft border management and peaceful coexistence. The conference
was funded by the United States Agency for International Development and hosted
by the Northern Bahr el Ghazal State authorities. It included delegations from the
Dinka Malual, Dinka Rek and Dinka Twic, the Raja community and the Misseriya
Awlad Kamil, Misseriya Fiyarin and Rizeigat. The Ngok Dinka attended as
observers. UNISFA also participated in the conference as an observer. The gathering
provided an opportunity for the communities to share their experiences, be st
practices and information on practical arrangements put in place to peacefully
administer the annual Misseriya and Rizeigat dry season migration in the Dinka
homelands of the Bahr el Ghazals, in South Sudan. All interlocutors spoke in favour
of ending the recurring cycle of conflict in the border region and of starting a new
chapter of reconciliation and peaceful coexistence. They agreed to focus their
efforts on local, grass-roots-level dialogue to achieve mutual respect for each
community’s culture and livelihood and committed to a series of follow-up
conferences. UNISFA will work closely with both the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities to build on the outcomes of the conference and to facilitate similar
dialogue between the two communities. Regrettably, the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee has not met since March 2015, and a date has not been set for the
rescheduled traditional leaders’ dialogue meeting proposed by the African Union.

4/12

15-19473

S/2015/870

IV. Humanitarian and recovery situation
16. The difficult economic situation and ongoing conflict in the region continued
to have an impact on the Abyei Area during the reporting period. United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and non-governmental organizations continued to
provide humanitarian and recovery assistance to 89,300 internally displaced persons
and returnees in central and southern Abyei. The delivery of humanitarian and
recovery assistance also continued for 15,000 vulnerable agropastoralist Misseriya
in northern Abyei. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
non-governmental organizations began their planning for the resumption of
assistance to Misseriya seasonal migrants during the dry season. In September, the
food rations of the 150 Ngok Dinka displaced households returning from Agok to
their villages of origin in and around Abyei town were transferred accordingly.
More displaced persons are expected to return in the coming months.
17. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and non -governmental
organizations also continued to provide humanitarian assistance to 6,800 people
displaced from Unity State and 1,200 people displaced from Gogrial County, Warrap
State, in South Sudan. The number of conflict-affected South Sudanese displaced
persons from Unity State who used Diffra in northern Abyei as a transit point to
reach other Sudanese locations increased during the reporting period by 500 to
1,500. They were provided with basic relief assistance by relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes during their short stay in Diffra, facilitated by
UNISFA through the provision of force protection and the transportation of
supplies.
18. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and non -governmental
organizations are preparing to shift from general food distribution to more rec overyoriented interventions, such as Food for Assets, Food for Education and nutrition
programming. In order to ensure a smooth transition, a number of consultations with
the community leadership and potential implementing partners have been put in
place, covering the entire Abyei Area.
19. Efforts to support livelihoods continued alongside the provision of food aid.
Key activities included vocational training in carpentry, masonry, tailoring and
small-business skills as well as cash-for-work activities. Recent graduates of skills
training programmes established a cooperative in September, and a new round of
skills training began in October.
20. A total of 3,640 households in southern Abyei benefited from the distribution
of locally sourced sorghum seeds. Agricultural inputs, including tools and vegetable
seeds, had been stocked for distribution to 1,500 households by the end of the rainy
season. In northern Abyei, 20 community animal health workers were trained and
provided with livestock kits in September. Following the training, around 1 million
head of livestock in northern Abyei were to be vaccinated in November.
21. A number of UNISFA-funded quick-impact projects, including the
construction of a community hall and a market, were completed in October. Other
similar small-scale projects are in the implementation phase, covering the specific
needs of the sedentary communities as well as of the agropastoralist and seasonal
migrants.

15-19473

5/12

S/2015/870

22. In the health and nutrition sectors, 20 health facilities, including a new clinic
supplemented by mobile clinics and community malaria projects, continued to
provide basic health and nutrition support services thro ughout the Abyei Area,
covering the needs of both the host communities and displaced persons. There has
been a continued increase in malnutrition rates in the entire area, mainly among
children from the displaced communities of South Sudan who have entered the
Abyei Area. Displacement, food shortages and diseases were the leading causes of
the spike in malnutrition rates.
23. Owing to the conflict in 2011, some schools have been abandoned and the
children moved to southern Abyei to attend schools in the saf er southern area of the
Kiir River. The small number of trained teachers available and the overcrowded
schools in the areas of displacement have had an impact on the learning
environment for children in the Abyei Area. The education of girls has been
particularly affected, with high drop-out rates in higher primary education.
24. During the reporting period, 12 water points in villages south of the Kiir/Bahr
El Arab River were rehabilitated, benefiting at least 3,000 people, and hand washing
facilities were regularly maintained in public facilities. Around 2,000 hygiene kits
were distributed to the most vulnerable people. Latrine use remained a key
challenge in the entire Abyei Area, although 27 latrines, 15 in schools and 12 in
internally displaced persons sites, were constructed in August and September.
Activities to ensure the protection of the most vulnerable from violence,
exploitation and other abuses also continued throughout the Abyei Area. Those
activities included family tracing and reunification exercises, the monitoring of
children in foster care, support for children in contact with the law, training for
community-based child protection networks on the protection of children and the
provision and management of child-friendly spaces and child-friendly protection
units at police stations, support for vulnerable children with both food and non -food
items, mine risk education and ongoing monitoring of the protective environment
within villages.
25. United Nations humanitarian organizations have developed an inter-agency
contingency plan for humanitarian assistance in the Abyei Area for the six -month
dry season. The humanitarian community is facing many operational challenges,
and a lack of implementation capacity is being felt across all sectors. At pr esent,
only one local non-governmental organization is operating in northern Abyei, while
two international non-governmental organizations in southern Abyei are facing
serious funding shortages. Additional challenges include prevalent intercommunal
tensions, necessitating the continued reliance by United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes on UNISFA protection; delays in the issuance of travel permits and
restrictions on the movement of personnel and supplies into the Abyei Area by the
Sudanese authorities; high implementation costs owing to security and logistical
constraints; and the non-availability of northern Sudanese staff for safety and
security reasons.

V. Status of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism
26. On 14 October, an extraordinary session of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism took place in Addis Ababa, under the facilitation of the African Union

6/12

15-19473

S/2015/870

High-level Implementation Panel for the Sudan and South Sudan. The session was
the first to be held since May 2013. At the conclusion of the meeting, the parties
accepted the map of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone presented to them by the
Panel in November 2011, and agreed to its centreline as the location of the
separation line between the armed forces of the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan. In addition, the parties agreed to activate all mechanisms relating to
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism as provided for in relevant agreements,
in particular the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mecha nism, in
coordination with UNISFA and consistent with Security Council resolution 2024
(2011). The parties stated that their recognition of the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone and its centreline would not have any bearing on the definitive and final
location of the boundary between the two countries, and would not affect the current
administrative arrangements obtained in any area in the Zone. They also agreed that
either party might raise a concern about any point of the centreline through the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism in order to arrive at a mutually agreed adjustment
that addressed the concerns of that party.
27. During the meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, the
UNISFA Force Commander briefed the attendees on the status of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and the challenges of supporting the
implementation of the agreements of 29 June 2011 and 30 July 2011 relating to the
monitoring of border security between the Sudan and South Sudan. The parties
deferred discussion on the status of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism to the next ordinary session of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, which is scheduled to take place in Khartoum in November.
28. In line with the assessment of May 2015, no further infrastructural investments
are currently being planned for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, beyond initial operating capability, pending the demonstration by the
parties of a greater commitment to the implementation of their border arrangements.
In the meantime, UNISFA will continue its attempts to engage with the Government
of South Sudan to address the existing restrictions on aerial monitoring and landing
permissions and the deployment of a force protection c ompany to Gok Machar.
29. During the reporting period, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism continued to face numerous challenges in the implementation of its
aerial verification and monitoring mandate. A number of Mechanism patrols did not
take place owing to the denial of landing permissions by the Government of South
Sudan, in violation of Council resolutions 1990 (2011) and 2024 (2011) and the
status-of-forces agreements, signed by the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan in 2012. The restrictions on aerial monitoring of the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone in the western sector also continued. Only three of seven planned
missions were conducted during the reporting period, in the eastern sector of the
Abyei Area. To date, the Mechanism has been able to conduct only 57 of the
140 planned aerial monitoring patrols. The deployment of a force protection
company from Kadugli to Gok Machar remains suspended owing to the refusal of
landing permissions by the Sudan People’s Liberation Army division and brigade
commanders in that area. The troop strength in the Gok Machar camp remains at
64 of the authorized 265, which is not sufficient for even basic camp security and
administration.

15-19473

7/12

S/2015/870

30. Three newly contracted patrol support teams of the M ine Action Service were
deployed to the Mechanism sector 2 headquarters in Kadugli, the Sudan, on
19 August. In addition, two patrol support teams were in the process of deployment
to the Mechanism sector 1 headquarters in Gok Machar, South Sudan. In prepa ration
for planned ground patrols, the Service also delivered various training modules on
integrated ground patrols for 85 Mechanism personnel, including national monitors
from the Sudan and South Sudan, international military observers and elements of
the UNISFA force protection unit.

VI. Personnel deployment and mission support
31. During the reporting period, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,515
personnel (224 military observers/staff officers and 4,291 troops), of an authorized
strength of 5,326. The strength of the UNISFA police component stood at 23 police
officers (18 men and 5 women) from six police-contributing countries, of an
authorized strength of 50. The total number of civilian staff stood at 233. The
Government of the Sudan issued 123 visas for UNISFA personnel; 98 visas for
civilian and military staff remain pending.
32. Regarding logistical planning for the deployment of the Mechanism, necessary
construction work, including office and living accommodations and kitchens, have
been concluded, a perimeter chain-link fence for the Gok Machar camp has been
completed, and skeletal fuel services are now operational for the Gok Machar sector 1
headquarters force protection company. However, as noted above, the continued
denial of landing rights by the South Sudanese authorities has prevented the timely
deployment of Mechanism personnel.
33. The Government of the Sudan continues to restrict the delivery of construction
materials for the development of roads and infrastructure in and ar ound UNISFA
camps. The construction of new accommodations, camp expansion earthwork, work
on the perimeter wall and the completion of the Athony Airfield are all pending
owing to the non-availability of construction materials. Despite discussions between
UNISFA and senior government representatives, the issue has remained unresolved
since January 2015 and is significantly increasing the cost of UNISFA operations.
Troop rotations must be conducted by means of expensive rotary -wing air transport
from Abyei to Kadugli, and then by fixed-wing aircraft to Addis Ababa, instead of
the much cheaper option of fixed-wing rotation from Athony to Addis Ababa. The
use of the Athony Airfield will also be critical for the proposed fixed -wing
reconnaissance patrols in support of the Mechanism.

VII. Financial aspects
34. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/294, appropriated the amount of
$268.3 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2015 to
30 June 2016. As at 3 November 2015, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for UNISFA amounted to $17.8 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $1,503.1
million. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 31 July
2015, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment has been

8/12

15-19473

S/2015/870

made for the period up to 30 June 2015, in accordance with the quarterly payment
schedule.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
35. The signing, on 17 and 26 August 2015, of the Agreement on the Resolution o f
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and the prospect of an end to the
conflict there offer a fresh opportunity to refocus attention on Abyei in order to
advance the implementation of the Abyei Agreement of 20 June 2011 and the
agreements on border security of September 2012. I am hopeful that the new
positive momentum witnessed in the relations between the two Governments can
resuscitate the implementation of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and translate into
a sustainable improvement of border security. UNISFA, in partnership with my
Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan and in support of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel for the Sudan and South Sudan, will continue to
promote and support stable and peaceful relations between t he two countries and
engage with both Governments to encourage progress on all outstanding bilateral
issues.
36. In this regard, I warmly welcome the holding of the meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism in Addis Ababa on 14 October, and hop e that it
will spur renewed commitment by the parties to implement their agreements and
kick-start their engagement in operationalizing the required mechanisms and
committees. That extraordinary meeting paved the way for the resumption of normal
meetings, which are much needed for the provision of effective and regular
direction to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. I welcome the
parties’ decision to convene an ordinary meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism in November in Khartoum, and urge the two parties to allow the
mechanism to meet on a regular basis.
37. The Joint Political and Security Mechanism remains the principal oversight
body for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. The United
Nations has expended considerable effort and spent over $26 million on the
development of infrastructure in support of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism. As I have stated in previous reports, the United Nations is
no longer prepared to further develop the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism beyond its initial operating capability if the two parties do not address
the impediments to its full realization, demonstrate the necessary political
commitment and invest in the implementation of their agreements. In my report of
16 June 2015 (S/2015/439), I noted that the continued investment of UNISFA in
achieving full operating capability would be based on a set of conditions that the
parties must meet in order for the Mechanism to achieve its objectives. The United
Nations stands ready to amend the concept of operations of the Mechanism to
increase its operational effectiveness, as set out in my previous report, once the
parties have met the conditions and recommitted themselves to their border security
agreements.
38. At the same time, there is a need for both parties to the Abyei Agreement of
20 June 2011 to respect their accord, related Security Council resolutions and the
resolution adopted at the ninth meeting of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
held in March 2015, which reiterated the need for the Abyei Area to be a weapons -

15-19473

9/12

S/2015/870

free zone. In that regard, I call on the parties to emulate the renewal of Joint
Political and Security Mechanism meetings and resume the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee meetings, only one of which has been held in the past two years. It is
important that the two parties revitalize a viable political process that will lead to
the implementation of the Abyei Agreement of 20 June 2011. They should hold as a
matter of urgency the traditional leaders’ dialogue meeting proposed by the African
Union, which was postponed in June.
39. I am encouraged by the efforts of actors on the ground to seek dialogue and
reconciliation. The consultative conference on soft border management and peaceful
coexistence, held in Aweil, Northern Bahr el Ghazal State, South Sudan, in
September, was an important event. I applaud the State authorities for this initiative,
which sets out key arrangements that have successfully governed the peaceful
migration of the Dinka Malual and the Rizeigat in recent years. I call on the Dinka,
the Misseriya and the Rizeigat delegations at the conference to follow through on
the results of the meeting and build a genuine and sustainable grass-roots peace
process encompassing all their communities along the Sudan -South Sudan border.
UNISFA will continue to do all it can, within its mandate and capabilities, to further
the aims of the conference and will work to implement dialogue and reconciliation
initiatives between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya peoples.
40. I also commend the efforts of UNISFA to initiate dialogue through the
establishment of a common market between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities. I welcome the holding of the first joint meeting between the two
communities in the Abyei Area since the assassination of the Ngok Dinka
Paramount Chief in May 2013. This is an important step forward. I call on the two
communities to continue this initiative with UNISFA and find a compromise and
common ground on the issue of the market. This is exactly the type of initiative that
is needed to rebuild trust and confidence between the two communities. I hope that
the communities will grasp this opportunity to work towards a future of tolerance
and understanding in which both the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities can
reap the rewards of reconciliation and peaceful coexistence.
41. I take note of the reservations recently expressed by the Government of the
Sudan about my decision to appoint a civilian Head of Mission to UNISFA, which
was welcomed by the Security Council in its resolution 2205 (2015). While
discussions between the Government of the Sudan and the United Nations on this
matter are ongoing, I urge the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to focus
on how to move forward with the implementation of all provisions of the Agreement
of 20 June 2011.
42. In addition, I renew my call on the Sudanese authorities in Khartoum to
provide increased levels of support to UNISFA. This includes the timely issuance of
visas, relevant permissions to allow the delivery of construction materials for the
development of roads and infrastructure, and the granting of the necessary
permission to conclude the construction work at the Athony Airfield. Without such
support, the mission’s efforts to implement its mandate in the communities of Abyei
will be seriously constrained. Similarly, the South Sudanese authorities in Juba must
provide UNISFA and the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism with
all the necessary cooperation and full freedom of movement to enable them to carry
out their mandated tasks.

10/12

15-19473

S/2015/870

43. As the Security Council considers the renewal of the UNISFA mandate, I am
encouraged by the outcomes of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting
held on 14 October and the agreement to hold a further meeting in November. I
therefore request the extension of the mission’s mandate for six months in order to
maintain the momentum recently created.
44. Finally, I wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation to the Head of Mission,
Haile Tilahun Gebremariam, the Force Commander, Lieutenant General Birhanu
Jula Gelalcha, and the military, civilian and police personnel of UNISFA, who
continue to work, often in challenging circumstances, for peace and stability in the
Abyei Area. I also wish to thank my Special Envoy, Haile Menkerios, the former
President of South Africa and Chair of the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel, Thabo Mbeki, the African Union Commission and the
Government of Ethiopia for their continued commitment and support in the search
for peace and security in the Abyei Area.

15-19473

11/12

S/2015/870

12/12

15-19473
