Reaolutiom adoptecl Oil the Npol'II of the ftfth C.0-mittee

cial year ended 31 December 1954 and the certificate of
the Board of Auditors ;•
2. Tokes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in paragraphs 224 to 226 of its first report8
to the General Assembly at its tenth session.
539th ple,uwy meeting_,
3 N OfJember 1955.

953 (X). Annual report of the United Natlom
Joint Staff Pension Board
The General Assembly
Tokes note with satisfaction of the annual report' of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board.
539th plenory meetin.9.,
3 N ovember 1955.

954 (X). Report of the United Natlom Joint Staff
Pension Board on the tbird actuariat valuation of the United Natiom Joint Stal' Pemion
Fund as of 30 September 1954
The Generol Assembly
1. Takes note of the report• of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board on the third actuarial valuation of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
as of 30 September 1954;

2. Takes note of the observations thereon of the Advisory Cornmittee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions as set forth in its third report• to the General
Assembly at its tenth session.
539th plenory metlÏt&Jl,
3 N ovember 1955.

955 (X). Amendments to the Regulatlom of the
United. Nationa Joint Stal' Pemlon Fond
The General Assembly
Adopts the texts annexed to the present rcsolution as
amendments to the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund. These amendments shall become effective from the date of their adoption.
539th plenory meeting_,
3 N ovember 1953.
ANNEX
Article 1, porogroph 4 (amended text)
"Final average remuneration" means the average annual pensionable remuneration of the participant during the last five
years of his contributory service. Where the participant bas les1
than five years of contributory service, the final average remuneration shall mean the average annual pensionable remuneration during the actual period of contributory service.
Article 11, poragroph 2 (amended text)
The foregoing provision shall apply to the Registrar and
every full-time officer of the Registry of the International
Court of Justice except that the occupant of the position of
Registrar as at 16 Dccember 1954 shall become a participant
notwithstanding that he was over sixty years of age at the time
of bis appointment.
1 Ibid., Te•lh Sessio•, Suppl,mml No. 6D (A/2900).
• Ibid., Supplement No. 1 (A/2921).
1 J~., Supplemenl No. 8 (A/2914).
• Ibid., Supplemenl No. 8A (A/2916).
• Ibid., Tmth Session, Anr1es1s, agenda item 44, document

Af/986.•

19

Arlicl, IV, poragroplt 3 (amended text)
A participant who is entitled under this article to a benefit
which is leu than $180 per annum may, prior to the date on
which the first payment of bis retirement benefit becomea due
and with the consent of the Joint Staff Pension Board receive
the whole benefit payable to him in the form of a lump sum
which is the actuarial equivalent of bis benefit. ln the case of a
participant who is married at the date of retirement, be may also
receive the actuariat equivalent of the prospective benefit wbicb
would be payable on bis death under article Vil, 2(o).
Arlicl, VII, poragroph 2(a) (amended text)
If a married man who is a recipient of a retirement benefit u
provided under article IV dies, hia widow, provided she wu bis
wife at the time of the ccsaation of bis service with the member
organization, shall be entitled, except as provided in paracraph
3 below, to a widow's benefit half as large as the benefit which
was being paid to the deceascd at the time of bis death. However, if the deceued at the time of bis retirement had received
a lump sum as provided in article IV in lieu of part or the
whole of the retirement benefit to which be was entitled, the
widow's benefit shall be half of the total retirement benefit to
which the staff member was entitled at the cesaation of hia
service, except that in the case where a married man received
the actuariat equivalent of a prospective widow's benefit, no
widow's bencfit shall be payable. This benefit shall cease on the
widow'1 remarriage.

Article VII, paragroplt 5 (amended text)
Upon the death of a participant who does not leave a widow
entitled to a widow's benefit, there shall be paid to bis desipated
·recipient a sum equal to:
(a) His O}Vn contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2¾ per cent per annum, plus
(b) Such amount as may have been tran ■ferred on bis account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund of a member organization at 11'& âme of bis entry into the Pension Fund,
without interest, ph...
(c) If he bas validated a period of prior non-pensionable
service under article Ill such amount, not exceeding S per ceDt
of bis pensionable remuneration for that period, a, be may bave
received from the Provident Fund of a member organization
in excess of bis own contributions thereto and have refunded
to that member organization.
If a designated recipient doe■ not survive a participant or if a
participant bas not made, or bas revoked, a designation, ■uch
sum ■hall be paid to the participant's estate.
Arlicl, IX, pa,agroplt 2 (amended text)
On the basis of the medical examinations referred to in the
preceding paragraph, the Joint Staff Pension Board shall decide whether the participant concerned shall be covered by the
provi ■ions of articles V and VII, 1, immediately, or shall not
be covered by those provisions until be ha■ completed five yean
of contributory service or, in the case of a re-entrant, until be
bas· completed five years of contributory service subsequent to
bis re-ehtrance. However, no participant ■hall be excluded from
the benefits provided under articles V and VII, 1, if the disability or death is the direct result of accident or damage to
health ari■ing from service in an unhealtby area, nor shall hU
widow be excluded from the provision of article VII, 1, if be
bas attained age sixty.

Article X, porograplt l(o) (amended text)
If the participant hu less than five years of contributory
service, he shall be paid a sum equal to :
(i) Hi■ own contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2¾ per cent per annum, plus
(ii) Such amount as may have been tran■ferred on hia eccount to the Pension Fund from the Proviclent Fund of
a mcmber organization at the time of bis entry into the
Pen ■ion Fund, without interest, pl111
