S/PV.8725

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8725th meeting

Tuesday, 18 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve/Mrs. Delieux . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. King
Ms. Tayob
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-04223 (E)
*2004223*

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Griffiths is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock and Her
Excellency Ms. Inga Rhonda King, Permanent
Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, in
her capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: We are witnessing in Yemen what
we have long feared. Since October, I have briefed the
Security Council several times on the signs of hope and
momentum towards peace. But, at the same time, we
have all been acutely aware that renewed violence could
reverse the gains made, render peace more difficult and
inflict even more severe humanitarian consequences on
the population.
Since we last met (see S/PV.8704), the military
situation over the past month has grown increasingly
dire. Both sides have announced expansive military
goals and exchanged fierce rhetoric. Most of the
heavy fighting has taken place in the Nihm district of
Sana’a governorate and in Al-Jawf, Ma’rib and Sa’dah
governorates. Front lines that had been quiet for several
months have been drawn into the escalation. Reports
of airstrikes and cross-border aerial attacks have
increased considerably.
2/21

18/02/2020

I am distressed — as we all must be — by reports
of dozens, and perhaps hundreds, of civilian casualties,
displacement of families and damage to schools and
hospitals. Women and children continue to suffer the
most from several attacks. Yemeni journalists and civilsociety activists have also continued to face severe
pressure and restrictions.
The parties have reassured me many times of
their belief in a peaceful, political solution to the
conflict. But peace cannot be taken for granted. It
requires continuous commitment and the nurturing of
a political process to make it happen. The escalation I
just described directly contradicts the parties’ desire to
move in that direction.
The leaderships of both parties have the ability and
responsibility to rein in the violence, scale down the
rhetoric and commit to a more sustainable de-escalation.
Prior to the recent increase in violence, the parties — as
we observed in the Council — had considerably reduced
the number of airstrikes and cross-border aerial attacks.
That de-escalation had a strong, positive impact on the
prospect of peace, and indeed can do so again if the
parties are committed.
I am concerned that the escalations may also
threaten the progress made in Al-Hudaydah, where the
situation is vulnerable to an increase in violence. In
December 2018, the parties reached the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement in Stockholm based on the shared goals of
avoiding military operations in the city and ensuring
the passage of humanitarian and commercial goods
through the three ports. We must not lose sight of
those goals.
The escalations on other fronts have raised tensions
and led to greater volatility in Al-Hudaydah but have
not yet had a major impact on the overall military
situation — a small blessing, but one we must be happy
for. The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA), led by Lieutenant General
Guha, is striving to maintain cooperation between the
parties, despite continued operational challenges and
restrictions on the freedom of movement. However, I
fear — and I know this would be true of my colleague
Lieutenant General Guha as well — that the escalations
elsewhere could pose a challenge to his efforts to
maintain calm in Al-Hudaydah and distract the parties
from the implementation of the Agreement.
Despite the unremittingly dire military situation,
the parties have made significant progress in their
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

efforts to build confidence and provide relief for those
who are suffering. Between 10 and 16 February, the
parties met in Amman and agreed to exchange prisoners
and detainees, in line with the executive mechanism
agreed in Stockholm 14 months ago. That is a firm
commitment from the parties to the families that they
will be reunited with their loved ones. And it is a sign
that the parties are prepared to progress towards their
commitment to eventually release — “all for all” — all
those deprived of their liberty in relation to the conflict.
I heartily commend the Government of Yemen and
Ansar Allah for their positive engagement and for
making the concessions required to make progress. I
was present during those discussions; the atmosphere
to enable those concessions was unmistakable. I also
thank the coalition, of course, but also the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan for hosting the meeting. We all look
forward to the implementation of the agreed releases as
soon as possible. I should add that, as usual, that process
benefits from the unique value of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, with which we are very
proud to be partners.
That positive step follows the release from prison
by Ansar Allah, supported by our colleagues in
UNICEF, of 68 boys encountered during military
operations. The boys are now in interim care and — I
am glad to say — being united with their families. I
encourage Ansar Allah to continue to engage with the
United Nations and UNICEF in order to make progress
in addressing violations of children’s rights.
Furthermore, during the first half of February,
the first two medical air bridge flights transported 28
patients from Sana’a for medical assistance abroad. I
once again commend the commitment of the parties
and the support of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for
that humanitarian measure. I am also grateful to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the Egyptian
Government, which will host additional patients.
Despite that small but significant sign of hope,
many thousands of patients in need of medical care
abroad remain in Sana’a, where such care is not
available. For their sake, the medical air bridge must
operate regularly and not just as a temporary solution.
I know that my good friend and colleague, Ms. Lise
Grande, United Nations Resident Coordinator and
Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, and Mr. Altaf
Musani, the World Health Organization’s representative
in Yemen, are working very hard to make that happen.

S/PV. 8725

I am sure Council members will join me in hoping that
those efforts bear fruit.
Overall, the progress on those humanitarian
measures shows us that, even in this bleak situation, the
parties can work together and situation across the table
from one another to relieve the suffering of the Yemeni
people. We must hope that the confidence they have built
has not completely gone to waste. However, my fear is
that, as this briefing suggests, such confidence, trust
and relationships are becoming increasingly fragile.
I am also acutely alarmed by the lack of progress
in addressing the threat posed by the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, which we have discussed on previous occasions
in the Chamber. The tanker’s condition is deteriorating
by the day. Any rupture could spill more than 1 million
barrels of oil into the Red Sea, causing an environmental
and economic catastrophe for Yemen and its neighbours.
We are all on notice of that potential catastrophe.
That threat — which we discuss every time we visit
Sana’a — must be dealt with on a purely technical basis,
without politicization. The United Nations is committed,
ready and prepared to send objective technical experts
to undertake an assessment and initial repair, to be
immediately followed by permanent arrangements to
address the threat and make that vessel safe.
In my briefing last August (see S/PV.8598), I
informed the Council, to my slight shame, that a date
had been agreed for the assessment to occur later that
month, but it never happened. The assessment mission
must take place immediately and unconditionally,
without further delay.
Everything I have heard from Yemeni leaders in
the almost two years that I have had the privilege of
serving the Secretary-General and the Council in this
assignment points to a core principle that I wish to
emphasize today — peace in Yemen can emerge only
from a political compromise between both parties
through a process mediated by the United Nations, our
process, which we discuss each time we meet. It will not
be dictated or successfully resolved from a position of
military dominance. Engagement in the United Nations
process must be unconditional. It cannot be secondary
to territorial gain, particularly when — as we have so
vividly seen in Yemen — there is no military solution
to the conflict.
How do we move from here to the launch, at
last, of that process? With the encouragement of the

20-042233/21

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

18/02/2020

Council, we are actively working towards that goal and
the re-establishment of truly inclusive de-escalation
arrangements, but we realize that a reduction in
violence is not enough. That has been the lesson of the
past two months. We need the parties to unite around a
vision for a post-conflict Yemen that is in line with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

trend seen in previous months of decreasing civilian
casualties. In January, assessments suggest, more than
160 civilians were killed or wounded across Yemen.
On Saturday, air strikes reportedly killed dozens of
civilians in Al-Jawf. Humanitarian Coordinator Lise
Grande issued a statement about that incident the same
day, and I associate myself with what she said.

It is perhaps timely to recall those elements — a
genuinely inclusive Government and a political transition
process; a military and security arrangement and
sector that safeguards all Yemenis; the chance for
reconstruction and the revitalization of the country’s
institutions and economy; and, finally, an acceptance
that enmities must end even while differences remain.
Those are reasonable, achievable goals, and they are no
secret. I insist that it is time for us to recall them here
and to hope that we will soon see their realization when
the political will is truly there.

Ten days ago, hostilities badly damaged two
hospitals in Ma’rib and injured a health worker. Those
hospitals had already closed because of fighting in the
area, depriving 15,000 people of medical care. And
in Taiz, Al-Hudaydah, Sa’dah and other places, we
continue to hear daily reports of civilians killed, homes
destroyed, farms damaged, children shot by snipers and
other horrors. For months, I have called for a nationwide
ceasefire. That call is even more urgent today when the
violence, as Mr. Griffiths has said, is at very real risk
of spiralling out of control.

I am sometimes accused of impatience, but now
we see why. Hesitance on the political track allows the
war drums to beat louder and allows provocations to
spiral and multiply. The hard work of the parties is at
grave risk of being undone. The parties must display
the courage that I know they have to set aside shortterm military goals and make a sustained, tangible and
irreversible commitment to the political process.

The second issue is humanitarian access. Let me
remind everyone that international humanitarian law
requires the parties to facilitate access to people in
need. Access is essential if we are to continue saving
millions of lives across Yemen. Yet the space in which
we need to do that work has been narrowing from
all directions.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Every month, I brief the Security
Council on five priority issues in Yemen — first, the
protection of civilians and respect for international
humanitarian law; secondly, humanitarian access and
delivery; thirdly, funding for the United Nations aid
operation; fourthly, the Yemeni economy; and, fifthly,
progress towards peace.
As Mr. Griffiths just outlined, we are now going
through an extremely worrisome period in Yemen.
That is equally true for the humanitarian operation.
Let us start with protection of civilians. Hostilities
have escalated significantly along several fronts, most
notably in the governorates of Ma’rib, Al-Jawf and
Sana’a. As Mr. Griffiths just noted, those areas have
been mostly quiet over the past two years.
Fighting in those areas has displaced more than
35,000 people since January. That escalation, in
addition to clashes in other places, has reversed the
4/21

In the south, humanitarian agencies have to wait
too long to get projects approved. We estimate that
approximately 30 per cent of non-governmental
organization (NGO) projects were not taken forward
last year because the Government failed to agree them.
Efforts to carry out a multisectoral needs assessment
have recently stalled. We also remain concerned about
proposed Government regulations that would hinder
humanitarian agencies’ ability to move around the
country as necessary in order to meet urgent needs.
This past week, the Government returned eight
trucks with medical supplies, held by Government
forces in Ma’rib since 30 January. However, after
initial inspection, it appears that up to 70 per cent of
the supplies are missing. We appreciate the ongoing
dialogue with the Government on all those issues, but
it is important to be clear that we have much more
serious problems in the areas controlled by the Ansar
Allah authorities.
Last year, those authorities issued more than 200
regulations on humanitarian action. By the end of
the year, the number of reported incidents disrupting
assistance had risen by a factor of six. Approximately
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

half of those incidents constrained movements of relief
supplies or staff, while approximately a quarter of
them involved attempts to influence decisions on who
receives help or otherwise interfere with programmes.
The Ansar Allah authorities asked NGOs to
sign agreements that would not be consistent with
humanitarian principles. Approximately 40 per cent
of NGO projects last year went unapproved — 10 per
cent more than in the south. It has also been suggested
that NGOs pay a 2 per cent tax to fund the authorities’
aid-coordination body. The situation is unacceptable.
Stopping the world’s largest aid operation would be
fatal for millions of people.
The Secretary-General issued a statement last
week about that. He reiterated the importance of
sustaining the humanitarian operation, and he supports
continued dialogue with all the interested parties to
ensure that help reaches all those who are in need of it,
in accordance with humanitarian principles. There was
also a valuable meeting in Brussels last week involving
United Nations colleagues, leading international NGOs
and some of the large donors to discuss how we can
maintain life-saving assistance in a principled way,
including the measures that may need to be taken
as a result of the interference and blockages that we
are seeing.

S/PV. 8725

I also want to reiterate what Mr. Griffiths said about
the FSO SAFER oil tanker. I have raised this issue in
my briefings to the Council on 10 occasions over the
past 12 months. It needs to be resolved. Nothing can
happen without the United Nations assessment mission.
Once again, therefore, like Mr. Griffiths, I urge rapid
action on that.
Amid all those challenges, the humanitarian
operation has continued to deliver. The World Food
Programme reports that it continues to provide food
assistance to more than 13 million people every
month; the World Health Organization is carrying out
more than 1.5 million medical consultations a month;
and UNICEF and others report that support to water
networks benefited an average of nearly 4 million
people a month from September to December in 2019. I
want to commend once again the humanitarian workers,
especially the Yemeni staff, who are delivering that
response. They are unquestionably saving millions
of lives.

The United Nations is seeking to intensify dialogue
with the Ansar Allah authorities at all levels and through
all the channels available to us. Last week, the Ansar
Allah authorities returned food that had been taken
from a World Food Programme (WFP) warehouse in
Hajjah. They also announced that they were dropping
the proposed 2 per cent levy and informed WFP that
they would implement a long-pending agreement on
biometric registration and other issues. We welcome
all those announcements and look forward to seeing
them implemented.

No one has suggested that the emergency in Yemen
has improved over the past year, but key assessments
remain blocked, complicating efforts to adjust
programmes based on the latest evidence. That makes it
difficult to know with certainty whether there are large
pockets of unmet needs throughout the country. To date,
we have not heard reports of famine-like conditions
returning in high-risk areas. In late 2018, we heard
such reports from many sources even before the formal
assessments had been completed. I believe that high
levels of aid delivery have helped, but it is clear that
without the assessments we cannot be confident of the
position. Let me, finally on this point, thank everyone
who has contributed to the medical evacuation of the
28 patients whom Mr. Griffiths mentioned. Like him,
I would like to see a more sustainable solution put in
place soon.

There are several other issues, including, first,
project approvals, especially agreements with NGOs;
secondly, moving forward with urgently required
assessments, including updating food security
assessments; and, thirdly, approving more monitoring
missions, all of which continue to require progress.
Those are activities that the humanitarian principles
require humanitarian agencies to conduct. Important
discussions are ongoing with the relevant parties to
cover all those and other points.

Humanitarian agencies have been able to continue
saving millions of lives because our donors have
provided the money to do so. That brings me to my third
point: funding for the United Nations aid operation.
I once again want to thank the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United States, the United Arab Emirates,
the United Kingdom, Germany, the European Union,
its States members and all our donors for their support.
All humanitarian agencies take very seriously the
accountability for those funds.

20-042235/21

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

We know that the choice over whether or not to
provide assistance is a voluntary one. The donors
have shown much generosity in financing the Yemen
humanitarian operation. In my experience, that
generosity is based on just two things: first, the belief
that there are real needs and, secondly, the belief that if
they provide resources, they will get to the people who
need help. Therefore, anybody currently or potentially
hindering humanitarian agencies’ work with regard to
those two points needs to understand what a big risk
they are taking with donors’ continuing generosity.
I turn now to the Yemeni economy. As Yemenis
depend almost entirely on commercial imports for
food, fuel, medicine and other basic goods, it is
essential to keep all ports open. Most food and fuel
imports continue to come in through Al-Hudaydah
or Saleef. Commercial supplies through those ports
have remained stable in recent months Thanks to a
mechanism for commercial fuel imports managed by
the Special Envoy, fuel volumes have been higher than
the previous average every month since October 2019.
It is equally important to ensure that imports are
affordable. The Yemeni rial is losing value, meaning
fewer people can afford the goods, above all food, that
they need to survive. A dispute between the parties
over bank notes is still driving a disparity between
the exchange rate in the south, which is approximately
650 rial to the dollar, and the north, where it is at
approximately 595 rial to the dollar. In late 2018, the
rapid depreciation of the Yemeni rial was a key factor in
bringing the country to the brink of widespread famine.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has played a crucial role
in stabilizing the rial. I thank that country once again
for that, including the recent release of an additional
$227 million for those purposes. I expect that such
support will continue to be necessary.
The last point is progress towards peace. Peace is
the only way to end the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
Mr. Griffiths just briefed the Council on the serious
risks that we now see. We are now entering the sixth
year of this war. Enough is enough.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador King.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
6/21

18/02/2020

resolution 2140 (2014), pursuant to paragraph 19 (e)
thereof. The last such briefing took place on 15 May
2019 (see S/PV.8525); this briefing will therefore cover
the period from 16 May 2019 to date.
From 16 May to 31 December, the Permanent
Representative and then the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Peru served as Chair of the
Committee. During that period, the Committee held
one informal consultation on 23 August to discuss
the mid-term update of the Panel of Experts. Four
recommendations were addressed to the Committee,
two of which were referred to the Panel for further
information, with action on the other two having been
agreed to by the Committee.
I would also like to recall that, for the sake of
comprehensiveness, during this time period my
predecessors also took action, as agreed upon by the
Committee, on three recommendations contained
in the final report (see S/2019/83) of the Panel
of Experts under resolution 2402 (2018). Those
recommendations concerned engagement with the
Head of the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen and the Head of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA), respectively, with a view to facilitating
the establishment of an information-sharing protocol
between the Mechanism and the Panel of Experts and
between UNMHA and the Panel of Experts.
The recommendations also concerned engagement
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs on the possibility of introducing the analytical
capacity of the Mechanism to identify networks using
false documentation to evade vessel inspections.
Action on the third recommendation involved
the dispatch of a joint letter to the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and the United Nations
Global Compact, seeking their views on the possibility
of organizing a conference to support the Government
of Yemen in implementing due-diligence mechanisms
to best manage cash flow and the import of goods under
the principles of the United Nations Global Compact.
Lastly, during that time period the Committee
received two implementation reports, from Panama
and Portugal. The Committee also continued to receive
vessel inspection reports from the Mechanism.
Since I took over as Chair, the Committee has held
one informal consultation, on 10 January, to discuss
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

the final report (see S/2020/70) of the Panel of Experts
under resolution 2456 (2019), which was transmitted to
the Security Council on 27 January.
Of the 11 recommendations contained in the report,
five were addressed to the Security Council and six to
the Committee. The Committee agreed to take action
on two of the six recommendations. It therefore agreed
that, during this briefing, the Committee would call on
all parties to the conflict in Yemen to strictly adhere
to international humanitarian law and to investigate
and prosecute their members who commit international
humanitarian law violations, and I am doing so via this
periodic report.
The Committee also agreed to refer back one
recommendation to the Panel, requesting further
information, and concluded the process of considering a
delisting request submitted by the legal representatives
of Mr. Khalid Ali Abdullah Saleh, through the delisting
focal point in the Secretariat, for the delisting of his
father Mr. Ali Abdullah Saleh. The latter’s name
remains on the Committee’s sanctions list.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador King for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

S/PV. 8725

Moreover, to pick up on something Mr. Lowcock
said, the violence serves to underscore the fact that
the conflict will continue until we can find a political
solution. We therefore encourage the parties to redouble
their efforts towards beginning political discussions.
In order to ensure the effectiveness of the peace talks
in Yemen, as well as the sustainability of the peace,
we encourage the development of a context-specific
approach to women’s participation in the process, as
called for in resolution 2493 (2019).
I want to turn now to humanitarian access. We
very much share the concerns that Mr. Lowcock
outlined. His briefing on the reversal of the trend
towards decreasing civilian casualties was sobering.
We endorse his remarks on international humanitarian
law, and I think that his warning about donors was also
very salutary. The United Kingdom is increasingly
concerned by access constraints and obstructions
in Houthi-controlled areas in the north. Houthi
restrictions have increased significantly over recent
weeks, with increasingly severe intimidation of United
Nations and non-governmental organization (NGO)
humanitarian workers. In line with resolution 2451
(2018), humanitarian workers need to be able to conduct
their work safely and without harm.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock, as well as Ambassador
King, for their briefings. I want to state on record,
once again, that we fully support the United Nationsled process and the United Nations efforts to bring
peace to Yemen. We once again take this opportunity
to urge all the parties to engage in good faith and work
closely with the United Nations to bring the conflict
to a close. In that regard, we welcome the 16 February
announcement of an initial agreement on an exchange
of prisoners, and, as ever, its implementation is key.

Unless those restrictions and obstructions are lifted
and intimidation ceases, there is a real risk that United
Nations agencies and NGOs will not be able to deliver
life-saving aid over the coming months. Urgent action
is needed, and I also support what Mr. Lowcock said
about the needs assessment. The Secretary-General’s
statement on 12 February reiterates the importance of
the humanitarian operation. I want to place on record
how grateful we are for the work that the United
Nations is doing to ensure that vital humanitarian work
can continue. In those increasingly difficult conditions,
it is vital that we as the international community
continue to support those efforts in a coordinated and
coherent manner.

We heard from Mr. Griffiths about the need for
violence and suffering to stop if peace is to thrive.
The decrease in violence that began in October was
welcomed by the international community and by
Yemenis, but as the emergency Security Council
meeting of 28 January acknowledged, the recent
violence in Al-Jawf and Nihm is of very grave concern.
Regardless of who started the violence, it is clear that
the Houthis have sought to exploit the situation and that
is unacceptable.

I would also like to put on record our concerns
about the Central Bank of Yemen and the fact that it
will imminently run out of foreign currency reserves,
which will cause major economic, humanitarian and
political consequences in Yemen. Significant financial
assistance, on a scale of $1 to $2 billion, is urgently
needed to prevent that. We look to the Government
of Yemen to urgently develop a credible plan that
reassures potential donors of their investments in the
Yemeni people.

20-042237/21

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

I would like to thank and pay tribute to the Panel
of Experts for its tireless work over the last year
and to say that the United Kingdom will work with
others on the Council and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) to take forward
its recommendations. The United Kingdom notes with
concern the findings of the final report (see S/2019/83)
of the Panel of Experts regarding weapons of Iranian
origin in Yemen. We also recognize the Panel’s findings
on the Abqaiq Aramco attack — the Houthis simply did
not have the capability to conduct such an attack. The
report’s findings on instances of intimidation and sexual
violence against women in Houthi-controlled areas are
also deeply troubling. That is unacceptable, and I hope
that the Council will reiterate our condemnation of
such actions today.
We would also like to place on record our concerns
about the FSO SAFER oil tanker and the vital necessity
of dealing with the issue. We urge the Houthis to
allow either the removal of the oil or a repair mission
to proceed, so as not to hold the environment hostage.
Continued Houthi inaction on the issue is nothing short
of reckless.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I thank our briefers for their valuable updates this
morning. I also take this opportunity to reaffirm Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines support for Mr. Martin
Griffiths and his team in their dedicated efforts towards
a solution to the challenging situation in Yemen, as well
as for their continued cooperation and coordination
with the Security Council.
Mr. Griffiths began his briefing this morning by
stating that we are witnessing in Yemen what we have
long feared and that the situation has become increasingly
dire. His words were chilling. Like Mr. Griffiths,
we are distressed. Last month, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines pointed to the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Yemen and expressed our concerns over
the restrictions on the delivery of humanitarian aid
(see S/PV.8704). It is unfortunate that we return to the
Council to hear such chilling reports one month later,
as we remain troubled by the unprecedented threats that
continue to persist.
At the same meeting, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham
informed us that access constraints affect 6.7 million
people in need of assistance across the country. We have
all heard, on several occasions, the various complaints
about the treatment of humanitarian personnel and
8/21

18/02/2020

listened to briefings that emphasize the ways in
which those restrictions are paralysing humanitarian
operations. The people of Yemen have suffered
enough and have lost too much. People have lost their
livelihoods; children have lost their childhoods; and
parents have lost children — that does not even begin to
scratch the surface. Yemen has been mired in conflict
for too long, and the people cannot lose their last shreds
of hope. The importance of sustaining humanitarian
assistance cannot be overstated, as the consequence of
restricted access is the prolonged suffering of many.
We recall the obligations under international
humanitarian law that demand unhindered humanitarian
access. In times of conflict especially, there can be
no derogation from those sacrosanct principles. The
international community must continue to engage with
all parties to encourage the active facilitation of safe
and unhindered humanitarian access in accordance
with humanitarian law.
In that vein, we welcome the efforts of the
humanitarian community to collectively overcome
the challenges I mentioned, in order to maintain the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to millions of
Yemenis. As such, we recognize the recent conference
of aid agencies and donors that took place in Brussels,
where the immediate removal of all restrictions,
obstructions and interference violating humanitarian
principles was called for. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines wholeheartedly supports and reiterates that
sentiment. We welcome and encourage all actions by
parties that contribute to the easing of impediments to
that life-saving assistance.
While humanitarian aid is critical, it is not a
panacea — such assistance merely treats one of
the symptoms of the conflict. What is needed for a
sustainable and tenable solution is a comprehensive
peace agreement. We call for the resumption of the
desperately needed peace process, which must be
inclusive and reflective of all groups across the various
categories in society. That is the only way to avoid a
further unravelling of the conflict, which remains
fragile, as evidenced by the stark deterioration in
circumstances and intensification of tensions. Yemen
remains an extremely multifaceted and complex conflict
with a wide range of actors, all of whom must come to
the negotiating table with the requisite political will to
achieve the much-needed lasting peace that Yemenis
deserve. We echo Mr. Mark Lowcock’s sentiment that
the situation is unacceptable.
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Allow me to note Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
concern about the FSO SAFER oil tanker. The potential
environmental risks that we face are unprecedented and
far too great to allow inaction. There is an urgent need
to address the issue. We urge the immediate facilitation
of the required access to the tanker.
Allow me to end on a positive note by recognizing
the efforts that are being made, as our acknowledgement
of such is also critical in encouraging the parties to act.
The facilitation and official commencement of mercy
flights is commendable, as is the finalization of a plan to
implement the prisoner exchange as per the Stockholm
Agreement. Such acts, which reflect a willingness to
engage, are those that kindle and sustain the hope that
Yemen can achieve peace.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my delegation thanks Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ambassador King for their
invaluable briefings.
Despite the delicate situation that Yemen has
endured for years, efforts made by the international
community — especially the United Nations — since
the signing of the Stockholm Agreement have led to
de-escalation and the emergence of positive indicators
over the past few months, with a focus on ways to
resume comprehensive political negotiations between
the parties. However, we are deeply concerned by
the recent exacerbation of violence and intensifying
clashes, particularly in the areas of Al-Jawf, Ma’rib
and Nihm, with negative impact on civilians. There
could also be implications for the advancement of the
political process and the overall situation, particularly
with regard to the humanitarian aspect.
Tunisia therefore calls on the conflicting parties
to reach a ceasefire, de-escalate the situation, heed
the voice of reason and make Yemeni interests a
priority above all else. The military option cannot be
a solution — rather, it would further complicate the
crisis and deepen the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni
people, especially given the potential for such escalation
to spread to other fronts.
In that context, we reaffirm the need to continue and
complete the implementation of what was agreed upon
in Stockholm, including the Al-Hudaydah Agreement,
the agreement on the exchange of prisoners and the
statement of understanding on Taiz. We also stress the
importance of adhering to the Riyadh agreement and
implementing its provisions. We also call for concerted

S/PV. 8725

efforts to create the necessary conditions for the
resumption of negotiations for a political settlement and
the establishment of a transitional period in accordance
with the agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcomes of the inclusive National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in order to put an end to the crisis, restore
security and stability in Yemen and safeguard its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
My country’s delegation emphasizes once again
our support for the efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths and
all his team to move forward the political process in
Yemen. We welcome the agreement reached in Amman
on a plan for prisoner exchanges under the auspices
of the United Nations. It is a positive step in the right
direction towards the full implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. In that regard, we encourage
the relevant parties to go on with this constructive
approach leading to confidence-building measures.
Despite regional and international efforts to reduce
humanitarian suffering in Yemen, an assessment of
the situation in the country points to deteriorating
humanitarian conditions, in particular as hostilities
continue. Today’s briefings included many indicators
and clues about the grave situation and the difficult
humanitarian challenges in Yemen. My country
underscores once again the need to quickly reach a
solution to the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, given
its possible environmental risks to the region. We reject
any politicization of the issue.
Tunisia calls for the stepping up of relief efforts and
for continued humanitarian assistance, with unimpeded
distribution and delivery to beneficiaries. We call
on all parties to respect international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We also
reiterate the need to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian workers.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings and for the continued efforts
of their teams. I also thank Ms. King for her comments.
The United States is troubled that the implementation
of the Riyadh Agreement has been slow. We call on the
Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional
Council to promptly implement the agreement, and we
welcome continuing Saudi facilitation of that process.

20-042239/21

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

We are dismayed about the ongoing escalation
between the Houthis and the Saudi-led coalition and the
potential loss of progress towards a political solution it
portends. We urge the parties to exercise restraint and
abandon the path of escalation, as it looked like they
might just a few weeks ago. The United States is also
concerned about the Houthis’ purported ban on the new
Yemeni rial notes in Houthi-controlled areas, which
will have a devastating impact on the exchange rate
and the overall Yemeni economy. That measure serves
only to harm ordinary Yemenis, and the Houthis should
resort reverse it.
Turning to sanctions, the report released last week by
the Yemen Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) (S/2020/70) contains
a number of findings with serious regional implications.
The Panel concluded that the Houthis did not carry out
the 14 September attacks against Saudi oil facilities.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General noted in his report
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) that
the unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) used in the attack
contained components consistent with known Iranian
UAVs. There is only one reasonable conclusion that
can be drawn from those findings: Iran launched the
attacks on Aramco facilities from Iranian territory.
Iran also continues to undermine the prospects for
a political solution in Yemen. Just last week, the United
States Navy interdicted 358 Iranian-made missiles and
other weapons on their way to the Houthis. We have
made that evidence available to the United Nations and
other international partners.
While all of us around the table call for a return
to talks, Iran shows its true colours by continuing to
send advanced weapons to the Houthis, in violation
of the Council’s arms embargo. The United States is
also extremely concerned about mounting Houthi
interference with the work of aid partners in northern
Yemen, which limits the ability of the United Nations
and other humanitarian organizations to deliver
assistance to the most vulnerable Yemenis. Houthi
actions, including the imposition of 2 or 3 per cent
per project levy amount to a flagrant rejection of a
principled humanitarian response. For any who would
point to reports that the Houthis have agreed to rescind
the project levy, they should know that the Houthis
have made clear to those on the ground that they expect
funding, in some manner, from the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs).
10/21

18/02/2020

The United States applauds the efforts of the
United Nations and other humanitarian organizations
to keep vulnerable Yemenis alive in that restrictive
environment. However, we understand that Houthi
interference now prevents the guarantee of assistance
delivery in the areas they control. In the light of those
entirely avoidable circumstances, donors are faced with
the difficult dilemma of how to continue delivering aid
while remaining responsive to taxpayers. We may be
forced to consider suspending or reducing our assistance
in northern Yemen as early as March, unless undue
Houthi interference ceases immediately and access to
vulnerable populations improves. We continue to ask
the Houthis to take steps towards ensuring minimum
conditions for principled humanitarian operations.
They include lifting access restrictions, eliminating
illegitimate levies on aid projects, allowing unimpeded
the assessment and oversight of projects, approving
backlogged agreements with NGOs and implementing
biometric registration.
The United States stands by the efforts of the
United Nations and other aid agencies to provide
humanitarian assistance based on the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
To the Houthis, we repeat our appeal from last month.
All Yemenis in need deserve life-saving assistance.
They must not make it impossible for us to continue
providing aid in the areas they control. The conditions
for doing so are clear.
In addition, we reiterate our call for the Houthis to
allow the United Nations to board, inspect and maintain
the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which experts assess poses
a serious threat of creating a major spill. In their quest
to extract benefit from the situation, the Houthis
block United Nations efforts to assess and remedy the
danger, while risking an environmental disaster that
would quickly become an economic and humanitarian
catastrophe. If that occurs, the Houthis alone will be
to blame.
On a positive note, the United States is appreciative
that the United Nations has been able to conduct two
medical air-bridge flights, transporting 31 critically
ill Yemenis to Jordan. We thank Jordan for its role
in helping those vulnerable people receive care.
Such life-saving measures are essential and should
continue with the helpful support of Jordan and other
regional partners.
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

We also welcomed the 16 February announcement
that the parties have agreed on a plan to complete the
first official large-scale exchange of prisoners since
the beginning of the conflict. We encourage them to
expeditiously complete the remaining steps that will
lead to the exchange. We hope that those developments
will bring the parties one step closer to resolving
the conflict.
In conclusion, today we renew our call for leaders
in Yemen to de-escalate hostilities. That is the only way
to end the suffering and destruction that have plagued
Yemen for far too long.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths
for his briefing on the political and humanitarian
situation in Yemen. We also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
a, for his briefing. Russia very much commends
the courageous efforts of all humanitarian agencies
working in the country. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Rhonda King for her briefing on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014).
We continue to closely follow the situation in
Yemen. It is volatile. There are glimmers of hope for
progress in the settlement process, as well as signs of
escalating violence and a perpetuation of the crisis. Sides
in Yemen are again in a stage of heated confrontation.
We are concerned that stabilization efforts have stalled.
Whereas at the beginning of the year we welcomed with
hope the decrease in hostilities and airstrikes, today
we have to note that armed hostilities have once again
intensified, with dire humanitarian consequences.
We are convinced that there can be no military
solution in Yemen. We agree with Mr. Griffiths and
the Yemeni parties that the final settlement formula
should be based on mutual compromise. We support
the Special Envoy in all the tracks of his mediation
efforts. We welcome peace initiatives to help assist
the Yemeni parties in their dialogue. We consider it
important for the United Nations to play the central role
in the settlement of the conflict and for that role to be
respected by the parties. The guiding principle should
be that of respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen.
We note the steps taken by Saudi Arabia to
transform the active phase of the conflict in Yemen
into the negotiations phase. We consider it important

S/PV. 8725

and necessary for all parties to strictly uphold its
provisions. Let us not forget that the unity of Yemen
is the achievement of the Yemeni people. We are
convinced that the way forward to solving problems
is possible through an inclusive dialogue among all
Yemeni forces without exception. As is the case with
other regional conflicts, we believe that the Yemenis
themselves should determine the future of their country,
taking into consideration the opinions of all segments
of society.
We will continue to provide assistance to United
Nations mediation efforts in Yemen, including through
our contacts with all political forces in the country and
interested parties, both in our national capacity and
as a permanent member of the Security Council. Our
work is facilitated by the historical friendly relations
that Russia has with Yemen and its people.
We note the agreement between the parties to start
a medical air bridge to transport Yemenis needing
medical care. We deem this effort to be an important
humanitarian initiative that not only provides practical
assistance to a population in need but also can serve
to be an important channel to build trust between the
parties. Another similar measure was the progress
achieved in the agreements on prisoner exchanges,
which need to be built on. The parties to the conflict
need to continue to move in that direction. We welcome
the efforts of everyone involved in ensuring those
agreements are successful.
At the moment there is a ceasefire in the
Al-Hudaydah region. There is the continuing practice
of entry of commercial ships and the unloading of their
cargo in that harbour. We must not allow the positive
operation undertaken in Al-Hudaydah, which was the
result of long-term and gruelling effort, to fall victim
to another wave of destabilization.
The international community must continue to
make collective efforts to put the conflict on a political
track and provide the necessary assistance to the
Yemeni people, who are in dire need of humanitarian
assistance. We are convinced that such a development
will serve not only to benefit Yemen but to ensure
security for all neighbouring States, because terrorist
groups are the only beneficiaries of armed hostilities in
Yemen. We call on all Yemenis to pool their efforts to
fight the terrorist threat.
In April we will mark the fifth anniversary of the
start of the bloody war in Yemen. The conflict needs to

20-0422311/21

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

be brought to an end. This tragic date should encourage
all Yemeni parties to engage in a comprehensive political
process and find a compromise on a set of fundamental
conflict-settlement issues, as Mr. Griffiths just outlined
in his briefing. We agree with the Special Envoy: all of
these matters can be solved with the necessary political
will. The Yemeni parties must find the strength to come
together for the sake of the future of their own State in
order to forge a modern, prosperous State that provides
opportunities for sustainable development. The
five-year-old war in Yemen must also inspire external
players to consolidate their positions and more actively
assist the Yemeni parties and the United Nations in
finding a compromise.
Instead of pointing fingers, it is better to return
to impartial diplomatic work, specifically to support
the work of Mr. Griffiths in both word and deed. We
consider it harmful and counterproductive to employ
anti-Iranian rhetoric. In that regard, we would like to
remind Council members of resolution 598 (1987),
which requested the Secretary-General, in cooperation
with States of the region, to develop a security
architecture in the region. We therefore draw attention
to the relevant Russian concept for collective security
in the Persian Gulf region. We urge everyone to study
it and develop joint measures to de-escalate tensions in
the region.
French diplomats have proposed constructive ideas.
We should take a closer look at them. We are all well
aware of the proposal made by the leadership of Iran.
A creative synthesis of those ideas would enable us to
establish a genuine basis for international cooperation.
Starting such cooperation would help to stop the war in
Yemen, improve the situation in the Persian Gulf and
establish dialogue between Arab States and Iran. We
see no alternative to such an approach.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ambassador Inga
Rhonda King for their briefings, which have given us a
very complete picture of the political and humanitarian
situation in Yemen. We reiterate our appreciation for
the efforts they have made in their respective fields to
achieve peace and address the pressing needs of the
affected populations in Yemen.
First, we are very concerned about the increase
in hostilities that began in mid-January, which has
led to the displacement of almost 5,000 people in the
12/21

18/02/2020

centre of the country. Today, more than ever, there is a
need for a genuine truce that commits the parties to a
national de-escalation. We reiterate that the parties to
the conflict have an obligation to respect international
humanitarian law and refrain from attacks on hospitals
and other health-care centres. Such indiscriminate
attacks particularly affect the civilian population, whose
well-being depends on the services provided through
that infrastructure. We recognize the importance of
the talks between Saudi Arabia and the Houthis, on the
understanding that they can bring about a ceasefire and
a cessation of hostilities.
Secondly, we are very concerned about the
deterioration of the current humanitarian situation.
We reiterate that all parties to the conflict have an
obligation to allow safe and unrestricted humanitarian
access. This humanitarian crisis is made even more
complex by the climate situation. The desert locust
plague threatens to invade Yemen, which could have
very severe consequences in a context where food
security is already fragile. It is known that this plague
can cause losses of up to 100 percent in both crops
and fodder, triggering an extremely alarming and
dangerous situation. Preventive measures are therefore
urgently needed to prevent this pest from spreading in
Yemen. We support the efforts of relevant organizations
to prevent the worsening of a situation to which the
Yemenis are already subjected, and we call for support
from the international community to that end.
Now more than ever we must reach a broad and
inclusive political agreement based on mutual respect
and full compliance with the commitments undertaken.
We therefore note the importance of making progress
in the implementation of the agreements reached in
Stockholm and Riyadh. In that regard, we are pleased
to learn that the parties have agreed on a detailed plan
to complete the first large-scale exchange of prisoners
since the beginning of the conflict.
There is no military solution to the conflict in
Yemen. We echo the words of the Secretary-General,
who said that our mediation capacity and tools for
maintaining peace need to be strengthened and that we
need to place long-term development at the centre of
our efforts.
We understand that the political process in Yemen
must be inclusive of women and young people and
reflect their needs. Indeed, because of the conflict,
agricultural production has been increasingly taken on
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

by women in Yemen, thus enhancing their participation
in the country’s economy. That is why it is important
to make it possible for them to be a part of the
political process.
In conclusion, we welcome the start of mercy flights
from Sana’a airport to neighbouring countries, where
patients, the majority of whom are boys and girls, can
to receive the treatment that they so desperately need.
We welcome the release and transfer from detention
centres to civilian actors of 64 boys who had been
deprived of their freedom. Both of those measures are
vital for trust-building among the population in the
political process and to alleviate their suffering. We
reiterate that only an inclusive, sustainable and credible
peace process can once and for all open the way for all
to development and prosperity for the Yemeni people.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank Martin
Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their comprehensive
and insightful briefings. Let me also thank Ambassador
Rhonda King for her work and her report as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014).
I wish to say a few words on the situation in Yemen
in general.
We strongly condemn the resurgence of violence in
the north by all parties. We are deeply concerned about
the continual fighting, especially in the region northeast of Sana’a, around Ma’rib and in Abyan. We call
on all actors to break the cycle of violence and instead
engage constructively and without delay in efforts to
de-escalate the situation. In this regard, we welcome
the recent agreement on a prisoner exchange between
the parties, under United Nations auspices.
Such confidence-building measures, as well as
mercy flights, and, equally, the invaluable work of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement, are critical elements on the path to political
talks. We encourage Houthis as well as the Yemeni
Government and the coalition to continue to follow
this path. The Special Envoy has our full support in his
tireless efforts to encourage the parties in that regard.
First and foremost, all parties must strictly adhere
to international humanitarian and human rights law
and protect civilians as well as civilian infrastructure.
Women and children are the ones suffering most from
the dire military and humanitarian situation. All actors
should alleviate their suffering and put their needs first.

S/PV. 8725

We are particularly appalled by reports of
systematic sexual violence against women, especially
in Houthi-controlled areas. This is unacceptable and
should not go unpunished. As with all human rights
violations in Yemen, accountability remains crucial.
Political leaders and their visions for a future
Yemen must be judged on their ability to provide a safe,
prosperous and healthy environment for the Yemeni
people that takes into account the diverse interests and
groups in the country. However, what we see now is
the contrary. There is no time to spare to work together
with the Special Envoy towards a political solution that
allows Yemenis to live in peace.
I would now like to make a few comments on the
once again sobering report that Mark Lowcock has
provided us this morning.
We all know that Yemen and its people are in
dire need of large-scale humanitarian assistance. Yet
in some parts of the country, in particular in Houthicontrolled territories, humanitarian personnel are
subject to inhumane treatment and humanitarian
operations are systematically restricted, thereby
depriving men, women and children of the desperately
needed assistance. That is cruel and deplorable. We have
witnessed these increasing restrictions for far too long.
As a result, 8 million people in need cannot be reached.
This is unacceptable. We must not wait any longer
to send clear and hard messages to the authorities in
Sana’a. Without respect for the humanitarian principles
and the safety of humanitarian staff, as Mark Lowcock
reminded us once again of this morning, life-saving
assistance cannot and will not get in.
We therefore once more call all parties, but
especially the Houthis, to uphold their responsibility to
cease any harassment of humanitarian staff; facilitate
safe, rapid and unhindered access; lift bureaucratic
restrictions; and enable project agreements without
further delay.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): My delegation wishes to
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy for
Yemen; and Ambassador Rhonda King, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014), for their briefings and updates.
A month ago, we discussed in this Chamber
(see S/PV.8704) the Yemeni situation, with some

20-0422313/21

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

encouraging signs. Unfortunately, a surge in hostilities
between the parties in Sana’a, Ma’rib, Al-Jawf and
other areas during the past few weeks has further
complicated the situation and cast a shadow over
the fragile de-escalation process. In the meantime,
the implementation of the important agreements
signed between the parties continues to be delayed in
some ways.
We share Council members’ deep concern about
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. Nearly 250,000
Yemeni people have died since 2015, including 100,000
as a direct result of hostilities and 130,000 from hunger
and disease. An estimated 4 million people have been
displaced within the country owing to the conflict.
In recent weeks, the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has continued
to receive reports of mass-casualty incidents across
the country.
Viet Nam therefore urges the parties to the conflict,
especially the Houthi, to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international law
and to facilitate the humanitarian work of the United
Nations and its relevant partners. The necessary steps
must be urgently taken to protect civilians and healthcare facilities. The provision of humanitarian assistance
should continue to be one of our highest priorities, in
parallel with efforts to launch constructive dialogues
among all Yemeni parties.
Access for humanitarian assistance must be
provided without any obstructions. We commend the
humanitarian flight operations, which, for the first time
in three years, brought a group of Yemeni patients from
Sana’a to Jordan for specialized medical assistance.
In that connection, we would like to express our
appreciation to the United Nations, the World Health
Organization, Jordan, Egypt and other parties for their
dedication and cooperation. We also welcome the
recent agreement by the opposing parties in Yemen to
implement the prisoner exchange.
Given the current fragile situation, we wish to
reaffirm that a peaceful political settlement is the only
way to resolve the conflict in Yemen. Here I would
like to recall Mr. Martin Griffiths’s recent statement to
the effect that peace depends on political compromise
between and among the parties. We call for further
efforts to be made by the parties to implement the
Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement, with
the aim of returning to de-escalation and moving towards
14/21

18/02/2020

a comprehensive and inclusive political process. In that
regard, we would like to express our appreciation for
the efforts of the Special Envoy, the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA)
and the Redeployment Coordination Committee. We
call on the concerned parties to ensure the safety and
mandate-based activities of UNMHA’s personnel.
The resumption of peace talks is contingent on
the political will and efforts of all parties involved
in the conflict in Yemen. For its part, the Council
should maintain its unity on, and firm support for, a
comprehensive political solution while being committed
to the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Yemen.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
for their briefings on the political and humanitarian
situation in Yemen. I also thank Ambassador King for
her briefing as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
The situation in Yemen remains deeply worrisome.
Unfortunately, during the past month the security
situation in Yemen has deteriorated owing to another
round of hostilities at the northern frontlines. We call
on all parties to the conflict to ensure an immediate
cessation of hostilities. The violence is causing further
suffering to the Yemeni people, who are already facing
the world’s largest humanitarian crisis. Thousands more
families have been forced to flee their homes. Both
those issues — the hostilities and the dire humanitarian
conditions — need to be addressed as a priority without
any further delay.
We are extremely worried about the continuing
attacks on civilian infrastructure. There can be
no justification for bombing hospitals, as recently
happened in Al-Jafra and Al-Saudi, leaving 15,000
people with limited access to medical care. In addition,
the air strike in Al-Jawf province last Saturday killed
at least 31 civilians. Such indiscriminate attacks are a
clear breach of international humanitarian law. We call
on all parties to the conflict to continue to make the
protection of civilians a priority.
Secondly, the continuing restrictions on distributing
humanitarian aid to the Yemeni people are another
breach of international humanitarian law. Intimidating
humanitarian workers, obstructing their work and
even arresting aid workers must stop immediately. It is
extremely worrying to hear from the aid agencies and
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

donors that they may be forced to scale down or stop
aid distribution in certain areas. An indication that the
Houthi authorities would cancel the 2 per cent tax on
every humanitarian project would be a step in the right
direction, as such a tax is contrary to the principles of
humanitarian aid.
It is also increasingly worrying that United Nations
officials have not been granted access to the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. Access must be provided to prevent
an environmental disaster in the Red Sea.
Despite those mostly negative tendencies, I am
nevertheless glad to also hear about a few positive
developments. We welcome the announcement of an
agreement on a large-scale exchange of prisoners, as
stated by the prisoner-exchange committee last Sunday.
That would be an important humanitarian measure
and a step towards implementing the Stockholm
Agreement. We also welcome the beginning of mercy
flights from Sana’a. We urge the parties to allow those
flights to continue so that Yemeni patients can receive
the treatment that they need.
Hopefully, such much-needed confidence-building
measures may also contribute towards the resumption
of formal political talks with the participation of the
Yemeni Government. It is clear that the solution to this
conflict can only be political. We call on the parties to
begin discussions on a comprehensive political solution
under the auspices of the United Nations without delay
or preconditions. We support the efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths in that regard.
We also urge the Government of Yemen and
the Southern Transitional Council to overcome the
obstacles in implementing the Riyadh agreement, which
is crucial in order to move towards a comprehensive
political settlement in Yemen.
Ms. Tayob (South Africa): We thank Special
Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and Ambassador King, in her capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), for their briefings. South Africa continues to
reiterate its support for Mr. Griffiths, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and for all his
efforts to find a peaceful solution to the situation in
Yemen. South Africa thanks the Panel of Experts for
its comprehensive report covering the year 2019 (see
S/2020/70).

S/PV. 8725

My delegation would like to reiterate that a causal
nexus exists between the political impasse, the dire
humanitarian situation and the security situation. Our
intervention will therefore focus on those three elements.
First, on the political process, South Africa urges
the parties to commit to a political process, which can
be achieved only through dialogue. There has been
no further implementation of the Riyadh agreement.
South Africa therefore wishes to reiterate its call for
the implementation of that vital agreement between
the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional
Council, as well as the full implementation of the
December 2018 Stockholm Agreement. Like Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths, we call on the Yemeni actors to
unite around a vision of Yemen addressing the conflict
and restoring peace within the country.
Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, South
Africa commends the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Yemen
regarding the commencement of the medical air
bridge evacuation between Sana’a and Amman. That
agreement was achieved with the collaboration of all
the parties to the conflict and highlights that progress
can be made when the political will is strong. It is
heartening to note that the spokesperson of the World
Health Organization indicated that the organization was
covering the costs of the victims’ medical treatment,
transport and accommodation.
However, of equal importance to note are the
restrictions on humanitarian operations in the north,
which continue to cause much frustration with regard
to the reliable delivery of aid, further threatening to
suspend aid altogether. We call on the parties to the
conflict to allow the free, regular and unimpeded
passage of food and other humanitarian relief and not
to take actions that would deprive civilians of their
rights to food and health care. In that regard, we remind
the parties to the conflict that all necessary measures
should be taken to respect the Geneva Conventions.
Thirdly, on the security situation, South Africa is
dismayed that, after much political traction and relative
calm, the recent escalation of fighting in Yemen has
effectively reset the conflict resolution process. The
number of fatalities continues to rise as the levels of
violence and conflict escalate in Nihm, Ma’rib and
Al-Jawf. In that regard, South Africa calls on the
parties to observe the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah and to
contribute towards a nationwide cessation of hostilities.

20-0422315/21

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

A cessation of hostilities in Yemen, or even parts of
Yemen, would greatly assist the negotiation process
towards a political solution for the country.
In conclusion, this unprecedented humanitarian
crisis necessitates an urgent commitment to a ceasefire
and the pursuit of a negotiated, peaceful and inclusive
solution to the crisis. We wish to reiterate that the
only sustainable solution to this conflict is a Yemeniled political settlement that is inclusive and fair and
puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of
Yemen first.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Special Envoy
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Ambassador King, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), for their briefings.
China has been closely following the security,
political and humanitarian situations in Yemen. We
commend the United Nations for its vigorous efforts
to advance the political process and improve the
humanitarian situation in Yemen. We support the 2140
Committee and the Panel of Experts in carrying out
their mandated work.
Recently, there have been fighting in several areas
in Yemen and an escalation of military operations,
which is of concern. At the same time, we note that,
against that backdrop, the Yemeni Government and the
Houthi representative recently reached an agreement in
Amman, the capital of Jordan, on a large-scale prisoner
exchange. That demonstrates that both sides are willing
and able to ease tensions in Yemen. China welcomes
that development and commends the efforts of both the
United Nations and the International Committee of the
Red Cross. We hope that the prisoner release will take
place as soon as possible.
We also call on all parties to the conflict to engage
in broad dialogue and consultations in order to make
progress with regard to a ceasefire, the cessation of
violence and the building of mutual trust, among other
elements. Despite the many challenges, the political
settlement of the Yemeni issue should continue. All
parties in Yemen should strive to relaunch the United
Nations-led comprehensive political settlement process
at an early date. The conflict in Yemen has been
continuing for five years, during which all parties have
paid a heavy price.
16/21

18/02/2020

In the past two years, after difficult negotiations,
the parties reached the Stockholm Agreement and
the Riyadh agreement. Those outcomes should be
commended and the political commitments made must
be fulfilled by all parties in order to maintain the
momentum for a political settlement.
The situation in Al-Hudaydah remains tense. We
support facilitating the work of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement in
monitoring the ceasefire and fulfilling its mandate. We
urge all parties to cooperate with the Mission.
The implementation of the Riyadh agreement has
entered its second phase, which has a direct impact
on the formation of a coalition Government and the
next stage of political negotiations. We hope that
all signatories to the agreement will implement the
consensus in military, security and other key areas.
In that process, it is imperative to pay attention to the
views of the countries of the region and leverage their
roles. Parties to the conflict in Yemen should focus on
the future of the country and the interests of the people,
avoid an escalation of hostilities and jointly safeguard
the country’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen is grim
and deserves serious attention. All parties in Yemen
should fully cooperate with the humanitarian relief
operations of the United Nations and relevant agencies,
avoid inflicting civilian casualties during military
operations and avert the more serious humanitarian
crisis that could result from a lack of humanitarian
access. The humanitarian situation has affected all
aspects of people’s lives — the country’s currency and
prices are unstable; food and supplies of drinking water
are insufficient and diseases such as cholera are not
effectively prevented or treated. Last year, the country
also suffered from plagues of locusts, which seriously
affected its agricultural production.
China is deeply sympathetic to the suffering of the
Yemeni people and has provided them with assistance
through multilateral and bilateral channels. We
advocate the promotion of peace and stability through
development in countries affected by conflict. We
hope that the international community, in addition to
providing relief supplies to Yemen, will also support the
country’s development and reconstruction by helping
to stabilize prices and providing support for education,
employment and other economic and social needs. The
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

unity of the Security Council is an essential prerequisite
for a political resolution of the Yemeni issue. All
parties should enhance communication, overcome
their differences, work towards consensus and create
favourable conditions for a political settlement.
On the question of sanctions, China always takes
the position that they are not an end in themselves. The
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) should play a constructive role in promoting the
political settlement of the Yemeni issue. China is not
in favour of introducing complicated issues into the
question of sanctions, since that would only undermine
the unity of the Council.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would like
to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock and Ambassador
King for their important briefings. All of them have
provided us with an update on the seriousness of the
situation on the ground. While there has been notable
progress in some areas, many issues remain unresolved
and are even getting worse. Nevertheless, we extend
our deepest gratitude to the Special Envoy and the
humanitarian workers for their tireless efforts to make
progress and deliver massive amounts of assistance
despite many challenges. In response to the briefings,
Indonesia would like to highlight three points.
First, I would like to touch upon humanitarian
assistance. We are deeply concerned about the
prolonged humanitarian impediments imposed by the
Houthis. Obstruction of humanitarian assistance and
operations, by any side and for any cause, is completely
unacceptable. That is particularly true in Yemen, where
over 12 million Yemenis are desperately in need of such
assistance. It is inconceivable that the Yemeni people,
who are already victims of that violence, have now
also become victims of bureaucracy, paperwork and
other impediments.
That is an unforgivable tragedy in view of the
fact that humanitarian aid is a lifeline for 80 per cent
of the population. In that connection, we urge Houthi
officials to immediately cooperate with the United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen in
order to resolve the blockade and create a conducive
environment in which humanitarian workers can
perform their tasks effectively.
The second topic I would like to address is the
political process and security situation. We would
like to reiterate our support for the Special Envoy and

S/PV. 8725

commend his efforts. In our view, no progress is too
little. We are encouraged to learn that there has been
agreement on a detailed plan to complete the first
official large-scale exchange of prisoners. We hope
that the swap occurs soon so that they can finally be
reunited with their families. We are also pleased to
hear that the mercy flight was operationalized and able
to carry more than 30 patients to receive medical care
outside of Sana’a. That is one good step towards helping
to build confidence.
In addition, we would like to see progress in Taiz and
a reduction of violence in Yemen. I share Mr. Griffiths’
serious concern about the recent escalation of violence,
which might hamper the political process. I would
also like to echo his sentiment that peace should be
nurtured. The recent escalation of violence, which
has led to increasing civilian casualties, is therefore
intolerable. If it continues, it will erode the confidence
of both parties to implement all previous agreements.
Thirdly, with regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
Indonesia has serious concerns that after months and
months of discussion of that issue, there has been no
major progress. The assessment team continues to be
unable to access the decaying tanker, whose explosion
would trigger an environmental catastrophe. It is the
hope of my delegation that the assessment team will
be permitted to at least enter the tanker, but it is also
critical that all the necessary actions be taken to prevent
a catastrophe. The discussion of relevant procedures
and oil revenue can continue after urgent pre-emptive
action has been taken.
In conclusion, my delegation pleads that, at the
very least, parties should work harder to avoid civilian
casualties and reduce the suffering of our brothers and
sisters in the country. Saving people’s lives should be
at the centre of our work. Furthermore, and for the sake
of humankind, dialogue should continue. I would also
like to underline Under-Secretary-General Lowcock’s
message that enough is enough.
The calendar continues to change and time ticks
away, yet the suffering of the people of Yemen goes
on and on. When will we put a stop to all that carnage?
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Envoy and the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs for their briefings and reiterate
our full support for them. I also thank Ambassador
King for her briefing. We have said it time and again: we
must put an end to the suffering of the Yemeni people,

20-0422317/21

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

18/02/2020

and a comprehensive and inclusive political solution is
the only way to achieve it.

General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Ambassador
Inga Rhonda King.

We are very concerned about the ongoing violent
clashes in northern Yemen, which have resulted in
many casualties. De-escalation must be pursued
without delay, facilitated by direct exchanges between
the parties, and we must move towards a cessation of
hostilities. Confidence-building measures are needed
in order to do so. Some initial progress has been
made — the first medical evacuation flights from
Sana’a to Amman in early February and the agreement
announced on 16 February 2020 for a large-scale
prisoner exchange. Additional progress is needed. The
Riyadh agreement must now be fully implemented. A
deteriorating situation in southern Yemen will benefit
only the terrorists.

The escalation seen over the past days, characterized
by missile strikes and aerial bombing, constitutes
a serious obstacle to the resumption of dialogue. My
delegation urges the parties to demonstrate further
restraint to give a chance to the political process and the
implementation of the various agreements previously
reached by the parties, including those of the National
Dialogue Conference, the November 2019 Riyadh
agreement and the various provisions of the December
2018 Stockholm Agreement. It was not so long ago
that de-escalation was proving to be a success, which
demonstrates that, if the parties want, they can create
the conditions necessary for seeking a political solution.

Those processes must lead to the resumption of
political dialogue with a view to reaching an inclusive
solution for the whole of Yemen and its components. The
role of the Special Envoy is central to the coordination
of those efforts. Every effort must also be made to
ensure humanitarian access. The parties are obliged
to respect international humanitarian law. Increasing
restrictions on humanitarian access and the diversion
of humanitarian assistance must cease immediately.
The announcement by the Houthis that they would
abandon the 2 per cent levy on humanitarian projects
is a first step, but much more progress is still needed. It
is imperative that the entire humanitarian community
remain steadfast in its commitment to the relevant
principles and support the United Nations humanitarian
response plan. That was the purpose of the donor
coordination meeting held in Brussels from 12 to
13 February.
Lastly, we urgently call for the United Nations to
be given rapid access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
which poses a serious threat to the environment. France
will remain fully committed and ready to act to reach a
political solution to the Yemeni crisis and, more broadly,
to avoid any escalation in the region. French authorities
are working with all stakeholders to that end.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths for his briefing on the recent
developments relative to the security situation in Yemen.
The Niger welcomes and reaffirms its full support for
his unrelenting efforts to return peace in Yemen. My
thanks also go to Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary18/21

We
condemn
violations
of
international
humanitarian law and blocking the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in a region in which
approximately two-thirds of the population are in need
of such assistance. We also condemn violence directed
against human rights workers and other civil society
actors. The evacuation of sick children to hospitals, in
particular in Jordan — it should be repeated — is to be
lauded, as it can significantly contribute to de-escalation,
which is so desperately desired.
Similarly, we note and welcome that, despite
upsurges in violence, the provision of humanitarian
assistance and medical care is being pursued thanks
to the courage and determination of the humanitarian
workers. Such humanitarian assistance, which is vital to
the Yemeni population in need of it, must continue and
be stepped up. In that regard, I call on all the relevant
entities of the United Nations system to strengthen
their support for the Yemeni economy and enable
the Government to ensure the regular functioning of
essential State services.
With regard to the political situation, my delegation
encourages the parties to keep the channels of dialogue
open and to resume without delay the political process,
which, — we cannot repeat enough — is the only way
of finding a lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.
Belgium is extremely concerned about the
escalation of violence in Yemen over the past month,
which led to one of the deadliest incidents to occur since
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8725

the beginning of the war. A resumption of the political
process is needed more than ever. The talks between
Saudi Arabia and the Houthis are a good starting point,
but, at some point, the Government of Yemen will have
to be involved in them, and the process will have to
be led by the United Nations. The next steps in the
political process must begin as soon as possible under
the auspices of the United Nations.

As Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, we welcome the
exchange of letters between Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Gamba and the coalition.
As a result, it was possible to adopt and formalize a
time-bound programme of activities implementing last
year’s memorandum of understanding. We call for its
implementation by the coalition as soon as possible.

Belgium welcomes the plan recently agreed
between the parties in Amman for the implementation
of the prisoner-exchange agreement, which could signal
a first step towards the resumption of the political
process. We encourage its swift implementation.

Lastly, the Secretary-General presented here in
the Security Council last week (see S/PV.8721) the
United Nations practical guidance for mediators to
better protect children in situations of armed conflict.
We invite the parties to the conflict and Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths to make use of the guide in the political
talks that, we hope will, soon begin.

The operational environment for humanitarian
actors in Yemen, particularly in the north, has rapidly
deteriorated, and humanitarian space has been
shrinking significantly. Obstacles are constantly being
imposed, thereby hampering humanitarian access
and the delivery of aid. International and national
humanitarian personnel are under threat, and we deplore
the direct attacks in many areas of the country. At the
conclusion of their meeting in Brussels on 13 February,
donors reaffirmed their full support for the United
Nations, international non-governmental organizations
and other humanitarian actors who are working
in extremely difficult conditions. The conference
participants unanimously stated that the situation is
untenable. Every form of restriction, obstruction and
interference that violates humanitarian principles must
be lifted once and for all.
Belgium takes note of the announcement by the
Houthis to lift the 2 per cent levy on humanitarian
projects and urges them to put it into practice. We also
call on the Houthis to refrain from setting up other
obstacles that make the distribution of humanitarian aid
to children and other civilians in need more difficult.
Belgium welcomes the medical flights. The civilian
population must be the focus of our attention. Those
innocent victims continue to suffer the most serious
effects of the conflict.
We also encourage the Houthis once again to finally
allow access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker in order to
facilitate a review of the situation and avoid a possible
environmental disaster.
All parties must respect their obligations and
commitments under international humanitarian law
and, where applicable, international human rights law.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on Belgium’s
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish you and your friendly delegation every success.
I also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his briefing
and I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. Our thanks also go to Ambassador
Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, in her capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014), for her efforts. I thank the
Committee members, as well.
The Yemeni Government has been eager to achieve
lasting peace in accordance with the agreed parameters,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
The Yemeni Government has always expressed
its support for the efforts of Mr. Griffiths. In order to
achieve such a noble goal, we have participated in many
consultations in good faith, and we have made significant
compromises, the latest of which was made in Sweden.
We had hoped that the Stockholm Agreement would
serve as a positive starting point to build confidence,
reach the desired peace that the Yemeni people aspire

20-0422319/21

S/PV.8725

The situation in the Middle East

to and end the conflict and humanitarian suffering of
our patient Yemeni people, brought on by the reckless
war waged by the Iran-backed armed Houthi militias.
Regrettably, after more than a year since the
conclusion of that Agreement, it has led nowhere. We
have entered a new phase of escalation, exacerbation
of the conflict and increased suffering among the
Yemeni people as a result of the Houthis’ recklessness,
their evasion of implementing their commitments and
their attempts to tighten their grip over the city and
port of Al-Hudaydah. Such acts are in disregard of
the provisions of the Agreement and United Nations
efforts. The militias have committed more crimes
and violations against the Yemeni people, amid the
obvious silence by the international community. They
have opened new war fronts in an attempt to bring our
people to their knees and make them submit to their
ideological and sectarian rule, while implementing the
Iranian agenda and scheme in Yemen and the region.
The grave escalation by the Houthi militias in
Al-Jawf, Ma’rib and Nihm and their targeting of cities
and displaced persons camps, as well as hospitals and
mosques, thereby claiming the lives of many civilians,
including women and children, underscores their
intention to abort peace efforts and prolong the war.
Their actions are in flagrant defiance of all efforts
undertaken by the United Nations, including the
Security Council.
The Yemeni Government once again reiterates the
that holding of any future consultations primarily hinges
upon achieving genuine and realistic progress in the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, as well
as on ensuring the success of such consultations. The
Yemeni Government commends the efforts of Special
Envoy Griffiths and the International Committee of
the Red Cross in connection with reaching a phased
agreement for the release of prisoners under the
Stockholm Agreement. The Yemeni Government
pursued that effort, as instructed by His Excellency
Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, President of the
Republic of Yemen, since the beginning, in accordance
with the principle of all-for-all. We reiterate that this
step is purely humanitarian and should be implemented
without procrastination, in line with the agreements
reached in the meeting held recently in Jordan.
The Yemeni Government commends the important
role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the alliance
leader, in supervising and ensuring the implementation
20/21

18/02/2020

of the Riyadh agreement. The Government is deploying
significant efforts, as directed by President Hadi, to
implement the provisions of the agreement, in line
with the chronological order agreed on, without any
selectivity. The Government has implemented all
those steps in accordance with the signed timetable,
and it looks forward to taking measures leading to the
implementation of the agreement and to join efforts in
order to defeat the Iranian-Houthi agenda.
The practices perpetrated by the Houthi militias
against humanitarian organizations and workers,
which include stealing and pillaging humanitarian aid,
controlling its distribution, detaining and intimidating
relief workers, undermining humanitarian action,
denying some areas their aid and imposing measures
and levies on humanitarian assistance, require the
international community to take a firm and decisive
stance to put an end to such practices, hold to account
the perpetrators and condemn such behaviour by the
militias, which must stop that approach.
The Yemeni Government holds the Houthi militias
fully responsible for the announcement made by some
donor countries and United Nations agencies to reduce
or stop aid or relief activities in Houthi-controlled areas.
That will have serious ramifications on the economic,
health and humanitarian situations of millions of people
in dire need of such aid. That announcement is a natural
consequence of the practices and behaviour of the
militias. It corroborates what we have repeatedly said
and emphasized here in the Council, namely, that the
militias do not care about the humanitarian situation
in the areas under their control. They have adopted a
policy of humiliation, impoverishment and starvation
against Yemenis. They also use humanitarian suffering
to turn a profit and make political and media bids before
local and international public opinion.
The Yemeni Government is committed to
providing all facilities conducive to relief efforts and
attenuating the humanitarian disaster. We once again
call on our friends in donor countries and humanitarian
organizations and agencies to coordinate with the
Yemeni Government in order to consider a mechanism
to provide assistance for beneficiaries in the Houthicontrolled areas and to stop yielding to the dictates,
pressure and extortion by those militias at the expense
of the groups in need.
The effects of the war waged by the Houthi militias,
as well as the risks to the safety, integrity and future of
20-04223

18/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen and Yemenis, are not limited to the humanitarian
suffering and disaster endured by my country to date.
They go beyond that to include long-term threats
represented by supporting terrorist organizations. The
Houthi militias support the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, which exists in Yemen, by providing it with
technical support, releasing its members and allowing
it to control some military positions or posts under their
control, according to United Nations reports.
The Iranian weapons seized by the United States
Navy on Sunday, 9 February, which included 150
anti-tank missiles, surface-to-air missiles, binoculars,
thermal imaging equipment, drone components and
other ammunition, which were bound for the Houthi
militias, constitute a flagrant violation of Council
resolutions and provide irrefutable evidence of the close
relationship between the mullah regime in Tehran and
the Houthi militias. They have common objectives to
perpetuate the war, undermine United Nations efforts

S/PV. 8725

towards reaching peace, exacerbate the suffering of the
Yemeni people and threaten the security, safety and
stability of the region and the world.
In conclusion, the Houthi militias continue to deny
United Nations teams access to the FSO SAFER oil
tanker in Ras Isa. The international community and the
Security Council must assume their responsibility and
bring pressure to bear on the Houthi militias. They must
also determine which Houthi leaders are responsible for
undermining the efforts to address the situation of the
tanker, while taking measures to deter them and avoid a
dangerous environmental disaster in the Red Sea.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

20-0422321/21
