S/PV.8225

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8225th meeting

Monday, 9 April 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-09955 (E)
*1809955*

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, and Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs.
Mr. De Mistura is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: This emergency meeting of the
Security Council underscores the gravity of the events
in recent days in Syria, of which there are severe
consequences for civilians. It takes place at a time of
increased international tensions, drawing national,
regional and international actors into dangerous
situations of potential or actual confrontation. It is an
important meeting.
There is an urgent need for the Council to address
the situation with unity and purpose. How did we reach
this point? The month of March saw devastating violence
in part of eastern Ghouta, which resulted in at least
1,700 people killed or injured in opposition-controlled
areas, dozens and dozens of people killed or injured
in Government-controlled areas and, ultimately, the
evacuation of 130,000 people, including fighters,
family members and other civilians.
However, in Douma there was a fragile ceasefire,
which continued for most of March. The United Nations
good offices played an important role in that regard.
Since 31 March, the United Nations has no longer
been able to be involved in talks, since, at that time,
the Syrian Government did not agree to our presence,
2/26

09/04/2018

although we made efforts to propose concrete ways
to address the issues that we understood were arising
in the continuing contacts, including the proposal to
activate the detainee working group agreed in Astana.
However, that proposal was not taken up at the time.
From 2 April, the evacuation of some 4,000 fighters,
family members and other civilians from Douma to
northern Syria took place. However, on 6 April there
was a major escalation in violence. There were reports
of sustained air strikes and shelling against Douma,
the killing of civilians, the destruction of civilian
infrastructure and attacks damaging health facilities.
There were also reports of shelling on Damascus city,
which reportedly again killed or injured civilians. Jaysh
Al-Islam requested our involvement in emergency talks
in extremis, but there was no positive response to that
request when it conveyed the same message to the
other side.
At approximately 8 p.m. local time on 7 April,
reports of an alleged chemical weapons attack in
Douma started to emerge. Pictures immediately
circulated on social media showing what appeared to be
lifeless men, women and children. Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on the ground claimed to have
received hundreds of cases of civilians with symptoms
consistent with exposure to chemical agents. The same
NGOs claimed that at least 49 people had been killed
and hundreds injured.
I wish to recall what the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, noted, namely, that the United
Nations “is not in a position to verify these reports”.
However, he also made it very clear that he cannot
ignore them and that he “is particularly alarmed by
allegations that chemical weapons have been used
against civilian populations in Douma” once again.
He further emphasized “that any use of chemical
weapons, if confirmed, is abhorrent and requires a
thorough investigation”.
I note that a number of States have strongly
alluded to or expressed the suspicion that the Syrian
Government was responsible for the alleged chemical
attack. I also note that other States, as well as the
Government of Syria itself, have strongly questioned
the credibility of those allegations, depicting the attacks
as a fabrication or/and a provocation. My comment is
that this is one more reason for there to be a thorough
independent investigation.
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons has said that it has made the preliminary
analysis of the reports of the alleged use of
chemical weapons and is in the process of gathering
further information from all available sources. My
colleague Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy of the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, who is with
us in the Chamber today, will further address this
matter. But I urge the Security Council, in accordance
with its own mandate to maintain international peace
and security and uphold international law, to, for God’s
sake, ensure that a mechanism is found to investigate
these allegations and assign responsibility.
Returning to the narrative of the events, at
around midnight on 7 April, hours after the alleged
chemical-weapons attack, Jaysh Al-Islam informed the
United Nations that it had reached an agreement with
the Russian Federation and the Syrian Government.
The Russian Federation Ministry for Defence stated
that the agreement encompasses a ceasefire and Jaysh
Al-Islam fighters laying down their arms or evacuating
Douma. The Russian Federation also reported that up
to 8,000 Jaysh Al-Islam fighters and 40,000 of their
family members were to evacuate.
As I brief the Security Council now, we understand
that additional evacuations from Douma are already
under way. We have also received reports that some
detainees — the ones we had heard about before — had
begun to be released from Douma today. We note reports
that the agreement provides for civilians who decide to
stay to remain under Russian Federation guarantees,
with the resumption of services in coordination with a
local committee of civilians.
I urge the Syrian Government and the Russian
Federation to ensure the protection of those civilians
so that as many civilians as possible can stay in their
homes if they choose to, or leave to a place of their own
choosing or return as per international law. I urge that
there be, for there should be, an immediate refocusing
for the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).
What we have see is basically an escalation before a
de-escalation.
Clearly, the dangers of further escalation arise
from situations beyond Ghouta as well. We have
received reports of missiles targeting the Syrian
Government’s Tiyas, or T-4, airbase early this morning.
No State has claimed responsibility for that reported
strike. The United States and France have explicitly

S/PV. 8225

denied any involvement. The Syrian Government, the
Russian Federation and Iran have suggested that Israel
could have carried out the attack, with Iranian State
media reporting that over a dozen military personnel
were killed or injured, including four Iranian military
advisers. The Government of Israel has not commented.
The United Nations is unable to independently verify
or attribute responsibility for that attack, but we urge
all parties to show their utmost restraint and avoid any
further escalation or confrontation.
We are also concerned about the dynamics in other
areas of Syria. Syrians in Dar’a, northern rural Homs,
eastern Qalamoun, Hamah and Idlib have all expressed
to us their own fears that they may soon face escalations
similar to what we have seen in eastern Ghouta. We
therefore urge the Security Council and the Astana
guarantors and those States involved in the Amman
efforts to work towards reinstating de-escalation in
those areas and elsewhere in Syria. The indications are
the opposite at the moment.
Meanwhile, following its operations in Afrin, the
Turkish Government has indicated the potential for
further operations in other areas of northern Syria
if Partiya Yekitiya Demokrat and Kurdish People’s
Protection Units forces are not removed from those
areas. Military operations in such areas have the
potential of raising international tensions. We therefore
urge all parties concerned to de-escalate, show restraint
and find means to implement resolution 2401 (2018)
through dialogue and fully respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria. Let me also highlight
the fact that we have recently seen — and this is
particularly tragic when we consider the efforts all of
us, including all members of the Security Council, have
made in the last year — the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant launch new operations within Syria, south
of Damascus, in rural Damascus, in remote areas near
the Iraqi border.
I would like to conclude with some bottom lines,
if I may.
First, civilians are paying a very heavy price for the
military escalation. We are not seeing de-escalation; we
are seeing the contrary. Today our first priority must
be to protect civilians from the war, from the conflict,
from chemical weapons, from hunger. We call on all
sides to ensure respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including humanitarian
access across Syria to all people in need. We urge once

18-099553/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

more for concrete respect for resolution 2401 (2018)
throughout Syria, which is, after all, a resolution of the
Security Council.
Secondly, continued allegations of the use of
chemical agents are of extremely grave concern.
Those allegations must be independently and urgently
investigated. Any use of chemical weapons is absolutely
prohibited and constitutes a very serious violation of
international law, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013). Preventing impunity and
any further use of chemical weapons and upholding
international law must be an utmost priority for all
members of the Security Council.
Thirdly, I have to say this very slowly because
today is the first time, in over four years of briefing the
Security Council in person, that I have reached a point
in which I have to express a concern about international
security, not just regional or national or Syrian security,
but international security. Recent developments have
more than ever before brought to the surface the dangers
that the Secretary-General warned about recently
at the Munich Security Conference, when he spoke
of “different faultlines” in the Middle East that are
interconnected and crossing each other, of conflicting
interests of both global and regional Powers, and forms
of escalation that can have absolutely devastating
consequences that are difficult for us to even imagine.
The Council cannot allow a situation of uncontrollable
escalation to develop in Syria on any front. Instead,
it must find unity and address the concrete threats to
international peace and security in Syria today.
I am sorry to have been this brief, but I wanted to
focus on one specific concern, namely, the threat to
international security related to what we are seeing now
in Syria and the danger of the alleged chemical-weapons
attacks being repeated. Next time I will brief the
Council on humanitarian and other issues and on the
political process, which I know we are all interested in
focusing upon, but today is the day for talking about
security — international security — and peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his very informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Markram.
Mr. Markram: I thank you for the opportunity
to address the Council again today, Mr. President.
The High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, is away on official travel.
4/26

09/04/2018

It has been less than a week since I last briefed
the Council (see S/PV.8221) on the issue of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. In the intervening
period, new and deeply disturbing allegations of the
use of chemical weapons have come to light. Over the
past weekend, there have been reports on the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Douma, in the Syrian Arab
Republic. According to reports that came in yesterday,
it is alleged that at least 49 people were killed and
hundreds more injured in a chemical-weapon attack.
More than 500 other individual cases reportedly
presented with symptoms consistent with such an
attack. The Office for Disarmament Affairs has been
in touch with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on the matter. The OPCW,
which implements the Chemical Weapons Convention,
to which Syria is a State party, is gathering information
about the incident from all available sources, through
its Fact-finding Mission in Syria. After completing its
investigation, the Fact-finding Mission will report its
findings on the alleged attack to the States parties to
the Convention.
Sadly, there is little to say today that has not already
been said. The use of chemical weapons is unjustifiable.
Those responsible must be held to account. That those
views have been stated on many previous occasions
does not lessen the seriousness with which the
Secretary-General regards such allegations. Nor does
it lessen the truth behind them, which is that what we
are seeing in Syria cannot go unchallenged by anyone
who values the decades of effort that have been put in to
bring about the disarmament and non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. As the body charged with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Council must unite in the face of this continuing
threat and fulfil its responsibilities. To do otherwise, or
simply to do nothing, is to accept, tacitly or otherwise,
that such a challenge is insurmountable. The use of
chemical weapons cannot become the status quo, nor
can we continue to fail the victims of such weapons.
Just over one year ago, in responding to the attack
on Khan Shaykhun, the Secretary-General called for
those responsible to be held accountable, stating that
there can be no impunity for such horrific acts. Just
over one week ago, speaking on behalf of the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, I noted that
unity in the Security Council on a dedicated mechanism
for accountability would provide the best foundation
for success in that regard. I reiterate that belief here, as
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

well as the readiness of the Secretary-General and the
Office for Disarmament Affairs to assist.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Markram for his informative briefing.
I now give the floor to members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): If you imagine, Mr. President, that I derive
pleasure from the subject of my statement today, or from
speaking at great length, you are wrong. Unfortunately,
however, the situation is such that I have a lot to say
today. And you will have to listen to me.
We thank Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Markram for
their briefings.
The Russian Federation asked that this meeting be
convened under the agenda item “Threats to international
peace and security” because we are deeply alarmed
about the fact that a number of capitals — Washington
first and foremost, with London and Paris blindly
following its lead — are purposely steering a course
designed to supercharge international tensions. The
leadership of the United States, Britain and France, with
no grounds and no thought for the consequences, are
taking a confrontational line on Russia and Syria and
pushing others towards it too. They have a broad range
of weapons in their arsenal — slander, insults, bellicose
rhetoric, blackmail, sanctions and threats of the use of
force against a sovereign State. Their threats against
Russia are brazen, and the tone they take has gone
beyond the limits of the permissible. Even during the
Cold War their predecessors did not express themselves
so crudely about my country. What next?
I remember the rhetorical question that President
Putin of Russia put to our Western partners, and
especially the United States, from the rostrum of the
General Assembly in 2015 (see A/70/PV.13), about their
careless geopolitical experiments in the Middle East,
when he asked them if they at least realized what they
had done. At the time, the question went unanswered.
But there is an answer, and it is that no, they do not
realize what they have done. As they do not realize what
they are doing now. It is not only we who are perplexed
at their lack of any coherent strategy on any issue. It
perplexes most of the people in this Chamber. They
just do not want to ask them about it openly. Wherever
they go, whatever they touch, they leave behind chaos
in their wake in the murky water where they have gone

S/PV. 8225

fishing for some kind of fish. But the only fish they
catch are mutants. I will ask them another rhetorical
question. Do they understand the dangerous place they
are dragging the world to?
One of the areas where the hostility manifests itself
most strongly is Syria. The terrorists and extremists
supported by external sponsors are being defeated. Let
me remind those responsible that these are the terrorists
and extremists whom they equipped, financed and
dumped into the country in order to overthrow the
lawful Government. Now we can see why this is causing
hysteria among those who have invested their political
and material capital in such dark forces.
In the past few weeks, thanks to Russia’s efforts to
implement the Security Council’s resolutions, a massive
operation has been carried out to unblock eastern
Ghouta, whose residents have been forced to endure the
humiliation of the rebel militias for several years. More
than 150 thousand civilians were evacuated from this
suburb of Damascus, completely voluntarily and under
the necessary security conditions. Tens of thousands
of them have already been able to return to liberated
areas and many have been taken in by relatives.
The changes in their demographic composition that
the defenders of the Syrian opposition have been
screaming about have not happened. That is a lie. Some
extremely complex negotiations were conducted with
the leaders of the armed groups, as a result of which
many left the neighbourhoods they were occupying,
with full guarantees for their security. Incidentally,
there were several attempted acts of terrorism during
these transport operations when militias tried to bring
suicide belts onto the buses and were prevented. Others
preferred to regulate their status with the Syrian
authorities. Thanks to the presidential amnesty, they
will now be able to return to civilian life, and may
even eventually be able to join Syria’s security forces.
That represents the implementation of the United
Nations principle of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration.
However, not everyone is so keen on such
positive dynamics. The outside sponsors — that is, the
leading Western countries — were ready to grasp at
any straw in order to hang on to any centre of terrorist
resistance, however tiny, within striking distance of
the Syrian capital, so that the militias could continue
to terrorize ordinary residents, taking their food and
begging humanitarian aid from the international
community. Incidentally, they were not about to

18-099555/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

share medicines with those ordinary civilians, as an
inspection of the strongholds left behind by the fighters
revealed. As happened previously in eastern Aleppo,
the improvised hospital facilities in basements were
full of medicines that thanks to Western sanctions
were not to be had for love or money in Damascus
and other Government-controlled areas. Mass graves
and bodies that showed evidence of torture were also
discovered. The dimensions of the tunnels that the
jihadists used were astonishing. Some of them could
easily accommodate small trucks travelling in both
directions. Those impressive underground facilities
connected the positions of groups that some view as
moderate to the strongholds of Jabhat Al-Nusra.
On 6 April, at their sponsors’ instructions, Jaysh
Al-Islam’s new ringleaders prevented the fourth group
of militia fighters from evacuating Douma and resumed
rocket and mortar fire on residential areas of Damascus,
targeting Mezzeh, Mezzeh 86, Ish Al-Warwar, Abu
Rummaneh and Umayyad Square. According to official
data, eight civilians were killed and 37 were wounded.
It is regrettable that we seen no statements from
Western capitals condemning the shelling of a historic
part of Damascus.
The next day, 7 April, militias accused the Syrian
authorities of dropping barrel bombs containing a toxic
substance. However, they got their versions mixed up,
referring to it sometimes as chlorine and sometimes
as sarin or a mixture of poison gases. In a familiar
pattern, the rumours were immediately seized on by
non-governmental organizations financed by Western
capitals and White Helmets operating in the guise
of rescue workers. These so-called reports were also
just as quickly disseminated through media outlets. I
should once again point out that many of these dubious
opposition entities have an accurate list of the email
addresses of the representatives of Security Council
members, which leads us to conclude that some of our
colleagues, with a reckless attitude to their position,
have been leaking sensitive information to those they
sponsor. Incidentally, we all should remember the
incident in which the White Helmets accidentally
posted on the Internet a video showing the preparation
stages for filming the next so-called victim of an attack
allegedly perpetrated by the Syrian army. The chemical
“series” that began in 2013 has continued to run, with
each subsequent episode designed to top the impact of
the previous one.
6/26

09/04/2018

In Washington, London and Paris, conclusions
have immediately been reached as to the guilt of the
Syrian authorities, or regime, as they call it. Has no one
wondered why Damascus needs this? While the Syrian
leadership has received its share of insults, the main
burden of responsibility has been laid at the door of
Russia and Iran, to no one’s surprise, I believe. As is
now customary, it has occurred at lightning speed and
without any kind of investigation. On 8 April, Syrian
troops searching the village of Al-Shifuniya, near
Douma, discovered a small, makeshift Jaysh Al-Islam
chemical-munitions factory, along with Germanproduced chlorine reagents and specialized equipment.
The Istanbul-based opposition journalist Asaad
Hanna posted a video on his Twitter feed that was
allegedly from the area of the incident. In it, an
unidentified individual in a gas mask, presumably from
the White Helmets, is posing against a backdrop of a
homemade chemical bomb that allegedly landed in a
bedroom in a building in Douma. It is accompanied by
commentary about what it calls another of the regime’s
attacks on civilians. There can be no doubt that this
production was staged. The trajectory of the alleged
bomb is entirely unnatural. It fell through the roof and
landed gently on a wooden bed without damaging it in
any way and was clearly placed there before the scene
was shot.
In an interesting coincidence, the chemical act of
provocation in Douma on Saturday, 7 April, occurred
immediately after the United States delegation in the
Security Council was instructed to call for expert
consultations for today, Monday, 9 April, on its draft
resolution on a mechanism for investigating incidents
involving chemical weapons. Today far-reaching
changes were made to the initial text. In such murky
circumstances, of course, we have to determine what
happened. But we have to do it honestly, objectively
and impartially, without sacrificing the principle of
the presumption of innocence and certainly not by
prejudging the process of an investigation.
Despite this provocation, the Russian specialists
have continued their efforts to resolve the situation
in eastern Ghouta. On Sunday afternoon, 8 April,
according to new agreements, the evacuation of Jaysh
Al-Islam combatants was resumed. Following Douma’s
liberation from militants, Russian radiological,
chemical and biological protection specialists were
sent there to collect evidence. They took soil samples
that showed no presence of nerve agents or substances
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8225

containing chlorine. Local residents and combatants
who were no longer fighting were interviewed. Not
one local confirmed the chemical attack. At the local
hospital, no one with symptoms of sarin or chlorine
poisoning had been admitted. There are no other active
medical facilities in Douma. No bodies of people who
had died from being poisoned were found, and the
medical staff and residents had no information about
where they might have been buried. Any use of sarin
or chlorine in Douma is therefore unconfirmed. By
the way, representatives of the Syrian Red Crescent
refuted statements allegedly made on their behalf about
providing assistance to victims of toxic gases.

Hama governorate, 20 one-ton containers and more
than 50 pieces of ordnance containing toxic chemicals
were discovered. In Tel Adel in Idlib governorate,
24 tons of toxic chemical, presumed to be chlorine,
were discovered. At a storage site in Moadamiya, 30
kilometres to the north-east of Damascus, 240- and
160-millimetre-calibre munitions and plastic canisters
of organo-phosphorous compounds were found. In
the area around As-Suwayda in Idlib governorate, an
manufacturing facility for synthesizing various toxic
substances was found, along with 54 pieces of chemical
ordnance and 44 containers of chemicals that could be
used to manufacture toxic substances.

I call on those who plan to denounce the regime
when they speak after me to assume that there was no
chemical-weapon attack.

Since the beginning of this year alone, four
instances of militias using toxic chemicals against
Government troop positions have been established in
Suruj and Al-Mushairfeh districts, and more than 100
Syrian troops have been hospitalized. On 3 March,
during the liberation of Khazram and Aftris in eastern
Ghouta, soldiers from a sub-unit of Government troops
discovered an auxiliary workshop for homemade
chemical munitions. This far from exhaustive list is
an indication of the misdeeds of the still unreconciled
opposition. And yet we have seen no eagerness to
send OPCW expert groups there to collect evidence
of these events. We demand that the OPCW verify all
of these areas. They are accessible. We are also seeing
information that American instructors in the Al-Tanf
camp have trained a number of groups of fighters to
carry out provocations using chemical weapons in order
to create a pretext for a rocket strikes and bombings.

Sweden has drafted a resolution calling for the
incident to be investigated. The Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) does not
need a resolution to investigate it, but we are willing to
consider it. Today we propose to do what is envisaged
in the draft resolution, which is to let the OPCW,
which Mr. Üzümcü, Director-General of its Technical
Secretariat, has announced is ready to deal with the
situation, fly to Damascus immediately, if possible
tomorrow. There the Syrian authorities and the Russian
military will ensure the necessary conditions so that
the OPCW experts can travel to the site of the alleged
incident and familiarize themselves with the situation.
That, by the way, is what President Trump and other
Western leaders have been urging us to do.
The Syrians have repeatedly warned that there
might be chemical provocations. At the Russian Centre
for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian
Arab Republic they are saying that the equipment
needed to film the next purported chemical attack has
already been brought in. We have also made statements
to that effect in the Security Council. Everyone has
heard those warnings, but has deliberately ignored
them because they do not correspond to the doctrinal
positions espoused by those who dream of seeing the
legitimate Government of yet another Arab country
destroyed.
There has still been no attention given to the
discovery in November and December 2017 of a
significant quantity of chemical munitions on Syrian
territory that had been liberated from militias. In
terrorist warehouses in Az-Zahiriya and Al-Hafiya in

It has been clear to us that sooner or later there
would be an attempt to bring the jihadists out of harm’s
way and at the same time to punish the regime that some
Western capitals hate. The talking heads on television
have thrown themselves into urging a repeat of last
year’s effort at a military attack on Syria. This morning
there were missile strikes on the T-4 airfield in Homs
governorate. We are deeply troubled by such actions.
The provocations in Douma are reminiscent of last
year’s incident in Khan Shaykhun, with their shared
element being the planned nature of the attacks. Analysis
of the operations conducted by the United States in April
2017, on the eve of the incident in Khan Shaykhun and
after it, shows that Washington prepared its operation
in advance. From 4 to 7 April of last year — in other
words, from the day that a toxic substance was used
in Khan Shaykhun until the strike on the Al-Shayrat
airbase — the USS Porter and Ross naval destroyers

18-099557/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

were already present in the Mediterranean Sea, where
they were engaged in planned operations. They did not
call into any ports where an exchange of munitions
could have been effected as a way to increase their
quantity of cruise missiles.
Specifically, from 4 to 5 April, the USS Porter was
located south-east of Sicily and the Ross was en route
from the Rota naval base to an area south of Sardinia.
Later, on 6 April, both ships were observed moving at
accelerated speed towards the area of the firing positions
to the south-west of Cyprus, from where they launched
a massive strike on Al-Shayrat on 7 April. However, the
59 Tomahawk missiles that were launched would have
exceeded the two destroyers’ total munitions capacity
if they had actually been engaged in the anti-missile
defence operations that they were assigned to, which
required only 48 units. That means, therefore, that
even before the chemical incident in Khan Shaykhun,
these United States naval vessels undertook a military
operation with a strike capability above the number of
cruise missiles necessary for their anti-missile defence
operations, which could be evidence of advance
planning by Washington of an action against Damascus.
Among other things, Saturday’s fake news from
Douma was aimed at diverting the public’s attention
from the circus that is the Skripal case, in which London
has become terminally mired, hurling completely
unproven accusations at Russia and accomplishing its
basic purpose of extracting solidarity from its allies in
order to construct an anti-Russian front. Now the British
are shifting away from a transparent investigation and
concrete responses to the questions they have been
asked while simultaneously covering their tracks.
At the Security Council meeting on 5 April on
the Skripal case (see S/PV.8224), we warned the
Council that the attempt to accuse us, without proof, of
involvement in the Salisbury incident was linked to the
Syrian chemical issue. There was an interesting new
development regarding the issue yesterday. As Britain’s
Foreign Minister Boris Johnson was continuing his
display of rapier wit “exposing” Russia, another gem
emerged. The Times informed us that Royal Air Force
experts in southern Cyprus had intercepted a message
sent from outside Damascus to Moscow on the day of
the Skripals’ poisoning that contained the phrase “the
package has been delivered” and said that two people
had “successfully departed”. Apparently this formed
part of the intelligence that London provided to its
allies before expelling our Russian diplomats. Is not it
8/26

09/04/2018

obvious to everyone that there is an irrefutable SyriaRussia-Salisbury connection? I will give the British
intelligence services one more huge hint, for free.
Why do they not assume that the Novichok they are so
thrilled about reached Salisbury directly from Syria? In
a package. To cover its tracks. How pathetic.
Ambassador Haley recently stated that Russia will
never be a friend of the United States. To that, I say that
friendship is both reciprocal and voluntary. One cannot
force a friendship and we are not begging the United
States to be friends. What we want from it is very
little — normal, civilized relations, which it arrogantly
refuses, disregarding basic courtesy. However, the
United States is mistaken if it thinks that it has friends.
Its so-called friends are only those who cannot say no
to it. And that is the only criterion for friendship that
it understands.
Russia has friends. And unlike the United States,
we do not have adversaries. That is not the prism
through which we view the world. It is international
terrorism that is our enemy. However, we continue
to propose cooperating with the United States. That
cooperation should be respectful and mutual, and
aimed at resolving genuine problems, not imaginary
ones, and it should be just as much in the interests of the
United States. Ultimately, as permanent members of
the Security Council, we have a special responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Through the relevant channels, we already conveyed
to the United States that military action conducted on
false pretences against Syria, where Russian troops are
deployed at the request of its legitimate Government,
could have extremely serious repercussions. We urge
Western politicians to temper their hawkish rhetoric,
seriously consider the possible repercussions and
cease their feeble, foolhardy efforts, which merely
produce challenges to global security. We can see
very good examples of what becomes of the military
misadventures of the West in Yugoslavia, Iraq and
Libya. No one has invested Western leaders with the
power to take on the roles of the world’s policeman and
its investigators, prosecutors, judges and executioners
as well. We urge them to return to the world of legality,
comply with the Charter of the United Nations and work
collectively to address the problems that arise rather
than attempting to realize its own selfish geopolitical
dreams at every step. All our energy should be focused
on supporting the political process in Syria, and for
that, all stakeholders with influence must unite in a
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

constructive effort. Russia is always ready for that kind
of cooperation.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to request a briefing of the Security Council on the
results of the United Nations assessment mission in
Raqqa and on the situation in the Rukban camp. We can
see how the coalition members are trying to complicate
a resolution of the problems resulting from their actions
in Syria, particularly the carpet-bombing operation
designed to wipe out Raqqa. No chemical provocations
will distract our attention from that issue.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Deputy High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs Thomas
Markram for their briefings.
Only five days ago, here in this Chamber (see
S/PV.8221), we mourned as we remembered the sarin
attack at Khan Shaykhun that occurred a year ago.
This weekend another devastating gas attack was
carried out in the city of Douma, killing more than
45 civilians and injuring more than 500. It was another
in a series of chemical-weapon attacks in Syria. That is
unacceptable. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is one of
nine Security Council members that requested today’s
emergency meeting because we all believed that it was
critically important to address this horrific attack. We
must reinstate the prohibition on the use of chemical
weapons. We must underscore the basic norms of the
international legal order and stop the ongoing tragedy
in eastern Ghouta and Douma.

S/PV. 8225

to use their influence to prevent any further attacks.
They must ensure a cessation of hostilities and a
de-escalation of the violence, as per resolution 2401
(2018). An immediate ceasefire is needed in Douma so
that humanitarian and medical aid can reach the victims
of the attack and so that humanitarian personnel can
continue their life-saving work. We owe it to the men,
women and children of Douma and of Syria. We owe it
to our own citizens.
Furthermore, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
would also like to point out that the majority of the States
Members of the United Nations count on the permanent
members of the Council not to use their veto in cases
of mass atrocities. The international community should
be able to count on the Council to uphold international
humanitarian law and the international prohibition
on the use of chemical weapons, and to act when
international law is trampled. Let me be clear. We
support the humanitarian work of the White Helmets.
They do extremely important humanitarian work for
civilians in Syria in dire circumstances.

We almost met twice today because one permanent
member of the Council seemed not to want a focused
discussion on the issue at hand, the chemical attack
in Douma. That begs the question of whether that
particular member State would prefer the international
community to stand by and watch like a spectator while
it covers for the crimes of its ally, the Syrian regime,
some of which amount to serious war crimes. The
Council must not stand idly by. It is high time for us to
act in three ways, condemning, protecting and holding
to account. First, today we should condemn in the
strongest possible terms any use of chemical weapons.
International law has been trampled on. Silence and
impunity are not an option. However, condemnation
alone is not enough.

Thirdly, all members of the Council regularly stress
the importance of accountability for perpetrators who
use chemical weapons. Yet the Council has not been
able to move forward on that issue for months owing
to one permanent member’s use of the veto. We have
been unable to tackle this crisis because one permanent
member is a direct party to the conflict and has proved
that it will defend the Syrian regime at all costs. We
must intensify our efforts to establish a mechanism
that can continue the meticulous work of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) and investigate and
identify perpetrators independently of the politics in
the Council. The JIM has identified both the Syrian
regime and a non-State actor as responsible for the use
of chemical weapons in Syria. As I said last week (see
S/PV.8221), the discontinuation of the JIM mandate
cannot be the end of the story — all the more so because
since the JIM ceased to operate, we have received
reports that the regime has carried out at least six
more chemical-weapon attacks and perhaps even more.
For those who claim that chemical-weapon attacks
have not taken place or that such accounts have been
fabricated, I have a clear message. The establishment of
an effective, impartial and independent attribution and
accountability mechanism must not be vetoed.

Secondly, we must deliver on our responsibility
to protect. The protection of civilians must remain an
absolute priority. We call on the Astana guarantors

Let us not forget that the United Nations is bigger
than the Council alone. We have strong leadership
at the helm of Organization and a powerful General

18-099559/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

Assembly. Both must consider all instruments to
advance accountability for the use of chemical weapons.
The work should build on the important work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Fact-finding Mission and the JIM. We welcome
the Fact-finding Mission’s immediate investigation of
the terrible incident in Douma this weekend. It should
be given full access and cooperation by all parties. We
reiterate our strong support for, first, the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011; secondly, the Commission of Inquiry; thirdly, the
International Partnership against Impunity for the Use
of Chemical Weapons, initiated by France; and fourthly,
a referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court in The Hague as the most appropriate
path to accountability and justice.
In conclusion, the Council must act. The OPCW
Fact-finding Mission must complete an investigation
as soon as possible, and there can be no impunity
for the use of chemical weapons. To do otherwise is
tantamount to condoning such appalling attacks,
failing in our responsibilities and undermining the
international architecture that we have collectively
designed to stop such attacks. It is time for the Council
and the international community as a whole to act.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Markram for their briefings.
Almost exactly one year ago, I stood on the floor
of the Security Council and held up pictures of dead
Syrian children (see S/PV.7915). After that day, I
prayed that I would never have to do that again. I could;
there are many truly gruesome pictures. Many of us
have worked hard to ensure that one day we would not
have to see images of babies gassed to death in Syria.
However, the day we prayed would never come, has
come again. Chemical weapons have once again been
used on Syrian men, women and children. And once
again, the Security Council is meeting in response.
This time I am not going to hold up pictures of
victims. I could; there are many, and they are gruesome.
Worse are the videos imprinted in our minds that no
one should ever have to see. I could hold up pictures of
babies lying dead next to their mothers, brothers and
sisters — even toddlers and infants still in diapers, all
lying together dead. Their skin is the ashen blue that is
10/26

09/04/2018

now tragically familiar from chemical-weapon scenes.
Their eyes are open and lifeless, with white foam
bubbles at their mouths and noses. They are pictures
of dead Syrians who are unarmed, not soldiers and fit
the very definition of innocent and non-threatening.
Rather, they are women and children who were hiding in
basements from a renewed assault by Bashar Al-Assad.
They are of families who were hiding underground to
escape Al-Assad’s conventional bombs and artillery,
but the basements that Syrian families thought would
shelter them from conventional bombs were the worst
place to be when chemical weapons fell from the sky.
Saturday evening, the basements of Douma became
their tombs.
It is impossible to know for certain how many
have died, because access to Douma is cut off by
Al-Assad’s forces. Dozens are dead that we know of,
and hundreds are wounded. I could hold up pictures of
survivors — children with burning eyes and choking
for breath. I could hold up pictures of first responders
washing the chemicals off of the victims and putting
respirators on children, or of first responders walking
through room after room of families lying motionless
with babies still in the arms of their mothers and
fathers. I could show pictures of a hospital attacked with
chemical weapons. I could show pictures of hospitals
struck by barrel bombs following the chemical attack.
Ambulances and rescue vehicles have been repeatedly
attacked, maximizing the number of dead civilians.
Civil defence centres have been attacked in order to
paralyse the medical response so as to increase the
suffering of the survivors. Who does that? Only a
monster does that. Only a monster targets civilians, and
then ensures that there are no ambulances to transfer
the wounded, no hospitals to save their lives and no
doctors or medicine to ease their pain.
I could hold up pictures of all of that killing and
suffering for the Council to see, but what would be
the point? The monster who was responsible for those
attacks has no conscience, not even to be shocked by
pictures of dead children. The Russian regime, whose
hands are all covered in the blood of Syrian children,
cannot be ashamed by pictures of its victims. We
have tried that before. We must not overlook Russia
and Iran’s roles in enabling the Al-Assad regime’s
murderous destruction. Russia and Iran have military
advisers at Al-Assad’s airfields and operation centres.
Russian officials are on the ground helping direct the
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

regime’s starve-and-surrender campaign, and Iranian
allied forces do much of the dirty work.
When the Syrian military pummels civilians, they
rely on the military hardware given by Russia. Russia
could stop that senseless slaughter if it wanted, but it
stands with the Al-Assad regime and supports without
any hesitation. What is the point of trying to shame
such people? After all, no civilized Government would
have anything to do with Al-Assad’s murderous regime.
Pictures of dead children mean little to Governments
like Russia, who expend their own resources to prop up
Al-Assad.
The Council, which saw the pictures last year, has
failed to act because Russia has stood in its way every
single time. For a year we have allowed Russia to hold
the lives of innocent Syrians hostage to its alliance
with the Al-Assad regime. That also allowed Russian
to weaken the credibility of the United Nations. We are
quick to condemn chemical weapons in the Security
Council, but then Russia prevents any action. It vetoed
five draft resolutions on this issue alone and used 11
vetoes all together to save Al-Assad. Our lives go on
as usual.
The Council created the Joint Investigative
Mechanism. It found the Syrian regime responsible for
the attack at Khan Shaykhun a year ago. Because Russia
supported Al-Assad and his actions, Russia killed the
Mechanism. We condemned it, and our lives went
on as usual. We pushed for a ceasefire. The Council
unanimously agreed, but it was immediately ignored by
Russia and Al-Assad. We condemned it, and our lives
went on as usual. Now here we are, confronted with
the consequences of giving Russia a pass in the name
of unity — a unity that Russia has shown many times
before it does not want. Here we are, in a world where
chemical-weapons use is becoming normalized — from
an Indonesian airport to an English village to the homes
and hospitals of Syria. Since the Al-Assad regime used
chemical weapons at Khan Shaykhun one year ago,
chemical weapons have been reportedly used dozens of
times, and the Council does nothing.
What we are dealing with today is not about a spat
between the United States and Russia. It is about the
inhumane use of chemical agents on innocent civilians.
Each and every one of the nations in the Council is on
record opposing the use of chemical weapons. There
can be no more rationalizations for our failure to act. We
have already introduced and circulated to the Council a

S/PV. 8225

draft resolution demanding unrestricted humanitarian
access to the people of Douma. Al-Assad is doing all
he can to assure maximum suffering in Douma. Our
priority must be to help the starving, the sick and the
injured who have been left behind. We also call on the
Council to immediately re-establish a truly professional
and impartial mechanism for chemical-weapons attacks
in Syria, including the attack this weekend. We hope
that our colleagues on the Council will join us, as they
have before.
That is a very minimum we can do in response to
the attack we just witnessed. Russia’s obstructionism
will not continue to hold us hostage when we are
confronted with an attack like that one. The United
States is determined to see the monster who dropped
chemical weapons on the Syrian people held to account.
Those present have heard what the President of the
United States has said about that. Meetings are ongoing.
Important decisions are being weighed, even as we
speak. We are on the edge of a dangerous precipice. The
great evil of chemical-weapons use, which once unified
the world in opposition, is on the verge of becoming
the new normal. The international community must
not let that happen. We are beyond showing pictures
of dead babies. We are beyond appeals to conscience.
We have reached the moment when the world must see
justice done. History will record this as the moment
when the Security Council either discharged its duty or
demonstrated its utter and complete failure to protect
the people of Syria. Either way, the United States
will respond.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Peruvian presidency for having convened this
emergency Security Council meeting, at the request of
France, together with eight other Council members. I
also wish to thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and the Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mr. Thomas Markram, for their insightful briefings.
There are times in the lives of nations where what
is essential is at stake: life or death; peace or war;
civilization or barbarism; the international order or
chaos. That is the case today following the dreadful
chemical carnage that once again pushed the boundaries
of horror on Saturday in Douma. We are aware that two
new and particularly serious chemical-weapons attacks
took place in Douma on 7 April. The provisional toll
of human life is appalling. There are nearly 50 dead,
including a number of children, and 1,000 wounded.

18-0995511/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

That toll is likely to be even higher, as assistance cannot
reach some areas. Once again, toxic substances have
been dropped to asphyxiate, to kill and to terrorize
civilians, reaching them even in the basements where
they sought refuge. Chlorine gas has the particular
characteristic of being a heavy gas, capable of entering
basements. For that reason, it is used. That is the level
of deadly cynicism that has been reached in Syria.
There are no words to describe the horror of the
images that surfaced on 7 April, nearly one year after
the Khan Shaykhun attack, which killed nearly 80
people. What we see in the thousands of photos and
videos that surfaced in the course of several hours after
the 7 April attacks reminds us of the images we have
seen far too often: children and adults suffocating due
to exposure to concentrated chlorine gas. What we
also see are people suffering from violent convulsions,
excessive salivation and burning eyes, all of which
are symptomatic of exposure to a potent neurotoxin
mixed with chlorine to heighten the lethal effect. As
I mentioned, in total more than 1,000 people were
exposed to that deadly chemical compound.
The experience and the successive reports of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism leave no room for doubt
as to the perpetrators of this most recent attack. Only
the Syrian armed forces and their agencies have the
requisite knowledge to develop such sophisticated toxic
substances with such a high degree of lethality. And only
the Syrian armed forces and its agencies have a military
interest in their use. This attack took place in Douma,
an area that has been subjected to relentless shelling
by the Syrian armed and air forces for several weeks.
Unfortunately, the use of such weapons enables much
swifter tactical progress than conventional weapons.
We are all aware that the Syrian regime has
already been identified by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism as the party responsible for
the use, on at least four occasions, of chlorine and sarin
gas as a chemical weapon. There are no illusions as to
the sincerity of the declaration delivered by Syria on the
state of its chemical stockpiles in 2013. Unfortunately,
we once again we have proof in the form of empirical
evidence. This dovetails with the regime’s strategy of
terror against civilians. We have already experienced
this. At the worst, this is bad faith or, even worse,
complicity. The Damascus regime clearly seeks, by
sowing terror, to accelerate the capture of other urban
areas that it wishes to control. What could be more
12/26

09/04/2018

effective to prompt those who resist the regime to flee
than sieges, a tactic worthy of the Middle Ages, in
addition to chemical terror. Let us make no mistake: the
children frozen in an agonizing death are not so-called
collateral victims. They are deliberate targets of these
chemical attacks, designed and planned for the purpose
of waging terror. The Damascus regime is conducting
State terrorism, with its litany of war crimes and even
crimes against humanity.
The offensive and the shelling conducted by the
regime, as well as by its Russian and Iranian allies, over
the past 48 hours prove the degree to which they have
engaged in a military race without any consideration
of the human cost. This latest escalation of violence,
punctuated by a new instance of the use of chemical
weapons, brings us face to face with the destructive
madness of a diehard regime that seeks to destroy
its people completely. And that regime’s Russian and
Iranian allies are either unable or unwilling to stop it.
We are aware of the fact, and the Russian authorities
have confirmed this on several occasions, that Russian
military forces have a presence on the ground and in
the air in eastern Ghouta. On 7 April, as the second
chemical attack took place in Douma, Russian aircraft
were also taking part in air operations in the Damascus
region. Russian and Iranian military support is present
on the ground and at all levels of the Syrian war
machinery. No Syrian aircraft takes off without the
Russian ally being informed. These attacks took place
either with the tacit or explicit consent of Russia or
despite its reluctance and military presence. I do not
know which is more alarming when it comes to our
collective security.
The stakes revolving around this recent attack
are extremely grave. This is the latest proof of the
normalization of chemical weapons use, which we
should attribute not only to a regime that has become
uncontrollable and continues to gas civilians with
complete impunity, but also to its supporters, including
a permanent member of the Security Council. That
member failed in its commitment to implement
resolution 2118 (2013), which it, itself, co-sponsored.
That member’s responsibility in the endless tragedy
that is the war in Syria is overwhelming.
France therefore of course turns towards Russia
today in order to put forward two demands. The
first demand is a cessation of hostilities and the
establishment of an immediate ceasefire in Syria, in line
with resolution 2401 (2018), adopted on 24 February,
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

which to date has never been upheld by the Damascus
regime. France deeply deplores the fact that, although
it was unanimously adopted, it was not possible to
implement that resolution, which provides for a truce
and emergency humanitarian access. The second
demand is the establishment of a new international
investigative mechanism that will be able to document
all of the factors of the attack in Douma and ensure
that the perpetrators are brought to justice. The end
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism last November
due to two successive Russian vetoes has stripped us
of an essential tool of deterrence. For that reason, we
support any initiative to bridge that gap. And in that
spirit France has committed to a partnership to combat
impunity for the use of chemical weapons. In that same
spirit, we endorse the draft resolution that has been put
forward today by the United States.
With this attack the Al-Assad regime is testing yet
again the determination of the international community
to ensure compliance with the prohibition against
chemica-weapons use. Our response must be united,
robust and implacable. That response must make it
clear that the use of chemical weapons against civilians
will no longer be tolerated, and that those who flout
that fundamental rule of our collective security will
be held accountable and must face the consequences.
The Al-Assad regime needs to hear an international
response, and France stands ready to fully shoulder its
role alongside its partners.
Ultimately, we know that only an inclusive political
solution will bring an end to the seven-year conflict,
which has claimed the lives of 500,000 people and
pushed millions to take the route of exile. That is
why France will remain fully committed alongside
the United Nations Special Envoy and in line with the
Geneva process. However, in the light of this most
recent carnage, we can no longer merely repeat words.
Without being followed up by deeds, such words would
be meaningless. I wish to reiterate here what President
Macron has stressed on several occasions: France will
assume its full responsibility in the fight against the
proliferation of chemical weapons. France’s position is
clear. It will uphold its commitments and keep its word.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria and
Mr. Markram for their briefings. I also thank all the
United Nations teams on the ground for the important
and incredibly difficult work they do.

S/PV. 8225

As Staffan de Mistura said, this is an important
Security Council meeting. My Government shares the
outrage that other colleagues have eloquently described
today. It is truly horrific to think of victims and families
sheltered underground when the chlorine found them.
This is the third time in five days that the Council
has convened to discuss chemical weapons. This is
dreadful in the true sense of that word. The Council
should dread what we risk happening — for chemical
weapons to become a routine part of fighting. As one
of the five permanent members of the Council (P-5),
the United Kingdom believes that we have a particular
responsibility to uphold the worldwide prohibition on
the use of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). We
agree with the Netherlands Ambassador that the P-5 has
specific responsibilities. I believe that four members of
the P-5 do believe that, but there is one that does not.
The Russian Ambassador referred to a resurgence of
the Cold War. This is not the Cold War. In the Cold War
there was not this flagrant disregard for the prohibitions
that are universal on the use of WMDs.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral also referred to the risks of escalation, and to
international peace and security more broadly. We share
his fears, but it is the Syrian Government and its backers,
Iran and Russia, who are prolonging the fighting and
risking regional and wider instability. There are real
questions about what is happening in the T-4 airbase,
with its foreign fighters and its mercenaries.
We have been challenged today by our Russian
colleague to say why we believe the attack was carried
out by Syria and why we believe, further, that chemical
weapons were used. The reasons are as follows. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW)-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
found six uses of chemical weapons between 2014 and
2017. Two it ascribed to Da’esh for the use of mustard
gas, three it ascribed to the regime for the use of chlorine
and one further use it ascribed to the Syrian regime for
the use of sarin. That is the attacks that we talked about
in the Council just last week at Khan Sheykhoun, which
led to the United States strike — which we support — on
Al-Shayrat. In addition, as the French Ambassador has
said, we had reports of Russian and Syrian warnings
before the chemical-weapon attack took place and of a
pattern of Mi-8 Hip helicopters flying overhead. Those
reports have come from the ground.

18-0995513/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

I listened carefully to the Russian Ambassador’s
argument. As I have just set out, we, as the United
Kingdom believe that the Syrian regime is responsible
for these latest attacks. But there is one way to settle
this — to have an independent fact-finding mission
followed by an independent investigation — as we all
know that fact-finding missions are there to determine
whether chemical weapons have been used and, if they
have been used, what sort of chemical weapons. But only
an investigation can determine who is responsible for
their use, and therefore start the path to accountability.
I was very interested to hear the Russian offer that
an OPCW fact-finding mission could visit and would
have the protection of Russian forces. I believe that
this is an offer worth pursuing, but it would, of course,
be necessary for the OPCW mission to have complete
freedom of action and freedom of access. That still
leaves us with the question of who committed these
atrocities. That is why we support the United States
text for a draft resolution and we believe that there is no
legitimate reason not to support the call for the Council
to set up an independent investigative mechanism. As
I said before, we have nothing to hide, but it appears
that Russia, Syria and their supporters, Iran, do have
something to fear.
The Russian Ambassador singled out the
United Kingdom, the United States and France for
criticism. I would like, if I may, to turn to that. The
responsibility for the cruelty in Syria belongs to Syria
and its backers — Russia and Iran. The use of chemical
weapons is an escalatory and diabolical act. It strikes
me that what Russia is trying to do is to turn the debate
in the Council away from the discussion of the use of
chemical weapons into a dispute between East and West,
presenting itself as the victim. It is far too important to
play games with the politics between East and West in
respect of chemical weapons. Russia’s crocodile tears
for the people of eastern Ghouta has an easy answer.
It is to join us in the non-political attempt to get in
humanitarian and protection workers from the United
Nations to do their job of looking after and mitigating
the risk to civilians. Russia’s concern about attribution
for the use of chemical weapons also has an easy
answer. It is to join us in allowing the United Nations
to set up an international investigative mechanism to
pursue the responsible parties. I repeat here the two
demands of my French colleague, and I hope we will be
able to make progress.
14/26

09/04/2018

I had not intended to address the Skripal case in
Salisbury, but since my Russian colleague has done so,
I will address it today. He asked what the similarities
were between Salisbury and Syria. I think it is
important that I point out that the cases are different
in the following respects. First, there is a thorough
investigation under way in Salisbury. As we have
heard, there is no investigation under way in Syria. The
British Government in Salisbury is seeking to protect
its people, as is its duty. The Syrian Government, on
the contrary, as we have heard today, attacks and gasses
its people. I am sorry to say that what the two do have
in common though, is Russia’s refusal to assume P-5
responsibilities to prevent the use of WMDs and its
reckless support for the use of WMDs by its agents and
by its allies.
It is not we who want to alienate Russia. It alienates
herself by not joining in the vast majority of the
Council who wish to find a non-polemical way through
and to address the use of chemical weapons against
civilians in Syria. The Russian Ambassador mentioned
friends of the United States. My Government and its
people are proud to be a friend of the United States.
We stand with everyone on the Council who wants to
find a way through the chemical weapons problem, to
have a proper fact-finding mission and to have a proper
investigation as the first step to bringing this dreadful
conflict to a close.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Special Envoy de Mistura and the
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Markram, for their briefings. China takes
note of the reports alleging that chemical weapons were
once again used in Syria and caused civilian casualties.
That is of great concern to China.
China’s position on chemical-weapons has been
consistent and clear. We are firmly opposed to the
use of chemical weapons by any State, organization
or individual under any circumstances. Any use of
chemical weapons, whenever and wherever, must not be
tolerated. China supports a comprehensive, objective
and impartial investigation of the incident concerned
so that it can reach a conclusion based on substantiated
evidence that can stand the test of history and facts so
that the perpetrators and responsible parties can be
brought to justice.
The Syrian chemical-weapons issue is closely linked
to to a political settlement of the Syrian situation. China
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

supports the ongoing important role of the Security
Council and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) as the main channels for
dealing with the Syrian chemical-weapons issue. We
hope that the parties concerned will take a constructive
approach so as to seek a solution through consultations,
establish the facts, prevent any further use of chemical
weapons, preserve the unity of the Security Council
and cooperate with the efforts by the parties concerned
to advance the political process in Syria.
The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year
and is inflicting tremendous suffering on the Syrian
people. A political settlement is the only solution to
the Syrian issue. The international community must
remain committed to a political settlement of the
question of Syria, while fully respecting its sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
China has always opposed the use or threat of force
in international affairs. We always advocate adherence
to the Charter of the United Nations. All parties should
increase their support for the United Nations mediation
efforts and compel the parties in Syria to seek a political
settlement under the principle of Syrian leadership and
ownership in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
The fight against terrorism is an important
and urgent issue in the political settlement of the
Syrian question. The international community must
strengthen its coordination, uphold uniform standards
and combat all terrorist groups identified as such by the
Security Council.
At a recent Security Council meeting, China set
out its principled position with regard to the Skripal
incident (see S/PV.8224). China believes that the parties
concerned should strictly comply with their obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention and, in
line with the relevant provisions of the Convention,
carry out a comprehensive, impartial and objective
investigation and deal with the issues concerned
within the framework of the OPCW. China hopes that
the parties concerned will work in accordance with
the principles of mutual respect and equality, engage
in consultations, cooperate, avoid politicization and
measures that might further exacerbate tensions and
resolve their differences properly through dialogue.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura
and Mr. Thomas Markram for their briefings this
afternoon. I would also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for acceding to our request for an emergency meeting.

S/PV. 8225

We are dismayed by the general escalation of
violence in Syria, as described today by Staffan de
Mistura, in clear violation of the various resolutions,
including resolution 2401 (2018). In that regard, I want
to plea with the Syrian authorities represented in the
Chamber and with the Astana guarantors to live up to
the Security Council’s resolutions.
We asked for this meeting today because over
the weekend we were yet again faced with horrifying
allegations of chemical-weapons attacks in Syria,
this time in Douma, just outside Damascus. There
are worrying reports of a large number of civilian
casualties, including women and children. The graphic
material that has been shared is beyond repugnant. We
are alarmed by those extremely serious allegations.
There must now be an immediate, independent and
thorough investigation.
Let me reiterate that Sweden supports all
international efforts to combat the use and proliferation
of chemical weapons by State or non-State actors
anywhere in the world. We unequivocally condemn in the
strongest terms the use of chemical weapons, including
in Syria. It is a serious violation of international law and
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
The use of chemical weapons in armed conflict is
always prohibited and amounts to a war crime. Those
responsible must be held accountable. We cannot
accept impunity.
Addressing the use of chemical weapons in Syria
has become a central test of the credibility of the
Council. How we respond to the most recent reports
from Douma is therefore decisive. Despite the odds, we
must put aside our differences and come together. Now
is the time to show unity. In our view, the following
needs to happen.
First, we must condemn in the strongest terms the
continued use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Secondly, our immediate priority must be to
investigate the worrying reports from Douma. In that
context, we welcome the announcement by the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) that the Fact-finding
Mission for Syria — to which we reiterate our full
support — is in the process of gathering information
from all available sources. We express our hope that the
Fact-finding Mission can be urgently deployed to Syria.

18-0995515/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

Thirdly, all States, as well as the parties to the
conflict, including the Syrian authorities, must fully
cooperate with the Fact-finding Mission. What is
particularly needed is safe and unhindered access to the
site in Douma, as well as any information and evidence
deemed relevant by the Fact-finding Mission to conduct
its independent investigation.
Fourthly, we need to urgently redouble our efforts
in the Council to agree on a new independent and
impartial attributive mechanism to identify those
responsible for chemical-weapons use.
Finally, if the allegations of chemical-weapons
use are indeed confirmed and those responsible are
eventually identified, the perpetrators must be held
to account.
We are ready to work actively and constructively
with other members for urgent Council action. To
that end, we have circulated elements as input to
our discussions. We must immediately engage in
consultations in order to break the current deadlock and
to shoulder our responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations. We owe that to the many victims of the
crimes committed in this conflict.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Allow me to thank Special
Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs Mr. Thomas
Markham for their important briefings.
We are horrified by the news of another deadly
attack in eastern Ghouta, which took place on Saturday
evening. Dozens of people perished as a result of a
vicious act of violence against civilians in Douma. The
available information about the symptoms of the victims
affirm that they are consistent with those caused by a
chemical agent.
Poland condemns that barbaric attack, and
expects that it will be possible to hold the perpetrators
accountable. No military or political goal can justify the
extermination of innocent vulnerable people, especially
those seeking help in medical facilities. That atrocious
crime seems to be a cynical response to the debates in
the Council last week, when we commemorated the
first anniversary of the attack in Khan Shaykun (see
S/PV.8221).
We call on the actors affecting the situation in
Syria, especially the Russian Federation and Iran, to
take all the necessary actions to prevent any further use
of weapons of mass destruction and to achieve the full
16/26

09/04/2018

cessation of hostilities in the whole territory of Syria.
We insist that all parties to the conflict comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
As has been stated many times by members of
the Council, as well as United Nations officials and
European Union representatives, it is highly regrettable
that the renewal of the mandate of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism was vetoed, thereby
allowing those responsible for the subsequent chemical
attacks to remain unpunished. Today we face the results
of that impunity, witnessing further attacks against
civilians with the use of chemicals as weapons.
We urge all our partners in the Council to engage
in a serious discussion in good faith in order to
re-establish an accountability mechanism for chemical
attacks in Syria. That is the minimum that we owe the
victims of Ghouta, Khan Shaykun, Al-Lataminah and
the numerous other places where chemical weapons
have been used.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
Special Envoy De Mistura and Mr. Thomas Markram
for their briefings.
Reports of the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Douma on Saturday and the videos and pictures that we
saw through media outlets are indeed very worrisome.
It is also deeply disturbing that such reports of the use
of chemical weapons have continued in the ongoing
military activities in Syria. As we have repeatedly
stated, we strongly condemn any use of chemical
weapons by any actor under any circumstances. There
is no justification whatsoever for the use of chemical
weapons. Those responsible for these inhuman acts
must be identified and held accountable. This is
absolutely vital, not only for the sake of the victims
of chemical weapons in Syria but also for maintaining
international peace and security and for preserving the
non-proliferation architecture.
As the Secretary-General said in his 8 April
statement, cited by the Special Envoy earlier, any
use of chemical weapons, if confirmed, is abhorrent
and requires a thorough investigation. That includes
the need to establish accountability — something on
which the Council has yet to achieve consensus. In
the meantime, we believe the reported use of chemical
weapons in Douma, and in other parts of Syria,
should be investigated by the Fact-finding Mission,
and all parties should extend full cooperation in that
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

regard, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
While we all agree that accountability is
indispensable for deterring and stopping the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and beyond, there is currently,
as has already be said, no independent, impartial
and professional investigative mechanism that could
identify those individuals, entities, State or non-State
actors that use chemical weapons in the country. In that
regard, the Council should recover its unity and engage
in a positive and constructive discussion that could
address the existing institutional lacunae.
We all know that the threats to international peace
and security we face today are becoming increasingly
more complex by the day. We are seeing that the
proliferation of nuclear weapons is posing a real danger
and that the international norms on the use of chemical
weapons are also being undermined. Since the end of
the Cold War, the trust among major Powers has never
been so low as it is currently, which has enormous
implications not only for global peace and security but
also for the transformative agenda that we have set for
ourselves in the development sphere. We cannot think
of making any meaningful headway towards achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals without creating the
necessary global security environment. At the moment,
we really cannot say that this is an environment
conducive to making any progress on that account.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security. Unfortunately, it has not been able
to effectively address the new and emerging threats
and challenges to peace and security that we are facing
today. It has been all the more apparent that the lack
of unity and cohesion among members is undermining
the credibility of the Council. Perhaps we, the elected
members, have to look for ways and means to have a
greater impact, with a view to contributing to increasing
the Council’s effectiveness. Without dialogue among
the major Powers to build the necessary trust and
understanding, it will be extremely difficult to address
some of the most difficult and complex security
challenges we have ever seen, including the situation
in Syria.
Things are in fact bound to get even worse unless
something is done. We cannot afford to bury our heads
in the sand. The dangers are very palpable. That is why
every opportunity should be seized. That is also why

S/PV. 8225

we consider the news about the upcoming summit-level
meetings being planned to be encouraging. We can only
hope that those meetings will help to defuse tensions
and allow for serious discussions to take place with a
view to finding a common approach to tackling current
threats and challenges. The sooner those discussions
happen, the better for preserving global peace and
stability, which, as we speak, is becoming a source of
extremely great concern. In fact, I am understating the
magnitude of the potential danger we are facing.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): The Ivorian delegation thanks Mr. De Mistura
and Mr. Markram for their respective briefings on the
latest developments in Syria, after the resumption of
fighting in Douma and eastern Ghouta and the bombing
of the city of Damascus, following the relative calm of
recent weeks. My delegation would like to focus its
statement on three main points.
First, we remain deeply concerned about recent
reports of chemical-weapons attacks against innocent
civilian populations, which have reportedly resulted
in numerous casualties who have shown symptoms of
exposure to a chemical agent. While reaffirming its
categorical rejection of any use or resort to chemical
weapons, be it in times of peace or in times of war, Côte
d’Ivoire strongly condemns such acts and calls for these
events to be placed under an intense spotlight, with the
contribution of all stakeholders.
In the face of allegations of recurrent use of
chemical weapons by the warring parties in the Syrian
conflict, the Ivorian delegation stresses that it is more
important than ever that the international community
send a strong signal to show, beyond the usual principled
condemnations, its determination to put a definitive
end to this infernal cycle.
The use of chemical weapons violates the most
fundamental norms of international law and poses
threats to our collective security. That is why we must
engage in a unflagging fight against impunity in the use
of chemical weapons and preserving the international
chemical non-proliferation regime, which is one of the
fundamental pillars of our common security.
My second point concerns the need for the
international community to put in place a mechanism
for accountability and for the fight against impunity for
those who use chemical weapons, in order to put an end
to the repeated use of these weapons. In that regard,
the Ivorian delegation expresses its readiness to work

18-0995517/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

towards the establishment of such a mechanism and
calls on the Council to return to the unity it had when
it established the Joint Investigative Mechanism, whose
mandate unfortunately could not be renewed despite
our common efforts.
Thirdly, Côte d’Ivoire notes with regret that
resolution 2401 (2018), which remains the framework
for our joint action, has not been implemented and
that the humanitarian situation in Syria has further
deteriorated. In the light of the distress of the civilian
populations trapped in the fighting, the urgency for
a cessation of hostilities remains more relevant than
ever. In the face of the deteriorating situation, my
country would like once again to call on all parties
to the conflict to immediately cease hostilities and
to respect international humanitarian law, including
unhindered humanitarian access to persons in distress,
in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its conviction
that the solution to the crisis in Syria cannot be
military. Only an inclusive political process can put a
definitive end to this conflict. Such a political solution
must be in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and
imbued with the results of the Geneva negotiations.
My country believes that the Geneva talks remain the
right framework for achieving a lasting solution to the
Syrian conflict.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. Thomas Markram and their respective teams for
their exhaustive briefings.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses
its gratitude to the French Republic and to the other
members of the Council that called for the convening of
this afternoon’s meeting. We also thank the President
of the Security Council for having decided to hold this
afternoon’s meeting under the agenda item “Threats to
international peace and security: The situation in the
Middle East”. This is an appropriate topic, since recent
events in the Middle East represent a genuine threat to
peace and security, not only in that region but at the
international level as well. From the protests in the
Gaza Strip, with their loss of human lives, to the missile
attacks on Syria, as well as the horrendous chemical
weapons attack in the Syrian town of Douma, those
are all situations of deep concern for the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea.
18/26

09/04/2018

This past weekend we awoke to news that added
a new low to the saddest and bloodiest episodes of the
Syrian conflict. According to reports published in the
international media, on 7 April, in the Syrian town of
Douma in eastern Ghouta, more than 40 people, mostly
women and girls, died from asphyxiation caused by
inhaling a poison gas.
As we heard in this Chamber on 4 April from the
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Thomas Markram (see S/PV.8221), the
conclusions and recommendations of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic are
not binding and do not attribute responsibilities in the
case of evidence of the use of chemical substances
prohibited under the relevant international treaties.
In the light of that fact, we take this opportunity to
recall the obligation of all parties to take essential
steps towards the full implementation of resolution
2118 (2013), and we underscore the need to establish
an independent investigation mechanism of the United
Nations whose task should be focused on preventing
impunity, identifying those responsible and preventing
future attacks to the best of its abilities.
As far as the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
is concerned, no use of chemical weapons should
go uninvestigated or unpunished. As a result, the
alarming information coming out of Syria, especially
that pertaining to the use of chemical weapons
targeting civilians, both the case of Douma, which
we are discussing today, as well as similar events in
the past, must be investigated exhaustively, fairly,
objectively and independently by international bodies
in accordance with OPCW standards. The results of
such investigations must be made public and those
responsible must answer for their crimes before the
implacable face of justice.
The fact that chemical substances continue to be
used, especially against civilians, is cause for serious
concern to the Government of Equatorial Guinea.
During the general debate of the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly, the President of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, His Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, condemned in the strongest terms
the use, manufacture, possession and distribution of
chemical weapons in armed conflicts (see A/72/PV.13).
It is worth recalling that no member of the Council
should be considered exempt from that obligation,
which also reflects Chapter I of the Charter of the
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

United Nations, which enshrines the determination of
Member States to build a world of peace and ensure the
well-being of humankind.
The Security Council now finds itself at a
crossroads with respect to its options. It can either
strengthen the presence of international forces with a
view to future military intervention, as some military
Powers have been suggesting, or we can pursue
international negotiations, be they in Geneva, Astana,
Sochi or Ankara. However, history continues to teach
us that military interventionism has never resolved
conflicts; rather, it exacerbates and entrenches them,
sowing desolation and ruin in its wake.
As far as the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is
concerned, the only solution to the Syrian conflict is to
be found in the words spoken yesterday by Pope Francis
in the traditional Sunday mass in Saint Peter’s Square
in the Vatican:
“There is no such thing as a good war and a bad
war. Nothing, but nothing, can justify the use of
such instruments of extermination on defenseless
people and populations ... military and political
leaders choose another path, that of negotiations,
which is the only one that can bring about peace
and not death and destruction.”
In conclusion, we reiterate the appeal made by
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea to the countries
and actors with influence in Syria, as well as in Israel
and Palestine, to wield that influence in order to force
all parties involved in those conflicts to mitigate the
suffering of their people and to sit down to negotiate to
put an end to that chronic threat to international peace
and security which persists in the Middle East.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura and Deputy High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Thomas Markram, for their
briefings. We express our gratitude to Council members
for initiating this emergency meeting, which we hope
will lead to the launching of a timely and objective
investigation of the incident in Douma.
We firmly believe that the Security Council remains
the main and sole body authorized to counter threats
to international peace and security. Unfortunately, the
situation within the Council is becoming increasingly
strained. In order to achieve an appropriate solution to
these critical issues, it is of utmost importance that the
Council act unanimously, in a balanced and pragmatic

S/PV. 8225

manner. To that end, we must demonstrate greater
flexibility and negotiability, rising above our national
interests in order to achieve peace and stability. Any
controversy that involves prejudices and mutual
accusations and lacks conclusive results and irrefutable
evidence will have only a destructive effect and will not
lead to the results that the world community expects
from us.
With regard to the chemical attacks in Syria, we
mourn together with the families of those killed and
express our solidarity with them in the face of such
atrocities, by which innocent civilians become victims
of the relentless confrontation of the opposing parties.
Kazakhstan has always taken a firm and resolute stand,
uncompromisingly condemning any use of chemical
weapons as the most heinous action and an unacceptable
war crime.
With regard to the situation in Douma, we call for
an investigation into this alleged incident to be carried
out and for all the circumstances to be clarified as soon
as possible. The Council has the great responsibility
to act on verifiable facts, not only before the world
community, but before ourselves. Furthermore, history
itself will ultimately be the judge of our decisions.
Therefore, we need to verify all the details of the
incident. In that regard, we would like to draw attention
to the following aspects.
First, are there any other reliable sources, in
addition to White Helmets’ claims, and who can verify
the veracity of the assessments and testimonies of those
sources? Some claim that the number of victims is 70,
while others report that there were more than 150 victims
and still others believe there were only 25 victims. Even
one victim is too many. However, today, the Russian
Federation denied the attack altogether. There are many
allegations and assumptions regarding the very facts
concerning the use of a toxic chemical substance.
Secondly, we consider it important to take into
account the fact that the Government of Syria has
repeatedly notified us and requested that we check its
reports that a number of terrorist groups on the side
of the opposition were making attempts to transfer
chemical weapons and prepare chemical attacks on the
territory of eastern Ghouta. Actually, these allegations
have not been given due attention and we have had no
opportunity to verify all the facts. We are not advocating
for any side in this conflict, but rather demanding a full

18-0995519/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

09/04/2018

and objective investigation on the basis of which we can
make a thoughtful decision.

continue, along with the suffering of the people in
the region.

Thirdly, we believe that it is imperative to conduct
an independent investigation. We again recall the urgent
need for an investigative mechanism, the establishment
of which depends on the permanent members of the
Council. They must make every possible effort to
find common ground on the issue. We urgently need
objective and verifiable information, as well as an
immediate, independent, transparent and unbiased
investigation before any decision or action, unilateral
or otherwise, is taken.

The State of Kuwait condemns in the strongest
terms the heinous rocket and barrel bomb attacks
against residential areas under siege in eastern Ghouta,
including the latest attack on Douma, on 7 April.
Five days ago we marked the first anniversary of the
Khan Shaykhun incident (see S/PV.8221), in which
chemical weapons were used, as confirmed by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. It also
identified who used them.

We fully support the proposal that the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Factfinding Mission be sent at the earliest. We are certain
that the Syrian people are very interested in an objective
investigation. Therefore, Damascus and opposing
parties should provide all assistance and secure access
for the speedy visit of the OPCW inspectors to the
incident sites to collect facts on the ground.

Two days ago, scores of civilians, including children
and women, were killed or injured in attacks and air
strikes against Douma. Many cases of asphyxiation
were recorded. Several international reports confirmed
that the crimes committed in both incidents were
tantamount to crimes against humanity and war
crimes, which reminds us once again of the request
we all made in the Chamber for the establishment of
a new mechanism to determine whether or not and by
whom chemical weapons had been used, and to hold
the perpetrators in Syria accountable. The mechanism
must guarantee impartial, transparent and professional
investigations in all chemical attacks in Syria in order
to end impunity. For the past five years — specifically,
since August 2013 — the perpetrators of chemical
attacks in Syria have enjoyed impunity. They have not
been punished, even when we witnessed the very first
crime of the use of chemical weapons in eastern Ghouta.

Finally, we again call for the preservation and
strengthening of the unity of the Council to reach
a consensus-based decision to preserve peace and
stability in the world.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank you, Mr. President, for the prompt
convening of today’s meeting. We were one of the
countries that requested it.
We also thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
and Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
their briefings.
Since the beginning of this year, the State of Kuwait
has occupied the Arab seat in the Security Council. One
of our most important priorities, which we made clear
before we joined it, is to defend and uphold Arab issues,
voice the concerns about them and work to find peaceful
solutions. We deeply deplore the lack of any real and
genuine progress on any of these issues, in particular
that of the Syrian crisis, which regrettably continues to
deteriorate. Security Council resolutions on such issues
are not implemented. The Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security but is
unable to shoulder that responsibility. It is divided as
it faces those dangers and threats. Therefore the crises
20/26

We do not want to mark the first anniversary
of the attack in Douma without a conviction. We
call for the Council to establish an accountability
mechanism that would determine the perpetrators of
the chemical-weapons crimes anywhere in Syria — be
they a Government, entity, group or individual — so
that they can be held accountable in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 2118 (2013). The Council
must shoulder its responsibility with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
use of chemical weapons in Syria is a genuine threat
to the non-proliferation regime. The continued attacks
against civilians in medical facilities and residential
areas, through air strikes or artillery, are all flagrant
violations of the international community’s will and
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2401 (2018), which demanded a 30-day
ceasefire, at the very least, without delay.
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

The provisions of resolution 2118 (2013) are clear
and definite. They call for accountability for the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, which is a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. However, current events are a clear violation
of the provisions of the resolution. As members of the
Council, we cannot accept the status quo, which is
the continued use of chemical weapons in Syria. It is
another disappointment for the Syrian people, whose
suffering caused by the use of such weapons in different
parts of Syria we have been unable to end.
The Council has a collective responsibility. The
suffering Syrian people are sick and tired of tuning
into meetings of the Council without seeing tangible
results on the ground. At several junctures throughout
this bloody conflict the Council has been able to find
common ground to end the crisis. However, we must
overcome our political differences and establish a new
accountability mechanism in Syria that is professional,
credible and impartial. Such elements are available in
the draft resolution under discussion, which has been
put forward by the United States. It includes updates
on the incident in Douma. We call on all members of
the Council to build on that draft as a good basis for
negotiations on a future mechanism.
We continue to seek a political solution as the
only means to end the crisis in all its dimensions. The
political road map is clear and agreed, based on the
2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and on
resolution 2254 (2015). It seeks to maintain the unity,
independence and sovereignty of Syria and meet the
legitimate aspirations and ambitions of the Syrian
people towards living a dignified life.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
their briefings.
We are deeply concerned about the reported use
of chemical weapons in the city of Douma. Bolivia
reiterates its condemnation of the use of chemical
agents as weapons and considers it to be an unjustifiable
criminal act. There can be no justification for their
use, regardless of the circumstances or by whom
they are used, as it constitutes a serious violation of
international law and a grave threat to international
peace and security.

S/PV. 8225

We believe that the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission, in line
with its mandate, should verify in the most objective,
methodological and technical manner the reported use
of chemical weapons. Should their use be verified, it
must be investigated in an effective and transparent
manner in order to ensure that the perpetrators can be
identified and tried by the appropriate bodies so as to
prevent impunity. We therefore need an independent,
impartial and representative entity that will conduct a
comprehensive, credible and conclusive investigation.
Our major challenge is to ensure that we do not politicize
or exploit the Security Council for our own purposes.
We regret that so far there have been obstacles to
the full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), and
we call on all the parties involved to make every effort
to effectively implement it throughout Syrian territory.
We emphatically reject the ongoing bombardments and
indiscriminate attacks, especially those on civilian
infrastructure such as health facilities, and we deplore
all military activity in residential areas. Such actions
only cause more displacements, injuries and deaths.
We call on all the parties to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law, including
authorizing humanitarian access throughout Syria and
to all persons in need, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
We reiterate that there can be no military solution
to the Syrian conflict and that the only option is an
inclusive, negotiated and coordinated political process,
led by the Syrian people for the Syrian people, aimed
at enabling sustainable peace to be achieved in the
area without any foreign pressure, as provided for in
resolution 2254 (2015). We also reject any attempt at
fragmentation or sectarianism in Syria.
Bolivia wants to once again make clear its firm
rejection of the use of force or the threat of use of force.
We also reject unilateral actions, which are illegal and
contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic, and undermine any effort
to achieve a political solution.
Lastly, with regard to the events in the city of
Salisbury, we reiterate the importance of conducting an
independent, transparent and depoliticized investigation
in accordance with current rules and regulations
of international law, especially as set forth by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

18-0995521/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

We believe that cooperation among the relevant parties
will be essential to making progress through the
appropriate diplomatic channels in solving the crime
and strengthening the non-proliferation regime.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
We thank Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Markram for
their briefings. Peru is deeply concerned about the
new reports of the use of chemical weapons against
civilians in Syria, including minors, in the town of
Douma. In that regard, we note the urgent need for a
thorough investigation. Peru condemns any use of
chemical weapons wherever it may take place. We want
to point out that it is a heinous crime, a threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security and
a violation both of the non-proliferation regime and
international humanitarian law.
In the short term, we believe that the Syrian
Government and all parties to the conflict, including
countries with influence on the ground, should abide
by and implement the humanitarian ceasefire that
the Council provided for in resolution 2401 (2018),
and to cooperate with the Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. To that end, we
once again reiterate the importance of establishing an
independent and impartial accountability mechanism.
The investigations should result in the prosecution and
punishment of those responsible. The members of the
Council cannot permit impunity.
We must also remember that any response to the
conflict in Syria and the atrocities committed there
must be conducted in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. Peru opposes any use or threat of use
of force contrary to international law. We reiterate our
deep concern about the serious consequences that the
ongoing atrocities in the Syrian conflict may have for
the stability of the Middle East and for an international
order based on minimum standards of humanity and
coexistence. In that regard, I would like to conclude by
calling on the members of the Council to restore a sense
of unity and the common good to our discharge of our
high responsibilities. In the case of Syria, that means
implementing the ceasefire and ensuring the effective
protection of civilians, investigating and punishing
atrocity crimes and resuming a serious process of
political dialogue, based on resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), with a
22/26

09/04/2018

view to promoting the sustainable peace that the Syrian
people so badly need.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Like my Dutch colleague and friend, I too
have three points to make.
I would first like to respectfully request of my
colleague Mrs. Nikki Haley, Permanent Representative
of the United States, that from now on she refrain from
labelling any legitimate Governments as “regimes”.
Right now I am referring specifically to Russia. I have
made that request once before, but Ambassador Haley
was not present, and I asked for it to be conveyed to her
by her colleagues. Now I am requesting it personally. If
it happens again, I will interrupt the meeting on a point
of order.
Secondly, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom said that Syria is different from
Salisbury in that there no investigation is being
conducted in Syria, while one is under way in Salisbury.
We would very much like to know more about the details
of that investigation and would be grateful if she could
communicate them to us. However, for the time being
we know nothing other than that all of a sudden the
alleged victims of a chemical warfare agent, thankfully,
turn out to be alive and, apparently, almost completely
well. However, nobody has seen them yet, and we fear
for the condition of those important witnesses. At the
moment, we have learned from newspaper reports, the
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) has offered to shelter
the Skripals in the United States under new identities.
The CIA’s participation in this is itself revealing. But it
also means that we may never see these people, who are
key witnesses to what happened, again.
What else do we know? We know about the speedy
euthanization of the Skripals’ pets and the cremation
of the cat and dead guinea pigs. We are also aware of
the intention to demolish their house and the restaurant
and pub they visited. We also know that Yulia Skripal’s
sister, Viktoria, who wanted to see her, was denied a
British visa. Why? That is all we know. I repeat that we
would very much like to learn more details about what
is going on, and we would be grateful to our British
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

colleagues if they could keep us regularly informed
during the investigation.
Thirdly, and lastly, we did not meet here today to
address the situation in Douma. The agenda item is
entitled “Threats to international peace and security”,
although, needless to say, it was the situation regarding
Douma and the so-called chemical attack that prompted
the meeting. In today’s meeting, as Mr. De Mistura
mentioned and the Secretary-General has previously
discussed, we are moving towards a dangerous area.
Unfortunately, the people who are playing these
dangerous games and spewing irresponsible threats
do not understand that. Today we heard once again
what we have already heard many times. None of
our Western colleagues want to hear or listen to
objective information. None of them has expressed
any doubts about the one and only version that has
been given of what transpired. So what is the point
of an investigation? Why bother? They have accused
Damascus of a chemical-weapon attack not just before
any investigation has been carried out but before the
incident was even known about.
They are not convinced by the information that we
have provided today. They simply do not want to listen.
We have already said that there are no witnesses to the
use of chemical weapons at all. There are no traces of
chemicals, no bodies, no injuries, no poisoning victims.
Nobody went to the hospital. The footage was all clearly
staged by the White Helmets. We demand that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) mission immediately visit Douma and the area
of the alleged chemical weapons attack, interview the
residents and medical staff and and collect soil samples.
My British colleague said that only an investigation can
establish who is to blame. We agree, except that did
not stop her from blaming the so-called Syrian regime.
Those two things do not really jibe. We insist that the
OPCW mission visit Douma immediately. The Syrian
authorities and Russian troops are ready to provide the
necessary conditions for this to take place.
Lastly, we too wish there were an independent
investigative mechanism. I would like to remind the
Council that our draft resolution, which includes a
proposal for establishing such a mechanism, is in blue,
and we are ready to adopt it today, if necessary.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.

S/PV. 8225

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I apologize for
taking the floor again, but I want to clarify something.
The Russian Ambassador’s English is far too good for
him not to have understood me when I spoke on 5 April
(see S/PV.8224). The investigation of the Salisbury
incident that is under way is an independent police
investigation, and the United Kingdom will be very
pleased to update the Council as and when we have
something to say.
If I may, I would like to add one more thing.
The other difference between Salisbury and Syria is
that the United Kingdom is a party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention in good standing, and the Syrian
Government has not complied with its obligations as
certified by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The American representative said that Russia
spends its resources to support what she calls the
regime in Syria. My question to her is: What does the
United States spend its resources on in Syria? Does
it spend its resources providing milk and medicine
to Syrian children, or on providing weapons and
munitions to its terrorist groups, which have committed
the most heinous crimes against the Syrian people? Or
is it spending resources on the its alliance’s aircraft,
which have wreaked destruction in many places in
Syria, particularly in the city of Raqqa? What about the
continuous threats that are made against my country at
nearly every meeting of the Security Council on this
issue? Does she acknowledge that her Administration
has no respect for the Security Council, this international
Organization or the principles of international law?
Let us test the credibility of what my colleague the
United States Ambassador said. I ask members to note
that I do not refer to the American Administration as
the “American regime” because that would be legally
shameful in this Chamber. Let us test the credibility
of what my colleague the American Ambassador said
when she asked the Security Council to act in order to
achieve justice in Syria. Well, my test is to request that
her Administration and her country allow the disclosure
of the results of the United Nations Special Commission
that investigated the presence of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq for 18 years. The Commission was
headed for some time by a Swede, Mr. Hans Blix.

18-0995523/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

As Council members know, after 18 years of
investigation the Commission found no chemical
weapons in Iraq. Nor did they find Coca-Cola or Pepsi
Cola. Nevertheless, in a semi-confidential meeting
towards the end of 2008, the Security Council decided
to end the Commission’s work and bury its archives in
iron boxes. I repeat — it decided to bury its archives
in iron boxes. Only the Secretary-General knows the
code that opens those boxes. There was one condition,
which was that the boxes could not be opened for
60 years. What is so shameful in those archives? Why
did they have to be buried in boxes that cannot be
opened for 60 years? That question is directed to the
American Ambassador.
The Government of my country condemns in
the strongest terms the ruthless Israeli aggression
that took place this morning on the T-4 airbase in
Homs governorate, in which a number of civilians
were killed and injured. It was a flagrant violation of
Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and of various
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism, and
would not have occurred were it not for the American
Administration’s unlimited and consistent support for
Israel. The American Administration guarantees Israel
immunity so that it will not be held accountable in
the Council. That allows Israel to continue to practice
State terrorism and to threaten peace and security in
the region and beyond. Of course, Western countries
did not even mention the Israeli aggression in their
statements today, which shows that the Governments of
their countries are complicit in it and are covering for
it. Unfortunately, my dear friend Mr. De Mistura did
not hear Netanyahu say this morning that it was Israel
that launched the attack. That is why I was surprised
when he said that the United Nations has not been able
to verify the identity of its perpetrators. If Netanyahu
himself says that he launched this aggression, why does
Mr. De Mistura not refer to Israel as the aggressor?
This Israeli aggression is an indirect response to the
successes of the Syrian Arab Army in expelling armed
terrorist groups from the suburbs of Damascus, its rural
area and other Syrian territory. Those groups have
been killing the Syrian people, kidnapping civilians,
detaining them and using them as human shields.
They targeted Damascus alone with 3,000 missiles
over the course of three months, killing 155 martyrs
and injuring 865 civilians, most of them women and
children. The Syrian Government underscores that the
repeated Israeli aggression did not and will not protect
24/26

09/04/2018

Israeli agents operating within terrorist groups, nor
will it divert the attention of the Syrian Army from its
decisive military achievements in combating terrorism.
The American anti-racism activist Martin Luther
King Jr. said that “a lie is like a snowball: the further
you roll it the bigger it becomes”. It would seem that
this wise saying holds true at any time and at any place.
The Governments of some countries lie incessantly.
Fortunately, though, they have not quite perfected the
details of their web of lies, much like the famous Baron
Munchausen of German literature. How many roosters
truly believe that sunrise is the result of crowing?
Some permanent members have become professional
liars, and that in itself is a weapon of mass destruction.
Through their lies, Palestine was stolen. The lies of
these countries fuelled the war in the Korean peninsula.
Through their lies, they invaded Viet Nam. Through
their lies, they invaded Grenada. Through their lies,
they destroyed Yugoslavia. Through their lies, they
occupied Iraq. Through their lies, they destroyed Libya.
Through their lies, they created takfiri terrorist groups,
such as Al-Qaida, the Taliban, Da’esh, Al-Nusra Front,
Jaysh Al-Islam — and the list goes on and on. Through
their lies, the same countries are trying to defeat Syria
and prepare the ground for an assault today.
It is worth noting that the today’s negative statement
of the United States representative is in absolute
contradiction with a statement made by United States
Secretary of Defence General Mattis in an interview
with Newsweek two days ago with journalist Ian Wilkie.
Mr. Wilkie used the following title for the interview:
“Now Mattis Admits There Was No Evidence Assad
Used Poison Gas on His People.” That was said by the
American Defence Secretary, not the Syrian Defence
Minister. What a harmonious Administration!
On 10 December 2012, some six years ago, we
submitted a formal letter to the Council (S/2012/917),
before the operators of terrorist groups claimed, for the
first time, that sarin gas was used in Khan Al-Assal
on 19 March 2013. We informed the Council that the
United States, the United Kingdom and France had
launched a campaign of allegations claiming that the
Syrian Government may have used chemical weapons.
Back then, we warned that such allegations would
encourage Governments that sponsor terrorists to
provide chemical weapons to armed terrorist groups
and then claim that the Syrian Government had used
such weapons. What happened in the past few years
18-09955

09/04/2018

Threats to international peace and security

in Khan Al-Assal, Ghouta, Kafr Zita, Lataminah, Tal
Minis, Khan Shaykhun and many other villages and
towns in Syria confirms unequivocally what we had
warned of five to six years ago, and during all these
six years.
The United States, the United Kingdom and France
have been extremely eager to hold one meeting after
another based on fabricated information. That is part
of the deep crisis that we are witnessing. They want
to involve other Council members in that crisis. Since
2013, those three countries have created a big elephant
of lies and deceit in the Security Council. That elephant
is living in the Chamber today and is stomping on the
credibility of the Council with its huge feet. It seems
that these countries called for the holding of today’s
meeting to support terrorists and to obstruct the
agreement reached about Douma.
However, those countries were a bit late because the
terrorists had hoped this meeting would be held before
they were forced to reach an agreement with the Syrian
State to leave their strongholds and hand over their
weapons. These countries were late in fulfilling their
promises to the terrorists. It would have been better not
to repeat their nasty story and not to rely on false reports
from mercenaries — so-called White Helmets, founded
by British intelligence officer James Le Mesurier. He is
British, but his name is French. What proves that these
countries were lying is that the residents of Douma left
the city safely — 170,000 civilians left the city safely.
Those terrorists chose to reach an agreement with the
Syrian State as a last resort for them and their families.
Many buses are transferring them and their families
to the city of Jarabulus, after they refused to settle
their affairs and chose to go there. However, the vast
majority of residents chose to stay in their houses and
resort to the Syrian State.
It has been proven that the allegations of certain
States, including some States members of the Council,
on the deteriorating humanitarian situation in eastern
Ghouta were lies, just as we saw in Aleppo and other
places. As it turned out, terrorist group warehouses
were full of medication and food, monopolized by their
elements who sold some of those items to civilians at
exorbitant prices. At this point, I must ask: Did the three
countries call for this meeting in order to legitimize
the Israeli aggression that occurred this morning or to
impede the implementation of the agreement reached
with their terrorist tools?

S/PV. 8225

In this context, I must thank the delegation of the
Russian Federation for recognizing the true nature
of what these countries were preparing for, and aptly
called for the meeting to be held under the agenda item
“Threats to international peace and security”. That is
the correct agenda item.
We have conveyed to the Security Council,
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and what used to be called the
Joint Investigative Mechanism 145 letters, the latest
on 1 April 2018. I thank the Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan for pointing out that the Council
members do not read and that the Council does not
respond to those letters. The letters contain accurate
information. They indicate that armed terrorist groups
possess toxic chemical substances, notably chlorine
and sarin. We have warned time and again that those
groups were preparing to commit crimes involving
chemical weapons against innocent Syrians, and were
working with the White Helmets to fabricate evidence,
photograph locations and film Hollywood-like scenes
with everything staged in order to blame the Syrian
Government and influence public opinion against Syria
and its allies. Those countries call for the holding of
meetings such as this in order to create a pretext that
would justify any military aggression against Syria.
It seems that the directors of that terrorist scene
failed to perfect their web of lies. We note that in each
of those theatrical scenes on the alleged use of chemical
weapons by the Syrian Government, the substances
never seem to affect the armed elements, but only
women and children. These chemical weapons seem
to discriminate against women and children and do
not affect armed men. It suffices to wash away these
chemicals with water in front of the camera. Water
appears to heal everything. Rescue workers never need
to wear protective masks. The Syrian Arab Army does
not use these substances because it does not possess
them to begin with. The Americans destroyed them on
the vessel MV Cape Ray in the Mediterranean. So, the
Syrian Arab Army uses these substances, which it does
not possess, only when it is making military progress.
How strange that is!
This vehement campaign lacks the minimum
standards of credibility. It relies on fabricated
information on social media by elements of armed
terrorist groups and their operators. I announce from
this table that the Syrian Government is fully prepared
to facilitate an OPCW fact-finding mission to Douma,

18-0995525/26

S/PV.8225

Threats to international peace and security

where the incident is alleged to have occurred, as soon
as possible to investigate and verify these allegations.
We endorse the Russian proposal to hear a briefing
on the fact-finding mission’s report after its visit to
Al-Raqqa. We welcome this visit as soon as possible.
I hope that this offer does not suffer the same fate
as the first offer we made to former Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon after the Khan Al-Assal incident of
chemical substance use in March 2013. At that time,
we asked the Secretary-General to provide assistance
to the Syrian Government in immediately investigating
what happened in the town of Khan Al-Assal. It took
the United Nations four months and 11 days to send
Mr. Sellström, as Council members recall. Yes, it
took the United Nations four months and 11 days.
That is how the United Nations interpreted the term
“immediately” — four months and 11 days. When
Mr. Sellström arrived in Damascus to investigate what
had happened in Khan Al-Assal, terrorists in Ghouta
were instructed to use chemical substances again.
Mr. Sellström therefore left Khan Al-Assal and moved
to Ghouta. Council members should be aware that since
March 2013, investigations into what happened in Khan
Al-Assal have not taken place.
Today, we directly accuse Washington, D.C., Paris,
London, Riyadh, Doha and Ankara of providing Da’esh,
Al-Nusra Front, Jaysh Al-Islam, Faylaq Al-Rahman
and scores of other affiliated terrorist groups with
toxic chemical substances to be used against Syrian
civilians. We accuse them of inciting those massacres
and of fabricating evidence to falsely blame the Syrian
Government for the use of toxic chemical substances in
order to prepare the ground for an aggression against
my country, just as the United States and the United
Kingdom did in Iraq in 2003.
Yes, we say to the United States, the United Kingdom
and France that, in Syria and Iraq, we eliminated the vast
majority of Da’esh elements within three years — not
within 30 years, as President Obama has said. Those
States have plans to justify undermining the stability
of the region. Yes, we say to Saudi Arabia today that
we cut off its terrorist tentacles — the gangs of Jaysh

26/26

09/04/2018

Al-Islam — in eastern Ghouta. Yes, we say to Qatar and
Turkey that we cut off their terrorist tentacles — the
gangs of the Al-Nusra Front and Faylaq al-Rahman — in
eastern Ghouta. I say to all those who sent moderate,
armed, genetically modified opposition fighters to our
land that we eliminated these toxic exports. We call
on those exporters to bear the consequences of their
actions, as some surviving elements will return to their
original countries.
The issue is very simple. Let me just say that on
our borders with Turkey and in the separation zone
in the Golan with Israel, there are tens of thousands
of good, moderate terrorists with their light weapons,
long beards, black banners and white helmets. Whoever
wants to adopt them should submit an application to
their operators. They are ready to go to Europe and the
West as refugees.
In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic stresses
once again that it does not possess chemical weapons
of any type, including chlorine. We condemn anew the
use of chemical weapons at anytime, anywhere and
in any circumstances. My country, Syria, reaffirms
its readiness to cooperate fully with the OPCW in
fulfilling its commitments under the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
their Destruction.
The Russian Centre for Reconciliation in Syria
announced today that Russian military experts have
carried out investigations in Douma and confirmed that
they have found no sign of the use of chemical weapons
there. While treating the sick in the hospitals of Douma,
Russian doctors have proven that these patients have
not been subjected to any chemical substance. What
we were seeing there was nothing but Hollywoodstyle scenes.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

18-09955
