S/2012/21

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 January 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 9 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter from the former Secretary-General of the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), Efthimios E. Mitropoulos (see annex),
dated 21 December 2011, regarding IMO resolution A27/Res.1044* of 20 December
2011, on piracy and armed robbery against ships in waters off the coast of Somalia,
adopted by the IMO biennial assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

* The resolution referred to is on file with the Secretariat and is available for consultation.

12-20433 (E) 120112

*1220433*

S/2012/21

Annex
Letter dated 21 December 2011 from the Secretary-General of the
International Maritime Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
I write to thank you most sincerely for your unstinting efforts to spearhead,
through Security Council resolution 2020 (2011), action, by States and regional
organizations that have the capacity to do so, to join in the fight against piracy and
armed robbery against ships off the coast of Somalia.
I also wish to thank you for your personal support to promote the 2011 World
Maritime Day theme of the International Maritime Organization (IMO): “Piracy —
orchestrating the response” and its attendant action plan, not only through your
personal involvement at the launch of the plan in February of this year, but also
through your support to the various efforts made by IMO and the shipping industry
to develop and update guidance, best management practices and associated
recommendations to assist ships to prevent and suppress piracy attacks off the coast
of Somalia. These efforts were supplemented by the compilation of guidance on
privately contracted armed security personnel onboard ships in high-risk areas; and
by the capacity-building efforts in the region made by IMO through the Djibouti
Code of Conduct and the Djibouti Code of Conduct Trust Fund.
You may be pleased to note the good progress made in the common efforts to
suppress the menace of modern-day piracy through recently compiled statistics,
which show that against 33 ships and 733 seafarers held captive by pirates in
February (when the numbers peaked to record highs), the numbers have lately fallen
to almost one third of those mentioned above: to 13 ships and 265 seafarers.
Another aspect of the overall effort to note with satisfaction is the excellent
collaboration between IMO and the United Nations, in particular with your Office,
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, which has
continued to flourish, leading to several advances in our shared aim of eradicating
piracy from the troubled waters off Somalia, while also addressing its root causes on
land.
In its efforts to do just that, the biennial Assembly of IMO (which concluded
its twenty-seventh session on 30 November 2011), adopted resolution A.1044(27) on
piracy and armed robbery against ships in waters off the coast of Somalia, which,
whilst welcoming, among other things, the aforementioned Security Council
resolution, has requested me to transmit to you a copy of that resolution for your
consideration and any further action you may deem appropriate, and to express to
you and, through you, to the Security Council, the thanks and appreciation of IMO
for the actions you have taken on the piracy issue thus far. The purpose of this letter
is also in compliance with that request of the IMO Assembly.
(Signed) E. E. Mitropoulos
Secretary-General

2

12-20433
