UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/80
14 December 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3479th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 December 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Mozambique", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the installation of the President of
the Republic of Mozambique and the inauguration of the new Assembly of the
Republic of Mozambique following the first Mozambican multi-party
elections, as provided for in the General Peace Agreement, that were held
on 27, 28 and 29 October 1994, which were declared as having been free and
fair and were endorsed by the Council in its resolution 960 (1994) of
21 November 1994.
"The Security Council congratulates the people and the parties of
Mozambique for their peaceful fulfilment of the goals set out in the
General Peace Agreement. It encourages them to continue their efforts in
good faith to ensure post-election harmony on the basis, inter alia, of the
observance of democratic principles. It believes that, with the new
governmental structure in place, the foundations have been laid to secure
lasting peace, stability, national reconciliation and democracy.
"The Security Council commends the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) and
its staff for their fulfilment of the mandate of ONUMOZ and for their
efforts in assisting the successful achievement of the objectives of the
General Peace Agreement.
"The Security Council notes that, ONUMOZ having completed its mission,
its mandate has come to an end and ONUMOZ will be finally withdrawn from
Mozambique by 31 January 1995 in accordance with resolution 957 (1994) of
15 November 1994. In this connection, it looks forward to the
Secretary-General’s report on the final disposition of the assets of ONUMOZ
within the framework of the withdrawal of ONUMOZ, as requested in its
statement of 7 September 1994 (S/PRST/1994/51). In that context, it also
expresses the hope that effective arrangements for the disposition and, as
appropriate, the destruction of weapons and the establishment, with the

94-50038 (E)

141294

/...

S/PRST/1994/80
English
Page 2

assistance of the United Nations, of a national demining capability will be
in place prior to the final withdrawal of ONUMOZ, and that consideration
will be given to leaving demining and other equipment in Mozambique after
the withdrawal, subject to the appropriate arrangements.
"The Security Council emphasizes that the post-election period will be
an important and delicate time, during which there is a continuing need for
the international community to assist the Government and people of
Mozambique in the reconstruction and redevelopment of their country. It
notes the intention of the Secretary-General to report to the competent
United Nations bodies on future United Nations activities in Mozambique.
It urges all States and relevant international organizations to contribute
actively to these efforts."

-----
