1203rd

PLENARY
MEDlNG
(Opening meeting)

•

OfJU:ial Record!

Tuesday, 14 May 1963,
at3p.m.

NEW YORK
----------------~------------------------,--..:...
FOURTH SPECI.4L SESSION

tion to this proposal. I shall consider the Credentials
Committee constituted accordingly.
It was so decided.

CONTENTS
Agenda item 1:
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation. of Pakistan. • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

1

Agenda item 2:
Minute of sllent prayer or meditation. • • • • •

1

Agenda item 3:·
Appointment of the Credentials Committee

1

A.genda. item 4:
Election of the President. • • • • • • • • • • • • •

1

Agenda. item 5:
Organization of the session. • • • • • • • • • • • •

3

Agenda item 6:
Adoption of the agenda. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

3

Agenda item 8:
Admission of new Members to the United
J.Vations••••••

3

.:I

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

"

•

4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I wish to remind
the members that the Secretary-General has stated.
in his note convening this session. that credentials
for those representatives who were not already authorized to represent their Governments in the General Assembly should be issued in conformity with
rule 27 of the rules of procedure.

AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President

5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I now invite the
Assembly to proceed to the 'election of the President·
of the fourth special session of the General Assembly.
6. Mr. Taieb ,SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from
French): In accordance with the decision which it took
at the seventeenth session [resolution 1866 (XVI!)],
the General ~ssembly is meeting today in special
session in order to examine the financial situation of
the Organization.

President: Mr. Muhammad ZAFRULLA KHAN
(Pakistan}.

'1. It is in the interests of efficiency and in the hope
that our discussions may proceed rapidly and satisfactorily that the Tunisian delegation would like, with
the permission of the President, to put forward a few
procedural suggestions c,:>ncerning the .organization
of our work.

AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the su 'ion by the Chairman of the delegation of
Pakistan
.

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: By reason of my
chairmanship of the Pakistan delegation, in accordance
with rule 30 of the rules of procedure, I declare open
the fourth special session of the General Assembly.

8. First of all, I should like to propose formally to
the Members of the Assembly that they should reelect the President. the Vice-Presidentandth~Chair­
men of the Committees of the seventeenth session by
acclamation. for the duration of the present session.
Such a' procedure appears to be practical and in conformity with the rules of procedure; the General Assembly has already had recourse to it on a previous
occasion. at its third special session. which met on
21 August 1961.
.

AGENpA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I invite the repre-

sentatives to stand and observe one minute of silent
prayer or meditation.
The representatives stood in silence.

9. This proposal will enable my eminent friend.
Mr. Muhammad Zafrulla Khan, who presided over

AGENDA ITEM 3
Appointment of the Credentia Is Committee

The printed official records of the General
Assembly are Published in fascicle rorzn, the
record of ~ach meetit:lg being issued separately.
In order that the fascicles lllay SUbsequently
be boqnd in volumes by organ and seSsion, the
pagination· is continuous throughout .each seri~s
of records of a single body. At· the end of the
session, a prefatory fascicle is issued for each
series, containing a table of contents, a list of
members of delegations, an agenda and other
prefatory matter.

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: We shall proceed
with the appoint of the Credentials Committee. Rule 28
of the rules of procedure provides that the Committee
shall consist of nine members who shall be appointed
by the General Assembly on the proposal of the President. With a view to expediting the work of the special
session it might be appropriate if the Credentials
Committee were to consist of the same .members who
served during the seventeenth regular session. I
therefore propose to the Assembly the appointment
of the foUovving States to the Credentials Committee:
Canada. El Salvador. Greece. Guinea, Indonesia,
Mexico, Nigeria. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
and the United States of America. If there is no o'ojec-

After the close of the session, collated sets of
tascicles win be placed .on sale for the general
public.

1

A/PV.1203

2

General Assembly - Fourth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

the work of the seventeenth session with such ability
and distinction, to guide the debates of this session
with, the same wisdom and efficiency. It will also
enable us to prolong the mandate of the members of
the General Committee of the seventeenth session, it
being understood that the heads of the delegations
from which the Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen
of the Committees had been chosen at the seventeenth
session would replace their absent colleagues.

17. Mr. NIELSEN (Norway): It is indeed an honour
for the Norwegian delegation to second the motions
made by the representative of Tunisia. We would hope
that the proposal to follow the precedent of the third
special session of the General Assembly and to elect
Mr. Muhammad Zafrulla Khan, the President of the
tleventeenth regular session of the General Assembly,
as President also for this special session will receive
the .unanimous support of the Members.

10. Tne second proposal which I should like to submit formally on behalf of the Tunisian delegation relates to the adoption of the agenda by the Assembly without its first being referred to the General
Committee. We consider that the General Assembly
is meeting for the specific purpose of taking up the
one item that it decided to consider at its fourth spacial session. namely "Consideration of the financial
situation of the Organization in the light of the report
of the Working Group on the Examination of the Administrative and Budgetary Procedures of the United
Nations", and that there is consequently no need to
refer this matter to the General Committee.
11. Moreover. at the request of several delegations.
including my own [see A/5419 and Add.l], the General
Assembly will have to deal with another question,
that of the admission of Kuwait as a full Member of
the United Nations. We propose that the Assembly
should place that item on its agenda without first
referring it to the General Committee.
12. The insertion of such a question on our agenda
is .so happy and so rare an event that my delegation
does not wish to delay it and hopes to see the state of
Kuwait admitted to this body as soon as' poBsible.
Tunisia, which has ha..d the. honour of sponsoring the
admission of several brother countries ofAfricawhich
have achieved independence during the las'cfour years,
is happy to witness this new addition to the family of
States that have been freed from C010ll.ial trusteeship.
13. The admission of Kuwait to our Organization will
merely confirm the international existence of a young
State whioh has for a long time maintained diplomatic
relations with a great many countries, including my
own. Moreover. the Security Council has quite recently
unanimously recommended [1034th meeting] the admission of this brother country and we are confident
that all Member States will accept this recommendation; in the hope that Kuwait may make its !,Wil substantial contribution to the work of the Organization.
14. The friendly relations, the cultural ties and the
Islamic traditions that link us to the people of Kuwait
make us hope that this State may be officially admitted
. to this international forum without delay. Moreover,
the material contribution and moral support that Kuwait
has constantly given the Organization as an observer
State has .confirmed the political maturity of this
yourig State and its a.dherence to the principles of the
Charter.
15. For these reasons.. I shall propose on behaU of
the .Twii~i~n d.elegatlonthat after deciding upon the
Insertion on the agenda of the question of the consideration.of the financial situation of the Or.ganization an~ r.eferring it to the Fifth Committee', the Assembly.should consider this very day the question
of the admission of the State of Kuwait to membership
of the United Nations.
,,
16. These are the proposals that I have the honour
to submit formally for the consideration of the General .
Assembly. I :venture to hope that they will be accepted
wi~out discussiol'l and unanimously.

18. The honourable and highly respected representative of Pakistan, Mr. Zafrulla Khan, fulfilled his
functions as President with all the wisdom and capacity
which was to be expected from a man with his remarkable experien~e and integrity. Might I be permitted to
add that, on the basis of his handling of the sleventeenth
regular session, we should be allowed to hope that his
firm hand will contribute to make this session not
only successful. but expeditious and short. The Norwegian delegation, therefore. takes particular pleasure
in seconding the motion to elect Ml'. Muhammad
Zafrulla Khan as President of t.'le fourth special session of the General Assembly.
19. We are also glad to give the Tunisian proposal
regarding the composition of the General Committee
our full and unqualified support. The Norwegian delegation would also second the motion to approve the
provisional agenda for the special session of the General Assembly. Together with twenty other delegations, we have proposed [A/5419 and Add.1] a supplementary item for this agenda concerning the admission
of Kuwait to memb~.rship in the United Nations. We
would appeal for support for the proposal that thifl
supplementary item be included in the agenda and
dealt with without delay.
20. As to the Organization of work of the present
session, we are in agreement with the proposal that
the question of the financial situation of the Organization should be referred to the Administrative and
Budgetary Committee for consideration, whereas the
question of the a.dmission of Kuwait to membership
should be dealt with directly in the plenary. We would
hope that the Assembly would be able to take up the
propofsal [A/LA24 and Add.l] recommending the admissIon of Kuwait to membership in the United Nations
during today's meeting.

'.

Mt'. Muhammad Zafru11a Khan was electedPresident
of the fourth special sessional the General Assembly
by acolamation.

21.. The PRESIDENT: My colleagues ,I am sure. would
not stand in need of any assurance from me that I value
v/ery greatly the confidence which they have placed in
Dle a second time by electing me President of the
f,ourth special session. I shall do ev.erything in my
power to deserve that confidence. May I on my part
f~xpress the hope that the special session' will work
i.n the same spirit in Which the seventeenth /?e:ssion
worked; that is to say, in a spirit of genuine co-operation, with the sole desire to achieve the objectives of
the United Nations Charter which we are all committed
to uphold?
22~ All of us deem it a great honour to represent our
respective Governments and. States in this a~ust
Ibody. I am certain that we are also conscious that
levery one of us represents mankind as a whole and
1&hat .that is as. great an honoUr, and that we •. shall
1&herefore work in that spirit so that we shall bring
our judgement. our intelligence and our keen anXiety
to the· service of mankind towards the solution of the

proble
sessio

23. T
heard
Tunisi
Does
on the
decide
for th
this s
adopte
The

24. T
will s
as tha
ance
that
sion,
of Indi
pose
Gener
dent e
sugge
would
Corn
Gener
India
the n
Gener
It

25. T
third
which
sembl
conta"
conve
ation
the W
istrati
tions".
the in
e'ntitle
Nation
26. T
the
refere
of any
so dec
It
27. T
there
[A/541
The

28. T
of the
agree
that
to the
and th
in pIe

1203rd meeting - 14 May 1963

Inour
tions
hope
third
elect
If the
nbly,
leive

Isen-

i his

acity
larked to
~enth

problems with which we will be faced during this
session.
AGENDA ITEM 5
Organization of the session

23. The PRESIDENT: The General Assembly has
heard the proposal just made by the representative of
Tunisia and seconded by the representative of Norway.
Does any other Member wish to make any comments
on the first proposal to the effect that the Assembly
decides to reappoint the General Committee elected
for the seventeenth regular session until the end of
this special session? I take it that the proposal is
adopted by the General Assembly.
The proposal was adopted.

.t his
1 not

24. The PRESIDENT: The General Committee which

Nor-

will serve d1Jring the special session will be ilie same

.sure
lmad
ses-

as that of the seventeenth regular session, in accordance with the decision just taken. I have been informed
that among the Committee Chairmen at the last session, two are not present at this session, Mr. Kasliwal
of India and Mr. Eustathiades of Greece. For the purpose of ensuring the representative character of the
General Committee and in accordance with the precedent established at the third spacial s~ssion, I would
suggest that the representatives of India and Greece
would replace their absent colleagues on the General
Committee. If this suggestion is l:\.cceptable tu the
General Assembly. I would request the delegations of
India and Greece to convey to the Secr.etary-General
the name of the representative who will serve in the
General Committee a~ this special session.

losal
littee
lelel the

Gen-

,egalplelslon
:.We
this
. and
~sent

, that
:ani~ and
s the
~ship

rould
pthe
lad&ions

ident
rnbly
~ould

ralue
ed in
If the
1 my
part

work

lsion
leraes of
med
~ our

~ust

,that
~ and
shall
!ring
dety
f the

It was so decided.

AGENDA ITEM 6
Adoption cf the agenda

25. The PRESIDENT: I turn now to the secon.d and
third proposals made by the representative of Tunisia
which referred to the adoptio:r.~i the agenda. The Assembly has before it. the provisional agenda which
contains the item for which the special session was
convened, namely "Consideration of the financial situation of the Organization in the light of the report of
the Working Group on the Examination of the Administrative and Budgetary procedures of the United Nations". The Assembly also has before it a request for
the inclusion in the agenda of a supplementary item
elntitled "Admission of new Members to the United
Nations" [A/5419 and Add.1, A/5420].
26. The reprfsentative of Tunisia has proposed that
the agenda be considered in plenary forthwith without
reference to the General Committee. In the absence
of any objection, I take it that the GeneralAssembly
so decides.
It was so decided.
27. The PRESIDENT: I now ask the Assembly whether
there is any objection to the adoption of .the agenda
[A/5410 and A/5420].
The agenda was adopted.

28. The PRESIDENT: We now come to the allocation
of the two items. May I take it that the Assembly
agrees.to the proposal of the representative of Tunisia
that the' item on the financial situation be referred
to the Fifth Committee for Consideration and report,
and that the supplementary item be dea~t Withdirectly
inpleh~y meeting onthe opening day:
",,'

-

3

It was so decided.

AGENDA ITEM 8
Admission of new Members to the United. Nations

29. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has unanimously recommended that the General Assembly
should admit Kuwait to membership in the United
Nations. In this connexion the Assembly has before
it a draft resolution [A/L.424 and Add.1] sponsored
by several delegations~
30. Mr. RIFA'I (Jordan): If I do not express to you
today, M:r. President, special congratulations on your
unanimous election to the Presidency of this special
session of the General Assembly, it is because I hope
that my congratulations to you will be continuous.
31. At its 1034th meeting on 7 May 1963 the Security
Council unanimously decided to recommend the admission of the State of Kuwait to membership of the
United Nations. Upon approval of this recommendation
by the General Assembly. a new flag will be raised
in the United Nations and a new State will join in the
service of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations. My delegation is honoured and privileged to
join with the delegations of Costa Rica, Ecuador,
Federation of Malaya, Guinea, Hungary, India, Ireland,
Liberia, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan and Tunisia in sponsoring the draft resolution which has been circulated to
Members [A/L.424 and Add.1], proposing to the General Assembly the admission of Kuwait to membership
of the United Nations.
32. Small in population and area. Kuwait, the land of
oil and sand, comes today to the United Nations with
treasures of material and moral values. The thirsty.
sober and grave Arabian desertin its searchfor water
struck instead huge reservoirs ofoil, and thus provided
the world with fuel, light and heat. That same desert
which produced from its depths a great wealth, gave
mankind, spiritually, a heavenly inspiration and divine
revelation. Kuwait is a country which possesses these
two resources which are fundamental to the decent and
honourable life. and it represents the true characteristics of the Arabian desert.
33. Under the respectable dynasty of Al-Sabah over
the last 200 years, Kuwait has enjoyed its autonomy, .
and since the abrogation of the British-KuwaitAgreement of 1899 on.19 June 1961, Kuwait became a sovereign and in.dependent State and stood on an equal
foating with all the other freeml.m.~ers of the international community. It was recogniz~d by a considerable number of States and it exchanged with many of
them diplomatic relations on the ambassadorial level.
It joined the League of Arab States which. besides
KUWait, comprises Algeria. Iraq, Lebanon, Libya,
Morocco, Saudi Arabia. Sudan, Syria. Tunisia, the
United Arab Republic, Yemen and Jordan. The Arab
League also took a decision on 20 July 1961 to support
the admission of Kuwait to the .United Nations and to
aot with speed to this end.
34. Having set a high and completely satisfactory
standard of jivmg for its citizens and having built an
advanced social welfare system for its population.
Kuwait started a programme of economic aid to its
Alrab sister States through establishing·a.Kuwait fund
for Arab Economic Development. It extended this aid
to some of the Arabco~tries.including my own, and
my delegation acknowledges this fact with sincere
appreciation. Kuwait's admission to the United Nations

General Assembly - Fourth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

4

no doubt will enable it to play a constructive role in
world economic development.
35. Kuwait gave helpful opportunities to Arabs from
other lands to live on its soil and to take part in the
general progress and prosperity of the country. I mention with gratification that some 40,000 persons of
Jordanian citizenship live at present in Kuwait as a
good and useful community.
36. Kuwait is developing a democratic society with a
parliamentary system. It has a fine Arabic Press, a
number of daily newspapers and a well-organized and
powerful broadcasting system. It provides free education, medical services and social security for its inhabitants. Modern life in Kuwait manifests itself in
various aspects to the comfort and satisfaction of its
people.
37. In its external policy, the State of Kuwait has
succeeded in bstablishing friendly and peaceful relations with all other States alike. In ita national policy,
Kuwait, aware of its being a part of the Arab homeland and of the Arab nation, has adopted a constructive
attitude for strengthening brotherly ties with all Arab
countries. It could rightly be said in this connexion
that the collective efforts of all the Arab States, no
matter how they might vary in their constitutional
systems and internal conditions, are the best security
for Arab unity and progress.
38. The co-sponsors of the draft resolution have
bestowed upon me the honour of introducing it to the
General Assembly. It is with pride and joy that I do so,
in the dual capacity, officially and personally; Therefore, on behalf of my colleagues and on behalf of my
delegation, I submit this draft resolution in the hope
that the admission of the State of Kuwait to membership of the United Nations will be given by this Assembly a unanimous affirmative vote.
39. The PRESIDENT: As I have already mentioned,
the Security Council has recommended unanimously
tliat the General Assembly admit Kuwait to member,.
ship of the United Nations. May I take it that the GeneralAssembly decides, by acclamation, to accept the
recommendation of the Security Councilandto:t;eceive
Kuwait as a Member of the United Nations?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

40. The PRESIDENT: I declare Kuwait admitted to
membership of the United Nations.
The delegation of Kuwait was escorted to its place
in the General Assembly Hall.

41. The PRESIDENT: Last yea~, as President of the
seventeenth session of the General Assembly, I had
the great pleasure of welcoming six new Members
of the United' Nations-Rwanda, Burundi, Jamaica,
Trinidad and Tobago, Algeria and Uganda. Today, as
President of the fourth special session of the General
Assembly, I am happy to welcome the one hundredand-eleventh Member, Kuwait, to membership of ';;he
United Nations. I would request His Excellency the
Foreign Minister of Kuwait to convey to Emir His
Higbness Sheikh Abdulla AI Salem AI Sabah and the
people of Kuwait my warm felicitations on this happy
occasion, tog'ether with by best wishes for their
future.
42·li.Th~a~ission ofleach new ~embferhis a fur~helr
app catIon 10 the wor d commumty 0 t e princlp e
of the independence and equality of Member States.
It is, therefore, not only a stage in human progress,
bm a

43. I congratulate not only the new Member, Kuwait
on its admission to the United Nations, but also our
entire Organization on having taken one further step
towards achieving the ideal of universality.
44. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated from
French): The Arab delegations who have done me the
honour of asking me to speak on their behalf on this
occasion have conferred on me a most agreeable privilege, namely, that of welcoming the youngest Arab
State, which is joining the U:nited Nations today, and
of expressing on their behalf our good wishes and
congratulations to the I11th Member of the Organization. You will understand the emotion that pervades
me as I perform this pleasant duty, at the thought that
the State of Kuwait, which had already taken its place
in the Arab family two years ago, has today after
constant efforts and repeated requests, been unanimously admitted to membership of the United Nations.
45. While international upheavals have recently led
to the independence of a number of countries, Kuwait;
with quiet determination a.nd unwavering faith, has for
several years persisted in its efforts to transform the
relationship under which its sovereignty was subordinated to another Power and to take its place; with
full authority, as a free State in the Arab family of
nations, as it will now take its rightful place in the
international organizations.
46. This example of the peaceful attainment of independence is not the &.chievement of the people of Kuwait
alone; it also reflects a new international awareness
which, conscious of the need to uphold and assist
movements of liberation, has led the protecting Power
to assent, mutely and with great courage, to Kuwait's
efforts to become a Member of the United Nations.
47. The State of Kuwait is situated in a region where
all the main problems are contingent on social,progress, an:d where social prow.:oess itself is contingent
on the economic situat:i.on and the level of development.
The wealth that nature has showered on Kuwait not
only gqarantees the stability and social progress that
are already apparent in that country, but also gives
reason to hope that this well-being will spread to the
entire region and will consolidate its prosperity,
equity, justice and progress.
48. My delegation has had the honour to associate
itself with the Security Council's decision unanimously
recommending that the GeneralAssembly should admit
Kuwait to the United Na~ions [1034th meeting]. On hehalf of those same aelegations which did methe honour
of asking me to speak on.their behalf in the Security
Council, I am particularly happy to express the good
wishes of my delegation to the delegation of Kuwait
and to request it kindly to convey to the Emir's Gov,,~,
ernment the congratulations of the Moroccan Govern!1
o.Od wishes hOf the1 Modroccan people. I
ment andtthhe tghi
C~ ,[,~,~.;',.·
am sure at
s reques t as a rea y been granted,
<
since Kuwait has not awaited the official ratification
.~
given today !.P. orde>r to take its first steps in inter.~
national life.
i~.
49. Kuwaitis a member of several international'~
bodies. It has already been active in economic, social
",;~
.,~,
and cultural matters in l;IJl the major organs of world
,'"
society. Its behaviour and its contributions undoubtedly
)i~
prOdVlhadetan assurthancfe that this actiVihit~ Wlh·~l cha0ntinue~'i.
an t
tepa
0 progress upon w c It s em..;
,
h
barked gives promise of a better future for Kuwait,~
and, for the Arab faJ:llily of nations to which it belongs,
,;\l;

50.
plea
cong
four

51.
spe
own

of
Nep
to d
my
Ku
Org
52.
enli
Kuw
for
most
Sine
free
and
.soci
5(".

ape
tions
able
affai

lar
weal
gene
their
mad
velo
from
deve
54.
ber
like
has
, State
55.
India
tere
The
with
the f
to H
furth
betw

56.
Ceyl
Mala
brin

signi

We 1

asso
insid

tile 0
57.
Fren
you
elect
wisd
of de
are t
whic
58.

prOnlla:=':'==-~~f:r.:~~~

1203rd meeting - 14 May 1963

wait
our
step

50. Mr. CHAKRAVARTY (India): Mr. President,
ulease permit me in this, my first intervention, to
congratulate you on your election as President of the
fourth special session of the General Assembly.

rom
lthe
this
priU'ab
and
and
izaides
that
lace
crter
anions.
. led

51. I consider it a great honour and privilege to.
speak on this happy occasion not only on behalf of my
own delegation, but also on behalf of the delegations
of Australia, Canada, Cambodia, Ceylon, Indonesia,
Nepal, New Zealand and Malaya, which have asked me
to do so. Ii. is with a deep sense of gratification that
my delegation, along with these delegations, welcomes
Kuwait to take its rightful place in the United Nations
Organization.
52. The people of Kuwait, under the benevolent and
enlightened guidance of His Highness the Ruler of
Kuwait, in the course of a few years, have developed
for themsP-lves a social system which is one of the
most advanced and of which they can be justly proud.
Since independence, a constituent assembly has been
freely elected by the people to draw up the Constitution
and there has been deterInined planning for better
.social, cultural and economic conditions.

~ait;

lior
1 the
lorwith
.yof
I the

ldewait
less
sist
wer
Lit's

lere
~og­

~nt

ent.
not
that
Ives
the
·ity,

iate
Isly
Imit
belOur
rity
:ood
lVait
ovrne. I
tect,
tion
er-

:mal
cil~l

:lrld
~dly

lnue

wait

19S,

5r,. The Government of Kuwait has declared itself.
a peace-loving nation, keen to establish f:riendlyrelations with all. It has already shown that it is both
able and ready to play a worthy role in international.
affairs. Nature has generously endowed Kuwait with
large deposits of oil, which is the main source of its
wealth. The Ruler and people of Kuwait have equally
generously given of their wealth for the benefit of
their less fortunate neighbours. Kuwait has indeed
made a major contribution towards the economic development of other Arab countries by creating a fund
from which aids are available to other countries for
development projects.
54. For several years past, Kuwait has been a member of a large number of international organizations
like the lLO, WHO, FAO, UNESCO, and so forth. It
has also been an active member of the League of Arab
. States.
55. With a neighbouring country like Kuwait we in
India have had an old-established friendship and interestk which we wish to develop to our mutual benefit.
The Government of India has had consular relations
with Kuwait for a considerable period, and last month
the first Indian Ambassador presented his credentials
to His Highness the Ruler of Kuwait, thus cementing
further the already close and friendly tie3 existing
between our two countries.
56. The delegations of Australia, Canada, Cambodia,
Ceylon, India, Indonesia, Nepal, New Zealand and
Malaya are convinced that the State of Kuwait will
bring new ideas to our deliberations and will play a
significant and effective role in the United Nations.
We look forward to fruitful collaboration and happy
association with the representatives of Kuwait, both
inside and outside the United Nations, in promoting
Lle objectiv~s of this Organization.
57. Mr. CHANDERLI (Algeria) (tr.anslated from
French): Mr. President, allow me first of all to tell
you how delighted my delegation is tha;t you ha've been
elected President of this special session. Your
Wisdom, your concern for efficiency and the high level
of debate which you inspired at the seventeenth session
are the 'best guarantee of the harmony and seriousness
which should characterize the present session.
58. It is as:lngular coincidence and, I hope, a good
omen that we shOUld have concluded the seventeenth

5

session with the installation of ,the delegation of the
Arab Republic of Yemen and that we should begin this
fourth special session by admitting ancther Arab
State, that of Kuwait. This continuity might well symbolize, despite the vicissitudes of history, the steady
march of the nations of the Arab world towards sovereignty, an essential and necessary stage in their
natural vocation to unity.
59. The Algerian delegation is particularly happy to
come to this rostrum today to welcome the State of
Kuwait to the great family of nations. To our good
wishes are joined tho!3e of the delegations of Somalia
and Iran, which have asked us to associate them in
our congratulations.
60. The Algerian Republic and, before it, the organs
of the Algerian revolution have maintained and continue to maintain the warmest and most brotherly
relations with the people and Government of the State
of Kuwait. Hence our satisfaction, having had the pdvilege of preceding Kuwait in these precincts, atbeing
able to welcome it today with all the affection which
we bear it. Kuwait, a brother Arab country, has long
expressed in deeds its attachment to the Arab fatherland. Conscious of its international responsibilities,
Kuwait was able to demonstrate its public-spiritedness
even before its admission to the United Nations by
taking important initiatives in the matter of international solidarity. Among other actions, I shall quote
for the record the establishment. by the Government
of Kuwait, in 1961, of the Fund for Arab Economic
Development. This organi7.ation, which specializes in
the financing of economic projects by granting shortand long-term loans or by participating directly in
such projects, is certainly a remarkable contribution
to the cause of economic and social progress in the
Arab world.
61. My Government hadthegreatpleasureofwelcoming that of Kuwait in the Arab League. It cannot but
rejoice, then, at being able today to number this
brother country among the States Members of the
United Nations. The particularly cordial relations
which Algeria maintains with Kuwait cannot· but be
strengthened through co-operation at the United Nations level. Our close ties already find expression
in diplomatic and commercial relations, not to mention the long-standing cultural relations which, for
example, have enabled a large number of Algerian
students to profit from the education given at the excellent University of Kuwait. We know the determl.nation of the people and Government of Kuwait to work
for the construction of the Arab Unity.to whichwe all
aspire. This emotion, which is shared by all the Arab
peoples, cannot but bring us closer together andenable
us to contribute effectively to the maintenance of international peace and security.
.
62. We are therefore infinitely happy to welCome the.
delegation of Kuwait here, to offer it our warm congratulations upon the admission of its country to the
United Nations, and to request it to transmit to the
people and Government of Kuwait the assurahce ofour
loyal friendship.
63. Mr. OKAZAKI (Japan): Allow me at the outset of
my intervention to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your election to the high office of the PreSidency of
the fourth special session of the General Assembly.
64. Once.again it is my great pleasure and privilege
on behalf of the delegations of Laos, Philippines and
Thailand, as well as Japan, to participate in the cere-

6

General Assembly - Fourth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

monies welcoming a new Member of the United Nations. On this particular occasion it is not only an
honour. it is ,also So very sincere pleasure for me to
join in the chorus of voices offering a heart-felt welcome to the delegation of Kuwait which has just become the newest Member of our Organization.
65. Japan has a very special and intimate economic
relationship with Kuwait and many ef my compatriots
reside there now. I, myself, have had the opportunity
of visiting Kuwait more than a dozen times. r shall
long cherish with warm gratitude the memory of the
generous hospitality and many courtesies extended
to me during my visits, and the lasting friendships
I have formed among the splendid people of that fortunate land, which has become an ideal welfare state
under the wise guidance of its ruler andother leaders.
66. • The eJl,1:ent to which Kuwait has come to participate in regional and other international organizations
during recent years is well known. As a member of
the League of Arab States and various specialize·
agencies, Kuwait has more than amply demonstrg".3d
its capacity to make an outstanding additional contribution to the work of the United Nations as a whole,
with aU its wide-spread ramifications, and through
the United Nations, to the economic and social progress of mankind, justice for all peoples and the peace
and security of the world. Thus, by adding Kuwait to
our membership, ,,'e have further strengthened our
Organization and we shall be all the better able thereby to accomplish the high purposes of the United Nations as they axe set forth in the Charter.
67. Laos, Philippines, Thailand and Japan were among
the first of the many Governments which nownumber ,
I understand, ninety-two or more that have recognized
Kuwait as an independent and sovereign State. We look
forward to a long unbroken period of harmonious and
friendly relations in the interests not only 'of the mutual advantage of our two countries, but alsoofworld
pea:ce and harmony among all nations.
68. Therefore, on behalf of the delegations of Laos,
Philippines, Thailand and Japan, I am very happy to
welcome the delegation of Kuw~it and to pl~dge t.o
them our unstintlng co-operation in the pursuit of the
noble objectiv9s to which the United Nations is dedicated. With warmest good wishes we congratulate also
the people and Government of Kuwait on this most auspicious occasion. May they long enjoy,. together with
all the other peoples and Governments that compose
the United Nations, the blessings of peace, prosperity
and happiness.
69. Mr. BARNES (Liberia): Mr. President, the delegations of Sierra Leone, Uganda and Liberia, on whose
behalf I speak, are happy ingeed to see you occupy the
high office of President of the fourth special session
of the General. Assembly. Again the·· Assembly has
honoured itself by honouring ~'ou with this high and
important office. The outstanding and effective manner
in which you conducted the wor k of the seventeenth
session of the General Assembly is still fresh in our
minds. May this session be productive of the full
measure of success that will ensure the survival of
the United :Nations, the Organization which we alllook .
upon as the gleam.ing crown of mankind's striving.
70. As far back as the 959th meeting of the Security
Council, on 6 July 1961, Liberia, then a member of
that Council, expressed in that body the opinion that
Kuwait possessed all of the attributes of a sovereign
and independent. State, having progressed from a pro-

tectorate status to independence by the exchange of
notes of 19 June 1961 with the then protecting Power,
the United Kingdom. At the 984th meeting of the security Council, on 30 November 1961, when the application of Kuwait for membership in the United Nations
was before that body, Liberia whole-heartedly endorsed j;he admission of Kuwait to membership in our
Organization because of our conviction that Kuwait
was eminently qualified to assume and fulfil the oblig~tions of the Charter.
71. The delegations of Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Uganda were pIaased to sponsor, together withanumber of other delegations the resolution just adopted
admitting Kuwait into membership of this family of
nations•. We of these delegations heartily welcome
this newest of our Members. We are certain that
Kuwait will make a significant and, indeed, outstanding
contribution to the development of this Organization
and to the maturation of the worid community as a
whole. We are also confident that Kuwaitwil1put forth
its maximum effort, financially and otherwise, towards
furthering world order and towards building a prosperous and enduring peace. With a membership now
of 111 States, the United Nations moves closer to
becoming the universal Organization it was intended
to be, which we of the delegations of Sierra Leone,
Uganda ana Liberia believe is of fundamental importance if the Organization is to take its true role in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
72. Sir Patrick DEAN (United Kingdom): Mr. President, may I first discharge the pleasant duty of congratulating you on your election as President of this
special session, and of wishing you all success in
your very important task.
73. It gives me great pleasure, as it did in the Security Council a few days ago [1034thmeeting), to express a' very warm welcome to the delegation of
Kuwait, whose admission as the one hundred and
eleventh Member of the United Nations has just taken
place. I join those who have spoken before me in
wishing Kuwait well. We are very glad to have with
us today the distinguished Foreign Minister of Kuwait ,
and to him, and through him to the Government and
the p~ople of Kuwait, we express our pleasure that his
country has joined us in this international Organization..
74. For the people of Kuwait and for the United,Nations as a whole, this is an occasion for rejoicing and
satisfaction. I will not repeat what I said in the Security Council when, last week, it decided with unanimity
to recommend the admission of Kuwait. Suffice it to
say now that we know Kuwait will play its full part in
our work here and will bring to the United Nations the
competence and the' 2.bility to look to the future which
'the Kuwait Government. has shown in developing its
own country and in providing.a high standard of living
for its people. The United Kingdom, for its part, has
long been connected with Kuwait in times both good
and difficult, and many people of British nationality
have visited it or have lived and worked there. It is
therefore a special pleasure for ·us to see Kuwait admitted to the United Nations. So, on behalfof my Government and my delegation, I again·offer our warmest
congratulations and good wishes to the new Member
that has joined us ,today.
.75. Mr. CSATORDJ\Y (Hungary): First ofall~ Mr.
President, allow me to congratulate. you on your election to the Presidency of the fourth special session of
the General Assembly.

76.
mem
pres
con
amo
date
Fore
Gene
clare
take

Un.ite
ber
quest
signi
it po
conn
Briti
suan
Kuwa
with
to in
19 J
ships
been
that
great
UNE
been
over
rity
77.
neigh
creat
ment
and
Yeme

1203rd meeting - 14 May 1963

lge of
lower.
Secuplicaations
iyehin our
Cuwait
1e ob-

la and

Lnum-

dopted
lily of
lcome

:n that

anding
,zation
y as a
tforth
Iwards
prosipnow
ser to
tended
["eone.
mporwle in
Il'ity.
Presi)f conof this
ess in

Secuto extion of
ld and
ttaken
me in
re with
~uwait.

lnt and
l1at his

zation..
ed.Naingand
~ Secumimity
}e it to
part in
lns the
iwhich
ing its
[ living
rt, has
iligood
dnality
e. It is
ait adyGovlrmest
[ember

lh Mr.
relecsion of

76. On the occasion of the admission of Kuwait to
membership of the United Nations, I should like to express to the delegation and the people of Kuwait sincere
congratulations on behalf of the socialist countries.
among them my own. It is well known that in a letter
dated 20 April 1963 [A/5412). from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait. addressed to the SecretaryGeneral. the Government of Kuwait has solemnly declared the readiness of the State of Kuwait to undertake the obligations contained in the Charter of the
United Nations. It is rather fortunate that since November 1961, when the Security Council dealt with the
question of the admission of Kuwait to membership,
significant changes have occurred which finally made
it possible to consider this question favourably. In this
connexion, allow me to ref~r to the withdrawal of the
British troops from the territory of Kuwait. In pursuance of an agreement between the Arab League and
Kuwait, some units of the Arab States are also being
withdrawn. In the process of the accession of Kuwait
to independence, a great step forward was made on
19 June 1961 with the abrogation of the treaty relationships with Great Britain. The position of Kuwait has
been further strengthened internationally by· the fact
that in recent years it has become a member of a.
greatnumber of international organi~ations,including
UNESCO, ILO, FAO, WHO, and others, and that it has
been recognized by more than eighty countries all
over the world, including all the members of the Security Council.
77. It can be considered as a manifestation of goodneighbourly policy that the Kuwait Government has
created the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development and recently granted loans to the Democratic
and Popular Republic of Algeria and the Republic of
Yemen.
78. Important developments have taken place in the
internal situation of Kuwait as well. The modernization of society is going on by rapid steps. In this C011nexion, I should like to mention, only as an example,
the free medical and health services and the availability of education and social security to all. By
creating the Kuwait National Petroleum Company,' the
Government of Kuwait has taken the first step towards
guaranteeing that the national resources of the country will benefit the people instead of further enriching
foreign monopolies.
79. For those reasons, the socialist countries have
supported the admission of Kuwait to membership of
the United Nations. .We should like to express our
hope that Kuwait will play an active role in maintaining peace and security all over the world, especially
in the Near East, and will contribute to frustrating
the attempts of certain colonial Powers to intervene
further in the affairs ofthpt area. We are confident
that Kuwait, as one of th' newly independent Arab
States, will participate actively in the continuing
struggle for complete and general disarmament, for
international co-operation and for the liquidation of
colonialism, and against the emerging neo-colonialism.
80. In offering my congratulations, on behalf of the
socialist countries, to this newly admitted Member
State. may I at the same time welcome here the
Minister for. Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sabah AI-Ahmad
AI-Sabah, ~d. thrQugh him. the people of Kuwait.
81. Mr. STEVENSON (United States of America): The
delegation of the United States is gratified, Mr. Presi':'
dent, by your re-election to the Presidency· of this
special .session of ,the General Assembly. We con~

7

gratulateyou, and also ourselves on again having
such wise and efficient leadership.
82. Speaking for the delegation of the United States,
I too want to welcome Kuwait to membership of the
United Nations. On two previous occasions the United
States Government has affirmed its recognition of the
sovereignty and independence of Kuwait and its great
respect for that country.
83. Kuwait has participated. as we have been informed, increasingly in the work of the other organizations of the United Nations family. It is high time,
we believe, that it became a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations. Kuwait has made clear its acceptance of the obligations of our Charter. It has contributed a measure of its great wealth to the eoonomic
and social progress of sister Arab States. It has taken
energetic steps to improve the standards of living and
education of its people. My Government is convinced
that Kuwait should enjoy the privileges of full membership of this Organization.
84. Hence. we applaud the unanImous admission of
Kuwait today, and the delegation C?f the United States
looks forward to useful co-operation with its representatives in the advancement of our common cause
of peace, freedom and justice.
85. Mr. COMAY (Israel): I should first like toextend
to you, Mr. President, the congratulations and good
wishes of my delegation on your unanimous re-election
to the Presidency of this. "lpecial session.
86. My delegation wishes to make a brief statement
in explanation of our attitude towards the question of
the admission of Kuwait.
87. As a matter of principle. Israel has never opposed the admission of any State to the United Nations-not even in the case of Arab States which have
demonstrated their hostility to my country. This Organization admits new Members in terms of Article 4
of the Charter, which requires such Members to be
"... peaoe-Ioving States which accept the obligations
contained in the present Charter and, in the judgement
of the Organization, are able and willing to carry out
these obligations n. This duty to be peace-loving and
these Charter obligations must apply as between a
new Member and all the other Members, including
that which I have the honour to 'represent.
88. My del'<.Jgation would have cast an affirmative
vote on the admission of Kuwa.it, had a vote been taken,
only if we felt assured that the new Member State
would faithfully adhere to the Charter in regard to
my country as well. Since this is not clear to us, my
delegation would. haye abstained from the vote if a·vote
had been taken on the draft resolution [A/L.424 and
Add.I].
89. I wish to add onlytbat· nobody willbecbetter
pleased than we shall' be' to maintain peaceful relations
with Kuwait, or any other State, if there is a mutual
desire to do so. .
.
90. Mr. BINDZI. (Cameroon) (translated from
French): It is my pleasant duty to come to this rostrum on b~half of a number of African delegatIons
which have asked me to do so. When we parted at the
conolusion of the seventeenth session, the way in
which you, Mr. President, as also the distinguished
Vice-Presidents who assisted you in your task and
theeniinent Committee Chairmen. directed the work
of the GeneralAssembly,tllat exceptional mastery
which enabled us to finish within the allotted time,

JiiA"

8

General Assembly - Fourth Special Session - Plenary Meetings

gave us' an inspiring feeling. of having done our duty
well. Given this satisfaction, therefore, we all of us
more or less had in the back of our minds the hope
that you would again preside over the work of this
Assembly. We had believed the age of miracles was
past. We are happy that this unspoken wish we made
at the end of the seventeenth session has come true
today. Allow us to express to you our congratulations
on this well-deserved confidence which the Assembly
has again placed in you. We are convinced that, thanks
to your well-known qualities, the work of the present
session will be guided with your usual efficiency towards the happy conclusion called for by the problem
which is the reason for our present meeting.
91. I am equally happy to carry out the agreeable
task of conveying to the delegation of the State of
Kuwait, which we have just admitted to our midst, the
greetings and warm congratulations of the delegations
of the African States which have commissioned me so
to do, and the greetings and congratulations of the
Federal Republic of Cameroon.
92.. It is indeed always a great day for the United
Nations when a new Member crosses the threshold of
this Hall· and takes its place in this Areopagus which
foreshadows our common ideal: to bring together a
peaceful and harmonious assembly of the universal
community of man. Does not the Book of Genesis tell
of the COmmand which was given to man at the moment
of his creation, to increase and multiply, as a sign
of his vitality and survival? Yes, each new Member
entering here testifies to our Organization's vitality
and to the expansion of its audience in the world. Each
new ¥ember brings us closer to the day when, finally
embracing the whole world, our Charter will become
the credo of all the nations, thereby reducing the risks
of armed conflict.

93. The excellent speakers who preceded me have
rightly extolled the merits. of the State of Kuwait. I
shall confine myself to expressing my satisfaction at
the tl:1ought of the great positive contribution which
the delegation of Kuwait will bring to the life and
effectiveness of the Assembly. Long life andprosperity
to the people of Kuwait!

94. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (translated from French):
Mr. President, I should like first to associate myself
with the congratulations which have been adctressed
to you on the occasion of your election to the presidency. The fourth special session of the General Assembly is scarcely one hour old and already the sure
hand with which you know aow to guide our debates
has made itself felt, promising us rapid and effective
progress in our work.
95. The delegations of Austria, Belgium, Cyprus,
Denmark, Finland, France, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway,Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, Turkey and Yugoslavia have done me
the honour of asking me to congratulate Kuwait, on
their behalf, on its admission as the l11th Member
of the United Nations. It is with the greatest pleasure
that I discharge this pleasant duty on their behalf and
on behalf of. the Greek Government.
96.. The most eloquent praise of the country whose
delegation has just taken its place among us was the
unanimous acceptance of its candidature. On this
occasion, it has been rightly pointed out that Kuwait
possesses all the attributes required under Article 4'
of th-:: Dharter for admission to our Organization. A
sovereign State, it has stated that it accepts the obliga-

tions of the Charter; and, in the judgement of the Organization, it is both able and willing to carry them
out. Kuwait has more than these formal claims to our
welcome. By its active participation in the work of
the many internatiol1,al organizations to which it be.,.
longs, it has displayed a lively interest in co-operation
among all cOtlntries and in all fields. By Us libe.cal
government, it has placed itself among the countries
devoted to social progress, which is one of the noblest
objectives of the United Nations. Its peaceful policies
are a precious pledge of the contribution it will be
able to make to our efforts for the maintenance of
peace. It has generously used its immense resources
to improve the liVing conditions of its people and to
put into effect a vast programme of social services.
The establishment by Kuwait of a Fund for Arab
Economic Development demonstrates its feeling of
brotherhood and solidarity towards its neighbours.
97. The principle of universality lies at the base of
our Organization. But what gives us particular satisfaction is the idea that the admission of Kuwait will
serve to strengthen still further the presence in the
United Nations of that Arab world which rightly and
successfully aspires to make its voice heard with an
ever-growing unity in our counsels.
98. In conclusion, I should like to express, on behalf
of the delegations which have so commissioned me
and on behalf of my own delegation, our sincere congratulations and good wishes to the Government and
people of Kuwait.

99. Mr. ZEA (Colombia) (translated from Spanish):
I should Hke first oi all to congratulate the President
once again on the high honour conferred on him today
by the General Assembly, and at the same time to
express our deep satisfaction that the Assembly's
work will again proceed under his wise and skilled
guidance.

100. At this moment I am in the grip of two feelings
of which I am extremely proud. The first is my pleastee in representing the countries of Latin America
and the delegations of Jamaica and of Trinidad and
Tobago, and the second is the joy that I feel in exercising this representation on the occasion of the admission of Kuwait as a Member of the United Nations.
101. Om' countries feel profound satisfaction whenever a nation proclaims its independence and whenever
it brings its resources in human intelligence to help in
the world Organization's gigantic task of solVing the
grave problems which mankind must confront daily.
102. We too have passed through a protracted colonial stage and we too have progressed gradually, with
much hardship and effort but also with profound satisfaction, in shaping our national destiny in such a way
as to obtain peace and social justice.
103. We think that this accelerated progress of man.kind to a point where the peoples achieve their own
forms of government, chosen by themselves, and are
absolutely indepen~ent in the choice of their own
destiny. is the only way of ensuring well-being and
tranquillity for the race in the future and is the only
one which can, in the final instance, consolidate the
peace which we all desire.
104. In the case of Kuwait, in particular, as previous
speakers have already said, we have a country which
is. fully qualified to become a Member of the Organization. It has proved this continuously throughout ~he
years, it has proved this recently by its political

10
co
of
ad
to
M

fac
co
Un

10
of
Na
As
shi
10
ist
sio
ide
shi
Or
sal

sa
to
pre
tun
me
the

oft

1203rd meeting - 14 May 1963

of the Orcarry them
aims to our
he work of
whioh it be.,.
a-operation
y Us libE.£'al
e countries
the noblest
~ful policies
n it will be
intenance of
e resources
eople and to
al services.
Id for Arab
s feeling of
ghbours.
t the base of
cular satisKuwait will
,sence in the
1 rightly and
eard with an

;s, on behalf
issioned me
lincere conernment and

lID Spanish):

le President
m him today
ame time to
Assembly's
and skilled
two feelings
ls my pleastin America
rrinidad and
[eel in exer:m of the adited Nations.
!lction whenmdwhenever
[lce to help ill
f solving the
'ront daily.
:racted COlO adually, with
afound satisD such a way
ress of manlve their own
ives. and are
If their own
l1l'-being and
Id is the only
nsolidate the
, as previous
ountry which
f the Organilroughout the
its political

maturity. by the skill with which it has managed its
domestic affairs and by· the generosity with which it
has used its resources, not only for its own needs but
in giving assistance to its friends.
105. That is why we are giving it such a warm welcome. In expre ssing the satisfaction of the delegations
of Latin American and of Trinidad and Tobago at the
admission of Kuwait. I should like very respectfully
to ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the new
Member State to inform his Government of our satisfaction and of our hope that the presence of his great
country will be of happy augury for the work which the
United Nations has to accomplish.
106. Mr. PAZHWAK (Afghanistan): On behalf ofthe
delegations of Burma and Afghanistan. Mr.Pre~ident,
I wish to congratulate fOU on your election as President of the fourth special session of the General Assembly. Your election is obviously a result of your
success as Presid.ent of the last regular session.
Therefore, all that I have to do on this occasion is
simply to wish you continued success.
107. No one can speak better for the qualifications
of a State for admission to membership of the United
Nations than the unanimous decision of the General
Assembly itself. The admission of Khwaittomembership has been thus applauded today.
108. As far al3 the delegations of Burma and Afghanistan are com.erned, I wish to state that on all occasions we haye been most concerned with the basic
ideal of UB all, that is to say. increasing the membership of the United Nations and thus strengthening the
Organization on the basis of the pri,nciple of universality. Believing in this principle, we are proud to
say that we have placed on record here our welcome
to all new Members with all sincerity and without any
prejudice at all. Today, I am happy to have the opportunity once again to voice the pleasure of the Governments and the peoples of Burma and Afghanistan on
the occasi.on of the admission of Kuwait to membership
ofthe United Nations.
109. To us, Kuwait is not only a land of either sand
or oil. To us, it is a link in the golden chain of culture which binds us to the Arab world, and it is a
peace-loving country. We request tile delegation of
Kuwait· to convey to its Government and people the
most sincere congratulations of the Afghan and
Burmese missions, Governments and peoples.
110. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of
Kuwait to address the Assembly.
111. Mr. AL-SABAH (Kuwait}:l.I It is an honour and
a pleasure for me 'to stand today in this great Assembly, which represents the conscience and aspirations
of mankind, in order to present the thanks of the Government and, people .of Kuwait for this overwhelming
and unanimous response to Kuwait's request to be
admitted to membership of the United Nations.
112. My country, which is small in population but
staunch in faith in the eternal human values, is happy
to join the world Organization at a time when many
ar/~as in Asia and Africa have achieved their dream
of freedoin and participation in building a world where
peace with justice. friendship and prosperity will
triumph.
11 Mr. Al-Sabah spoke in Arabic. The English version of his statementwas supplied by the delegation.

9

113. The State of Kuwait achieved the fully independent status it now enjoys on 19 June 1961. It was
with deep gratifi(}atj.on that, in the short interval
preceding its admission to the United Nations, Kuwait
was able to win the confidence of, and to be recognized by, practically_all the Members of the world
Organization. It has joined several international
bodies and acceded to approx!matcly twenty treaties
and regional 'organizations .
114. Kuwait's participation in these international
activities clearly ir.dicates that it does not look on
independence and membership of the United Nations
as ends in themselves. It considers them rather as a
means of sharing in the responsibility of securing a
better life for its people and for the people of ot.~er
nations.
115. Kuwait's constructive efforts in the national
as well as the international fields of activity have become an accomplished fact well known to all of you.
Kuwait's achievement in free education, health and
social welfare to all its inhabitants is the object of
universal appreciation.
116. While Kuwait was exerting all its activities in
its own ierritor.y, it was also mindful of its duties
towards its less favoured neighbours. It was natural,
however, that Kuwait should first turn to its siste...
Arab countries. It instituted the Kuwait Fund for Arab
Economic Development with acapitalofs.pproximately
$280 million. That Fund shares in meeting the needs
of Arab countries. But Kuwait's participation in that
effort is not restricted to the activities which the
Fund is undertaking. It also extendsdi:rect material
aid ID funds and in kind to help in the progressive
evolution of that area.
117. Furthflxmore, my Government, in co-operation
with the Kuwait Investment Corporation, is studying
ways and means of broadening the bases of its economic co-operation with other newly emerging States.
118. In the field of international endeavour, Kuwait
has been anxious to participate in the world effort of
economic development. It. has contributed IliOl'e than
$120 million to international economic and financial
institutions. Over and above this, it has subscribed
to 1 million dollars of United Nations bonds.
119. Kuwait has hitherto depended to a large extent
on one single source of income, namely, oil. This
course is fraught with danger. In view of this, KuwS\it
has instituted a board of economic and social planning
to devise projects which aim at the diversification and
development of other sources of national income.
120. The foreign policy of my country springs from
one historic fact :which was clearly e~phasized in its
Constitution. This fact is that Kuwait is an indivisible
part of the Arab homeland, that its people are part of
the Arab nation. For this reason it is anxious to develop and strengthen its political, economic and cultural rels.tions with its sister Arab nations within the
framework of the League of Arab States.
121. Kuwait realizes the close ties which bind it to
the rest of the Arab world. It confirms its fu11support
of Arab unity. Kuwait is deeply convinced that its
destiny is intimatE:ly connected with the destiny of the
Arab nation.
122. The Arab homeland, in its turn:~ is a.. large and
important segment of the Asian and African world,
that world which has "nly recently achieved itsindependence, Developing coUntries realize that their

•

1_.
IQ

_

General Assembly - Fourth Spec~~3sion - Plenary Meetings

progressive evolution can onl~r be achieved under conditions of peace and international co-operation. Consequently, KuwaitIs policy is based on the principle
of non-alignment with either camp against the other.
This does not mean, however, that Kuwait shall not
have its own view on wor1 events. Kuwait believes
that the voice of truth and justice should prevail over
all other voices. For this reason, Kuwait's neutrality
is not negative but positive. Its aim is to seek what is
true and fair.
123. pursuant to this policy. my country is greatly
concerned about the destiny of nations which are still
struggling for their freedom andindependbnce. Kuwait,
therefore, declares that it upholds the resolutio.l
(1514 (XV)] of the General Assembly of the United
Nations of 14 December 1960 to the effect that nations
still groaning l;;.,der the yoke of colonialism should
be granted their freedom.
124. Kuwait, which wants to l!,"O on record as giving
its full support to the legitimat.:: demands of countries
and nations which are still suffering under colonialism,
equally feels deep anxiety and profound regTet for the
tragiC sufferings of the Palestinian Arabs. Passage

of time cannot deprive the people of Palestine of their
legitimate right to return to their homeland. From
this rostrum, Kuwait appeals to the conscience of the
world in the name of humanity and the rights of man
to vlaw this problem in the light of the lofty principles
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.
125. Kuwait is prOUd to join the United Nations. It
will always respond to the aspirations of the peoples
of the world. It has faith in the final and inevitable
triumph of truth and justice among men.
126. In conclusion, may I express, on behalf of the
GOV1E'rnment and people of Kuwait to you, Mr. President, and to the Members of the United Nb.tions, my
warmest thanks and deep appreciation for the kind
and generous sentiments which have been expressed
in this august Assembly toward my country.
127. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform my colleagues
that the ceremony of raising the flag of Kuwait among
the flags of the Members of the United Nations will be
performed at 10.15 a.m. tomorrow, 15 May 1963.

United

GEN
ASS

Of/icial R

Tribute
John

Tribute
Lequeri
to the tJj
Address b
sident

The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

1. The
feel that
first mee
sad passi
sure that
feelings c
brief pon .

XXmtook
del'S in th
in which
. ings of lov
men of eve
even contr
sader for
embraced
corners, a
distinction
that his be
the future
with the p
the ideals
organizati
lished - th
equality, p
beings; an
fundamenta
zation as
settlement
States to If
United Nati
Rights fo'
especia,lly

..

one of the f

century. F
religious
fitting that
spiration f
Uthoin V.N.

nOOS-March 1964-2,225

2. I hope
expresSlou
