General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

28

of Nuclear Weapons, non-nuclear-weapon States are to benefit
from any peaceful applications of nuclear explosions.
2. The explosions referred to in paragraph 1 of this article
shall be conducted as follows:
(a) In the case of non-nuclear-weapon States, in conformity with the provisions of article V of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;
(b) In the case of nuclear-weapon °"§ates, in conformity
with a procedure to be established under a special agreement
concerniing which the nualear-weapon States will conduct negotiations with due regard for the recommendations of the
Interna.tion.al Atomic Energy Agency on the subject and which
will be concluded as speedily as possible.

shall include a statement of the extraordinary circumstances
which it regards as having jeopardized its supre,me intere&ts.
ARTICLE VIII

This Treaty, the Chinese, English, French, Russian and
Spanish texts of which are equally authentic, shaill be deposited
in the archives of the depositary Govemments. Duly certified
copies of this Treaty shall be transmitted by the de,positary
Governments to the Governments of the signatory and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorizcd for
the purpose, have signed this Treaty. .
DoNE in . . . .
. . copies, at . . . . . . . . on the . . . . . . day
of ........ , .... .

ARTICLE IV

The prov1s10ns of this Treaty shall not affect obligations
assumed by the States Par,ties to the Treaty under other international agreements.
ARTICLE V

l. Any Party to this Treaty may propose amendments to
the Treaty. The text of any proposed amendment sball be
submitted to the depositary Governrnents, which shall circulate
it to ali Parties to the Treaty. Thereupon, if requested to do so
by one third or more of the Parties to the Treaty, the depositary Governmems shall convene a conference, to which
they shall invite ali the Parties to the Treaty, for the purpose
of considering such amendment.
2. Any amendment to this Treaty must be approved by a
majority of the votes of all the Parties to the Treaty, including the votes of ali nuclear-weapon States Parties to the Treaty.
The amendment shall enter into _force for each Party depositing
its instrument of ratification of the amendment upon the deposit
of such instruments of ratification by a majority of all the
Par-ties, including the nuclear-weapon States Parties to the
Treaty. Thereafter, it shall enter into force for any other Party
upon the depo9it of its instrument of rati&ation of the amendment.
ARTICLE VI

l. This Treaty shall be open to all States for signature.
Any Sta.te which does not sign the Treaty before its entry into
force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.
2. This Treaty shall be subject to ratifioa.tion by signatory
States. Instruments of ratification and accession shall be deposited with the Governments of ........ , which are hereby
designated the depositary Governments.
3. This Treaty shall enter into force upon the deposit of
the instruments of ratification by . . . . . . . . Governments, including the Governments of'al! nuclear-weapon States.
4. Por States whose in.struments of ratification or aocession
are deposited subsequeillt to the entry into force of this Treaty,
it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of their
instruments of ratification or accession.
S. Toe depositary Governments shall pronÍptly inform ali
signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature,
the date of deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession, the date of the entry into force of this Treaty and the
date of receipt of any requests for convening a conference of
Parties to the Treaty or of other notifications.
6. This Treaty shall be registered by the depositary Governments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
ARTICLE VII

l. This Treaty shall be of unlimited duration.
2. Each State Party to this Treaty shall, in the exercise of
its national sovereignty, have the right to withdraw from the
Treaty if it decides that e~traordinary circumstances, connected with the subject-matter of this Treaty, havé jeopardized
its supreme interests. It shall give notice of such withdrawal
to ali other Parties to the Treaty and to the Security Council
of the U-nited Nations three months in advance. Such notice

3479 (XXX). Prohihition of the development
and manufacture of new types of weapona
of mass destruction and new syateD18 of auch
weapons
The General Assembly,
Striving to strengtheri- international peace and security,
'conscious of the interest of nations in continuing
efforts to save mankind from the danger of the use of
new means of mass destruction, to limit the arms race
and to bring about disarmament,
Bearing in mind that modem science and technology
have reached a level where a serious danger arises of
the development of new, still more destructive trpes
of weapon1¡ pf mass destruction and of new systems of
such weapons,
Convinced that the prohibition of the development
and manufacture of new, still more destructive types of
weapons of mass destruction would serve the goal of
strengthening peace and preventing the threat of war,
1. Considers it necessary to take effective steps, by
concluding an appropriate intemational treaty or agreement, for the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction
and new systems of such weapons;
2. Takes note of the draft agreement on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new
types of weapons of mass destruction and new ~ystems
of such weapons, submitted to the General Assembly
by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the text of
which is annexed to the present resolution, as well as
points of view and suggestions put forward during thc
discussion of this question;
3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to proceed as soon as possible, with the
assistance of qualified governmental experts, to work
out the text of such an agreement and to submit a roport on the result3 achieved for consideration by the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents relating to the discussion by the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session of the item entitled
"Prohibition of the development and manufacture of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and ncw
systems of such weapons";
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-4irst session the item entitled "Prohibition of
the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Commiuee

ANNEX
Union of Soviet Socialist Repuhlics: draft agreement on
the prohibition of the development and manufacture of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new
systems of ■uch weapon■

The States Parties to this Agreement,
Guided by the interests of strengthening international peace
and security,
Desiring to contribute to saving mankind from the danger
of the use of new means of warfare, to limiting the arms race
and to bringing about disarmament,
Recog11izing tha,t modern science and technology have
reached a level where a serious danger arises of the development of new, still more destructive types of weapons of mass
destruction and of new systems of such weapons,
Conscious that the development and manufacture of such
weapons are fraught with the most serious consequences for
the peace and security of nations,
Bearing in mind that recent yean; have seen the conolusion
of a number of important agreements conceming limitation
of the arms race and disannament, including those related to
the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction,
Expressing the profound interest of Sta.tes and peoples in
the a,doption of measures to prevent the use of the achievements of modern science and technology for ,the development
and manufacture of the above-mentioned weapons of mass
destruction,
Desiring to promote the strengthening of confidence among
na.tions and the further improvement of the international
situation,
Seeking to contribute to the realization of the lofty purposes and principies of the Charter of the United Nations,
Having agreed on the following:
ARTICLE 1

l. Each State Party to this Agreement undertakes not to
develop or manufacture new types of weapons of mass de.
struction or new systems of such weapons, including those
utilizing the fatest achievements of módem science and technology. New types of weapons of mass destruction and new
systems of such weapons shall include: ( to be specified through
negotiations on the subject).
2. In the event tha,t new areas of development and manufacture of weapons of mass destruction and systems of such
weapons not covered by this Agreement emerge after the entry
into force of the Agreement, the Parties shall conduct negotiations with a view to extending the prohibition provided for
in this Agreement to cqver such potential new types and systems of weapons.
3. Each State Party to this Agreemen,t undertakes not to
assist, encourage or induce any other State, group of States or
international organizations to engage in activities contrary to
the provisions of paragraph 1 of this article ..
ARTICLB II
Each State Party to this Agreement undertakes, in aocordance
with its constitutional procedures, to take the necessary measures to prohibit a.nd prevent any activities contrary to the provisions of this Agreement, within the territory of such State or
in any territory under its jurisdiction or under its control,
wherever it may be.

MTICLB ill

1. In ithe event that any SCate Party to this Agreement haa
any suspicions that another State Party has violated the provisions of this Agreement, the Parties concemed u.ndertake to
consult ~ne another a.nd c_o-operate in solving the problems
which
2. If the consultations ~erred to in paragraph 1 of this
articte fail to produce reslilts mutually acceptable to the Parties concemed, the State which has such suspicions may lodge
a complaint with the Security Council of •the Uoitéd Nations.

átise. .

29

Such complaint must include evidence confirm.ing its valicllty,
as well as a request for its consideration by the Security
Council.
3. Each State Party to this Agreement undertakes to cooperate in carrying out any investigation which -the Security
Council may initiate, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, on the basis of the complaint
received by the Council. The Security Council shall inform
the States Parties to the Agreement of the results of the investigation.
4. Each State Party to this Agreement undertakes to provide or support assistance, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, to any State Party to the Agreement which
so requests, if the Security Council decides that such State
Party has been exposed to danger as a result of violation of
the Agreement.
ARTICLB IV

l. Nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the States Parties to the Agrce-

ment to develop and use scientific research and discoveries
exclusively for peaceful purposes without any discrimination.
2. The States Parties to this Agreement undertake to facilitate scientific and technological co-operation in the use of
the latest achievements and discoveries of science and technology for peaceful purposes.
ARTICLE V
Each State Party to this Agreement undertakes to pursue
in good faith negotiations on effective measures to limit tlhe
arms race in all its forms and put an end to it, as well as on
a treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict
and effective international control.
ARTICLB VI

l. Any State Party may propose amendments to this Agree-

ment. Each proposed amendment shall be submitted to the
depositary Governments and circulated by them to ali Parties
to ,the Agreenwnt, which shall inform the depositary Governments of acceptance or rejection as soon as possible after its
reoeipt.
2. The amendment shall enter into force for each State
Party accepting the amendment upon its aoceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Agreement, including the
depositary Governments, and thereafter for each remaining State
Party on the date of its acceptance of the amendment.
ARTICLE VII
1. This Agreement shall be of unlimited duration.
2. Each State Party to this Agreement sball, in the exoraae
of its national sovereignty, have the right to withdraw from
the Agreement if it decides that extraordinary circumstances,
connected with the subject-matter of this Agreement, have
jeopardized its supreme interests. It shall give notice of 811Ch
withdrawal to ali other States Parties to the Agreement ~d
to the Security Council of the United Nations three mootbs jn
a,dvance. Such notice shall inolude a statement of the elttnLordinary circumstances which it regards as having jeoparclized
its supreme interests.
ARTICLB VIlI

l. This Agreemeot shall be open to ali States · for aignaturc.

Any State which does not sigo the Agreement before its entry
into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
acicede to it at any time.
2. This Agreement shall be subject to ratification'' by signatory States. lnstruments of ratification and accession shall be
deposited with the Governments of ........ , which are hereby
designated the depoaitary Governments.
3. 1bis Agreement shall enter into force upon the depoait
of the instruments of ratification by . . . . . . . . . . Oovornmenu,
including the Governments designated the depositary Govemments of the Agreement.

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

30

4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession
are deposited subsequen,t to the entry into force of this Agreement, it sha11 enter into force on the date of the deposit of
their instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The depositary Govemments shall promptly inform all
signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature,
the date of deposit of each instrument. of ratification or accessiób and the date of the entry into f<Jl'Cl,Uf this Agreement.
and of the receipt of other notices.
6. This Agreement shall be registered by the depositary
Govemments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
ARTICLE IX
This Agreement, the Chinese, English, French, Russian and
Spanish texts of which are equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the depositary Governments. Duly
certified copies of the Agreement shaill be transmitted by the
depositary Governments to the Governments of the signatory
and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized for
the purpose, have signed this Agreement.
day
on the
copies, at
DONE in
of ...

3484 (XXX). General and complete disarmament
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3261 D (XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3386 (XXX) of 12 November 1975,
Convinced of the urgent necessity that ali States, in
particular nuclear-weapon States, take efiective measures to reverse the momentum of the nuclear arms race,
Recalling also its resolutions on the urgent need for
the prevention of nuclear proliferation and for an effective comprehensive nuolear weapon test bao,
Bearing in mind that it has not yet proved possible
to difierentiate between the technolo~ for nuclear
weapons and that for nuclear explos1ve devices for
peaceful purposes and that, consequently, it is not possible at present to develop nuclear explosive devices
for peaceful purposes without at the same time acquiring a nuclear weapon capability,
Conscious of the fact that the testing and application
of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes can have
significant arms control iinplications both for the spread
of nuclear weapons and their technology to States which
do not already have them and, in the context of limitations of nuclear weapon testing, for the refinement of
the arsenals of existing nuclear-weapon States,
Desir.ous of ensuring the fullest possible exchange of
nuclear technology and nuclear materials for the economic and social benefit of mankind without increasing the risk of diversion to military purposes and the
consequent danger to world peace and security,
Noting that non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons118
have the right to obtain the potential benefüs from any
applications of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, under appropriate intemational observation and
through appropriate intemational procedures, pursuant
to a special intemational agreement, through an appropriate intemational body with adequate representation of non-nuclear-weapon States, as contemplated in
artiole V of the Treaty,
118 Resolution 2373 (XXIl), annex.

Noting further that the potential benefüs from any
applications of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes could be made available to non-nuclear-weapon
States not parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons by way of nuclear explosion
services provided by nuclear-weapon States, as defined
by the Treaty, and conducted under the appropriate
intemational observation and appropriate international
procedures called for in article V of the Treaty and in
accordance with other applicable international obligations,
Recalling once again the statements made at the
1577th meeting of the First Committee, on 31 May
1968, by the representatives of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
concerning the provisions of article V of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons which relate to the conclusion of a special international agreement on nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, 57
Convinced of the need for the special international
agreement or agreements contemplated in article V of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in respect of the peaceful application of nuclear
explosions,
1. Appeals once again to ali States, in particular
nuclear-weapon States, to exert concerted efforts in ali
the appropriate international forums with a view to
working out promptly efiective measures for the cessation of th1t ,nuclear arms race and for the prevention
of the further proliferation of nuclear weapons;
2. Notes with appreciation:
(a) The report of the Intemational Atomic Energy
Agency concerning its studies of the peaceful applications of nuclear explosions, their utility and feasibility, including legal, health and safety aspects, which
comprises information regarding the establishment by
the Agency of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear
Explosions for Peaceful Purposes;58
( b) Toe section of the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament with respect to the
arms control implications of peaceful nuclear explosions within the framework of a comprehensive test
ban;59
( c) The consideration given by the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to the role of nuclear
explosions for peaceful purposes as provided for in
that Treaty;60
( d) Toe observations of the Secretary-General in
the introduction to bis annual report submitted to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session;61
3. Notes the conolusions of the Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons with respect to article V of the Treaty,
contained in the Final Declaration of the Conference,
adopted by consensus pn 30 May 1975;62
4. Notes also that the final documentation of the
Conference included a draft resolution submitted by
157 See A/C.1/1052.
58 See A/10168 and Corr.l and Add.l.
159 Of!icial Records of the General .Assembly,

Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/10027), paras. 62-78.
eo See A/10215, annex.
61 See Of!icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/10001/Add.l), sect. VIII.
82 A/C.1/1068, annex l.
