S/PV.8433

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8433rd meeting

Wednesday, 19 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ipo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Ms. Edjang Mangue
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Albanai
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Drug trafficking in West Africa as a threat to stability

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-45118 (E)
*1845118*

S/PV.8433

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

increase in the number of seizures of such precursors
as ephedrine and phenacetin has been recorded at both
airports, which may indicate the existence of new
laboratories producing psychoactive substances.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Drug trafficking in West Africa as a threat to
stability
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Fedotov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Vienna.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the f loor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to address this very important topic.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) is observing new, alarming trends in drug
trafficking in West and Central Africa, with disruptive
and destabilizing effects on governance, security,
economic growth and public health. Criminal networks
are no longer limiting their activities to moving cocaine
and heroin through Africa for destination markets in
Europe and elsewhere. According to UNODC’s 2018
World Drug Report, West and Central Africa, together
with the countries of North Africa, accounted for 87 per
cent of the pharmaceutical opioids seized globally,
which is largely due to rising use of Tramadol, an opioid
painkiller that is widely trafficked for non-medical use
in the region.
Along with Asia, Africa saw the largest rises
worldwide in cocaine seizures as well, suggesting
that cocaine trafficking and consumption have spread
to those markets. Through UNODC AIRCOP, which
works in several African airports, we know that heroin
seizures are on the rise across the region, with Lagos,
Accra and Cotonou airports high on the list, closely
followed by Bamako, Lomé and Ouagadougou.
Methamphetamine seizures have now reached
almost the same level as cocaine seizures, with Lagos
and Cotonou the main airports concerned. Recently, an
2/17

19/12/2018

At the same time, drug use in West and Central
Africa is rising, representing a serious threat to public
health. With the caveat that there is a lack of reliable
and recent data on the extent of drug use in the area,
UNODC estimates that in 2016 there were more than
34 million cannabis users in West and Central Africa,
as well as 1.8 million cocaine users. Globally, only
one in six people suffering from drug use disorders
receives treatment. However, in Africa that figure
is much lower, with only 1 in 18 problem drug users
having access to treatment.
At the same time, the region is grappling with many
other crime-related security threats, including arms
trafficking, money laundering, human trafficking,
cybercrime and maritime piracy, as well as threats
posed by terrorism. The linkages among terrorism,
illicit drugs and other forms of crime have been widely
acknowledged, including by the Security Council.
In August, the Security Council expressed serious
concerns about the continuing terrorist activities of
Boko Haram and other groups in the Lake Chad basin;
links between illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural
resources and the financing of armed groups; maritime
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea; and mercenary
activities linked to transnational organized crime,
including trafficking in persons, arms and drugs, as
well as the smuggling of migrants (see S/PRST/2018/17).
The Sahel region, which receives particular
attention through the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, is another area of focus for
UNODC. The upcoming phase of the strategy, which
is aimed at supporting the police component of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, will
focus on strengthening the capacity of the Joint Force
in tackling terrorism and organized crime, including
drug trafficking.
UNODC continues to reinforce regional and
interregional dialogue and responses to drug
trafficking. That includes efforts to disrupt the illicit
trafficking of drugs and precursors, as well as to
intercept financial f lows, law enforcement capacitybuilding and the scaling-up of drug use prevention
and treatment services. We seek to support national
intelligence and interdiction services, providing
18-45118

19/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

capacity-building through training workshops and
e-learning courses, including on intelligence-led
policing, detection and investigation techniques, crime
scene management, electronic evidence collection and
analysis, anti-money laundering and maritime crime.
At the regional level, our work focuses on
establishing inter-agency cooperation platforms
and mechanisms through AIRCOP, the West Africa
Coast Initiative, the Container Control Programme
and the Network of West African Central Authorities
and Prosecutors against Organized Crime. Our
Office has partnered with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to support the
implementation of the ECOWAS regional action plan
on illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug
abuse in West Africa through technical assistance to
enhance drug use prevention and drug dependence
treatment, legislation, forensics and law enforcement.
That is just a limited overview of what we do to support
West and Central Africa. For more information about
UNODC’s work, allow me to refer members to the
briefing note that I understand has been circulated in
the Security Council.
While strengthened technical assistance has
resulted in some positive developments, there remain
formidable challenges for countries in West and
Central Africa in building stability and in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. Post-conf lict
States and States in transition, including GuineaBissau, require greater attention, as recognized by the
Council, to address the challenges related to drugs and
organized crime alongside political reforms. UNODC
remains fully engaged in supporting West and Central
Africa, working closely with all its regional and
international partners.
I am grateful to the Council for drawing attention
to the need for urgent and determined international
action and support to address the threat of drugs and
for helping to pave the way for a safer, healthier and
more prosperous West and Central Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the f loor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I
would like to thank Executive Director Fedotov for
his briefing.

S/PV. 8433

The scourge of drug addiction continues to claim
too many lives around the world, including in West
and Central Africa. The harm caused by illicit drug
cultivation, trafficking and consumption is linked to
organized crime, illegal financial f lows, corruption
and, in some cases, even terrorism. Regardless of the
region or context, it is clear the corrosive impact of
transnational drug trafficking impairs the rule of law,
weakens public trust in Government and undermines
social and economic development.
While the primary responsibility for international
drug control policy belongs to the United Nations
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Security Council
also has a role to play in addressing the links among
drug trafficking, terrorism and international peace and
security. My country is certainly not immune to that
threat, as we, too, are facing a devastating opioid crisis
of unprecedented scale. The threat is a global one, and
no one country can or should have to face it alone.
In response to the challenge, President Trump
announced the Global Call to Action on the World Drug
Problem on 24 September. Endorsed by more than 130
countries, the framework calls on countries to reduce
drug demand, cut off the supply of illicit drugs, expand
treatment and strengthen international cooperation.
We urge all countries to work towards fulfilling that
important initiative because we know that successfully
confronting the challenge will require the efforts of
every country in the world.
In that regard, we applaud the Economic
Community of West African States for its regional
efforts to address drug trafficking, organized crime
and drug abuse through its regional action plan on
illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse
in West Africa for the period from 2016 to 2020. We
also commend the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) for its drug-control and anti-crime
technical assistance in Africa and throughout the world.
Today, I affirm the commitment of the United
States to also tackling that challenge. The United States
is investing significant resources in West and Central
Africa to counter drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime. I will mention brief ly a few of those
important efforts.
The United States International Law Enforcement
Academy programme delivers specialized courses
for criminal justice officials from West and Central
Africa on counter-narcotics, anti-corruption, financial

18-451183/17

S/PV.8433

Peace and security in Africa

crimes and border security, among other related topics.
Through three of its facilities, including the United
States West Africa Regional Training Center in Ghana
and the United States International Law Enforcement
Academies in Botswana, we have trained more than
2,100 criminal justice officials in 2018 alone.
In Ghana, the United States Department of
State’s Bureau of International Narcotics and Law
Enforcement Affairs supports Ghana’s police service
with $1.7 million to launch drug law-enforcement units
in four new strategic regions to strengthen its capacity.
In the Gulf of Guinea, we support the 2013
Yaoundé process to address illicit maritime activity.
Partnering with INTERPOL, United States assistance
to that regionally owned framework includes nearly
$3 million to assist maritime law enforcement
agencies in Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin and
Nigeria. We support the efforts of those countries to
investigate maritime-based organized crime, improve
information sharing, strengthen maritime interdiction
and investigation capabilities. The United States
Africa Command also partners with those countries to
support maritime training and operations such as the
Obangame Express exercise and the African Maritime
Law Enforcement Partnership.
In Liberia, the State Department is spending
$2.4 million in support of a transnational organized
crime project to promote intelligence-led policing
and investigations, interdiction and seizures of illicit
drugs, organized-crime prosecutions and capacitybuilding for security and law enforcement agencies.
The initiative, in partnership with UNODC, has
already led to increased drug-related interdictions and
more than 90 arrests associated with transnational
organized crime.
In Benin and Togo, the State Department has
invested over $4 million since 2012 to build the capacity
of magistrates to prosecute drug trafficking and
related cases through mentorship, technical assistance
and collaborative training sessions. Also in Benin, we
provide training and equipment to the national police
to stem drug trafficking across Benin’s land borders
and waterways.
The United States also supports training in
evidence-based best practices for officials who work on
drug use prevention, treatment and recovery services
throughout the African continent. Only last week in
Nairobi, we supported a major international drug4/17

19/12/2018

demand reduction workshop, with the participation of
more than 40 African nations.
In conclusion, the United States remains committed
to fighting the drug epidemic globally, including in
West and Central Africa. We look forward to working
with the Security Council, the region and our partners
to strengthen our communities, protect our families
and deliver a drug-free future for all.
Ms. Edjang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to congratulate the delegation
of Côte d’Ivoire on convening this relevant briefing
on drug trafficking in West and Central Africa as a
threat to stability. I also welcome Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and thank him for his
valuable briefing and recommendations, as well as the
dedication of his team.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is alarmed
and deeply concerned by the growing impact of drug
trafficking in Africa, particularly in Central Africa.
According to the UNODC World Drug Report 2018,
the overall production of opium and the manufacture
of cocaine have reached the highest levels ever
recorded. In Africa, that has triggered an increase in
the production, trafficking and use of drugs. In spite of
the progress made — albeit unevenly distributed — in
Africa’s development in recent decades, such progress
is being undermined by drugs, generating new
layers of vulnerability in the development of several
countries and communities across the continent. That
is due in part to the African population being mostly
young, with more than 60 per cent under 35 years of
age. Moreover, the unequal and limited development
of several countries affects their ability to control the
traffic in and use of drugs.
Many African countries are experiencing very
serious problems, such as the resolution of protracted
armed conf licts — with seven ongoing peacekeeping
missions in Africa — in addition to post-conf lict
situations, the scourge of terrorism, the illegal
circulation of weapons, piracy and maritime crime. As
Mr. Fedotov explained in his briefing, the complexity
and fragility of all of those situations are compounded
when combined with the drug trade, which undermines
peacebuilding and sustainable development efforts.
Narcoterrorism is fuelling the capacity and mobility
of terrorist and extremist groups in Africa, providing
income to Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
18-45118

19/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

associated groups, as well as Boko Haram, among
others. That can in turn increase the inf luence of
criminal and narcoterrorist syndicates in certain local
Governments, leading to corruption and destroying the
social and moral fabric of communities.
In order to address the situation comprehensively,
the African Union adopted its Plan of Action on Drug
Control 2013-2017. That stance was reiterated in the
Common African Position presented at the special
session of the General Assembly on the world drug
problem in 2016. In the same vein, the commitment to
sustainable development in Africa in order to curtail
the root causes of poverty and conf lict, in accordance
with the 2063 Agenda of the African Union and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, reinforces
that vision. However, making progress in implementing
those efforts is being conditioned by the aforementioned
limitations of capacity, resources and contexts.
We pay tribute to the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States for their response
to the problem of drug trafficking, terrorism and
maritime crime, with the collaboration of the United
Nations and the international community. Initiatives
such as the West Africa Coast Initiative, the Airport
Communication Project, the Joint Port Control Units
and strengthening criminal investigation and criminal
justice, among others, have generated some successes
in the fight against drug traffickers and narcoterrorists.
However, those successes have led to the establishment
of new trafficking routes, facilitated by porous land and
sea borders through Central African countries. That in
turn is increasing the production, trafficking and use
of drugs in the subregion. We recognize the impact that
large drug seizures have on traffickers and their allies.
We must replicate that across all subregions in order to
solve this problem once and for all.
For that reason, we believe it essential that such
initiatives — with the participation of the United
Nations and various other entities, such as the regional
offices, the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNODC and
other relevant entities, as well as INTERPOL and other
partners — attempt to prevent unwanted transfer effects
from the very moment the initiatives are conceived. In
that regard, we call for the involvement of the African
Union from the outset of those initiatives in order to
ensure that they are recognized and inf luential at the
continental and subregional levels and integrated into
continental strategies. We would thereby be able to

S/PV. 8433

intercept, neutralize and prevent the spreading of drug
production, trafficking and consumption to countries
and regions that are less affected.
Preventing terrorism and its financing, as well as
piracy and maritime crime, remains a priority for the
countries of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community. National and subregional initiatives, such
as the African Union Strategy on the Control of Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons; the Intergovernmental Task
Force against Money-Laundering in Central Africa;
the 2013 Yaoundé Declaration of the Heads of State
and Government of Central and West African States
on Maritime Safety and Security in their Common
Maritime Domain; and others, all tackle the issue of
drugs and interregional coordination.
Drug trafficking is a threat not only to international
security, but also to health and sustainable development
efforts. We believe that it is important for the Security
Council to remain involved in tackling this issue.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
commitment to fighting all forms of illegal drug
trafficking, production and consumption. Through our
Horizon 2020 national plan for sustainable development
and economic growth and our membership in Central
African and African Union organizations, we are
doing our utmost to collaborate effectively with all of
our partners in Africa and the world in this important
work. The Council can count on us.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
express my gratitude to Mr. Fedotov for his enlightening
briefing on drug trafficking in West Africa and the
work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). I also wish to thank Côte d’Ivoire through
you, Mr. President, for having put this topic on the
Council’s agenda. Like you, Sir, France also considers
this to be a particularly important topic and welcomes
the opportunity to discuss the matter today.
I will begin with some remarks on the obstacles and
perils that the production, trafficking and consumption
of drugs pose to the region’s security and prospects for
development.
As Mr. Fedotov pointed out in his briefing, West
Africa faces multiple threats related to transnational
organized crime in all its forms and is affected by
the issue of drugs in several aspects. The region is
an important transit area for trafficking in cocaine,
heroin and synthetic drugs, as well as a zone for the

18-451185/17

S/PV.8433

Peace and security in Africa

production of cannabis and synthetic drugs. The use
of drugs is also an increasingly significant issue. The
issue of drugs, including its security, economic, social
and health consequences, aggravates the structural
weaknesses of the region and seriously jeopardizes its
development.
Drug trafficking also has a negative impact on
the political dynamics of the region. In northern
Mali, for example, a significant proportion of armed
groups depend financially and logistically on the
financial f lows generated by the illegal economy and
drug trafficking. That situation diverts certain key
actors from implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali by generating violence
and hindering and hampering the realization of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process. The widespread corruption that is linked to
drug trafficking also undermines people’s confidence
in the rule of law, particularly the justice system, and
can encourage a ref lex of community protection and
even prompt membership to terrorist groups.
Finally, in a region characterized by both drug
trafficking and the presence of a number of terrorist
organizations, the issue of the link between organized
crime and the financing of terrorism has arisen.
While there is evidence of collusion between drug
traffickers and terrorist fighters, such cooperation
is more opportunistic — for protection rather than
for payment — than systematic. The proceeds from
trafficking do not seem to be the main source of
terrorist financing but could contribute either directly
or indirectly.
As to my second point, we should ref lect together
about our response at the national, regional and
international levels. At the national level, it is very
important that West African States make the fight
against drugs a real political priority and promote a
balanced approach that acts both to combat the drug
supply and to reduce the demand through prevention,
care, support for users and harm reduction measures.
It is essential that the States of the region strengthen
the capacities of the concerned institutions, with the
support of donors and international stakeholders.
Those actions must aim in particular at strengthening
the entire criminal justice system, particularly the
judicial system and asset seizure mechanisms, but also
take into account the preventive and social and health
care dimensions. The care of dependent persons, which
6/17

19/12/2018

remains underdeveloped, must become a priority area
of action. France has therefore fully supported the
creation of the first specialized centre for drug users
in West Africa in Dakar in 2014, the Centre de Prise
en Charge Intégrée des Addictions de Dakar and is
currently supporting the creation of a similar centre in
Côte d’Ivoire. Those efforts must be encouraged and
supported in other countries in the region.
At the regional level, it is critical to strengthen
cooperation in order to effectively fight trafficking
and corruption. The response must be based on joint
action on the security and development aspects. That
is the impetus of the approach deployed by the Group
of Five for the Sahel countries in the framework of the
Joint Force and the Priority Investment Programme.
France fully supports those efforts, in conjunction
with its partners. For example, the Alliance for the
Sahel, by financing quick-impact development projects
in vulnerable areas, helps to provide viable economic
prospects for local populations and prevent them from
joining networks from the illegal economy.
There are myriad challenges, but the States of
the region are not alone in meeting them. Indeed,
international organizations, and the United Nations
in particular, also have an important role to play in
addressing the drug problem.
First, they have the primary responsibility of
considering the whole dimension of the issue in the
quest for sustainable political solutions to conf licts.
Therefore, to continue with the example of Mali,
which I mentioned earlier, the fight against drug
trafficking in the region is also a means of supporting
the implementation of the peace agreement. Sanctions
are one of the tools at our disposal to act in that regard,
since the participation in trafficking activities is among
the designation criteria set up under the sanctions
regime for Mali. We must make full use of them.
Secondly, the United Nations must support West
African States, at their request, with technical assistance
and capacity-building. I would like to acknowledge the
outstanding work done by the UNODC in that area,
particularly by its regional office based in Dakar.
Finally, the United Nations is also the guarantor
of a comprehensive and balanced approach that allows
not only West Africa but also other affected regions to
act together to address the drug problem, based on the
principle of common and shared responsibility. In that
regard, the outcome document agreed to at the 2016
18-45118

19/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

special session of the General Assembly on the world
drug problem (resolution S-30/1) remains our common
road map. The ministerial debate of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, to be held in Vienna in March 2019,
will be another opportunity to reaffirm our shared
commitment to combating drug abuse in West Africa
and beyond.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important briefing
on drug trafficking in West and Central Africa as a
threat to international security. We appreciate the
briefing delivered by Mr. Yury Fedotov and we take this
opportunity to commend the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for the good work that it
has been doing in the area of fighting drug trafficking
and other transnational organized crimes.
That is an issue that we have been dealing with here
in the Council in the context of discussions on a wide
range of conf lict situations in Central Africa, as well
as West Africa and the wider Sahel region, including
Guinea Bissau, Mali and the Sahel. It has also been a
matter of discussion at the level of the African Union
Peace and Security Council.
The growing threat posed by international
organized crime and drug trafficking in some States
of West and Central Africa has indeed been a serious
challenge that undermines the peace and stability
of those regions. The challenge is more prevalent in
countries where institutions are weak and lack the
capacities necessary to effectively discharge their
responsibilities. That is why there is need to provide
support to those countries in building their capacities
to be more effective in preventing and combating drug
trafficking and other transnational organized crimes.
We appreciate what the UNODC is doing through
its regional offices to build the capacity of the law
enforcement agencies of those countries and strengthen
regional cooperation.
The need to address the challenge posed by drug
trafficking and other transnational organized crimes
through practical and action-oriented cooperation
at the regional level has long been recognized.
The exchange of information and intelligence, the
enhancement of border security, the establishment of
regular mechanisms for cooperation and the sharing of
experiences and best practices are indeed very critical
to dealing with those challenges. The role of the Group
of Five for the Sahel Joint Force and the Multinational

S/PV. 8433

Joint Task Force in fighting terrorism, drug trafficking
and other transnational organized crimes is very
important, and they must enjoy the international
support necessary to carry out their responsibilities.
At the level of the Council, we believe that there is
need to ref lect on the existing strategies and available
tools so as to enhance efforts to address the nexus
between drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. In that regard, we believe that it is imperative
for the United Nations and its relevant bodies to assess
their cooperation with the two regions and identify
gaps with a view to devising an appropriate strategy to
provide the necessary assistance to build their capacity
to address that challenge, thereby reducing the ability
of terrorist groups and other organized criminals from
taking advantage of drug trafficking.
It is to be recalled that the African members of
the Council — Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and
Ethiopia — organized an Arria Formula meeting in
June on maritime crime as a threat to international
peace and security. The discussion that took place
at that meeting is very much linked to what we are
discussing today. The Gulf of Guinea has been a major
hub for maritime crime and drug trafficking.
Criminal networks are increasingly moving heroin
through maritime routes and that is a significant
challenge that requires an enhanced response.
Important discussions took place during the Arria
Formula meeting, and we know that there have been
efforts to have a Council product on that important
issue. We hope that the Council will be able to
pronounce itself on that matter, and we fully support
the efforts of Equatorial Guinea, as a representative
of the Central Africa region, in taking the lead on that
important issue.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
thank Executive Director Fedotov of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his briefing
to the Council today.
Transnational organized crime not only finances
and fuels conf lict but also reinforces corruption and
undermines institutions, thereby destabilizing already
fragile environments. The citizens of the affected
societies are the ones paying the price for that.
Addressing the root causes of conf licts and instability
entails recognizing the severe impact of transnational
organized crime.

18-451187/17

S/PV.8433

Peace and security in Africa

West Africa is a transit location for drug trafficking,
which makes the region vulnerable to organized crime.
Drug trafficking is closely linked to instability in the
region, in particular in the Sahel, where smuggling
networks are used by terrorist groups as a source of
financing.
In the Council, we often see the devastating
and potentially long-term effects of conf licts on the
public institutions of a country. Conf licts contribute
to eroded trust in societies and undermine democratic
institutions and the rule of law. In those contexts,
criminal interests can gain a strong foothold. That is
one reason why it is crucial to include the broader rule
of law and justice chain in our peacebuilding efforts.
Building effective, accountable and transparent
institutions at all levels is a fundamental cornerstone
of stable and resilient societies, as also recognized in
Sustainable Development Goal 16. Providing access
to justice, as recently highlighted in resolution 2447
(2018) on police, justice and corrections, is equally
important.
When designing and planning the United Nations
work in conf lict-affected regions, the Council needs to
ensure that the role organized crime plays in conf lict
dynamics is ref lected. The connection between
organized crime and conf lict suggests that policing
must be a strategic consideration in all peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. In a context where
peacekeeping is, to a large degree, about introducing
or strengthening the rule of law, the role of police is
critical.
Throughout our tenure on the Council, we have
continuously advocated for an increased focus on
preventive efforts, in which United Nations policing
would play an important role. The Council has also
repeatedly and included in numerous resolutions
mandates or references to combating criminal f lows
and networks.
To ensure a more coherent response to drugs and
crime, we need to foster cooperation and information
exchange between the different authorities of Member
States and with international and regional entities
such as INTERPOL, EUROPOL, UNODC and the
Economic Community of West African States. Regional
cooperation is one of the most effective operational
tools for preventing organized crime and insecurity.
The UNODC regional programme in West Africa has,
as we have heard today, also contributed significantly
8/17

19/12/2018

to enhancing the capacity of West African States to
tackle narcotics smuggling.
Finally, it is important that the Council continue
to recognize the role that organized crime and drug
smuggling play in conf lict. If we fail to consider these
issues when designing our conf lict response or efforts
on peacebuilding and prevention, we will not be able
to address root causes or conf lict cycles appropriately.
This is true for West Africa as well as for other regions
plagued by conf lict.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Côte d’Ivoire for taking the initiative to
convene this meeting and Executive Director Yury
Fedotov for his briefing.
West and Central Africa have become key targets
of an onslaught of international drug trafficking. The
criminal activities that transit through countries of
West and Central Africa seriously undermine their
economic development and social stability and fuel
crime, violence and terrorism. To address the region’s
drug trafficking problem, the international community
should propose work in the following three areas.
First, we must work to help countries in the region
build capacity so that they are better equipped to
take the lead in tackling this scourge. The countries
of West and Central Africa are being held back by an
array of challenges in terms of resources, expertise
and know-how, capacity and others when it comes to
combating transnational organized crime, including
drug trafficking. They need robust support from the
international community. While fully respecting
their ownership, the international community should
help them formulate anti-drug trafficking strategies,
develop greater enforcement capacity and effectively
tackle this scourge and other forms of transnational
organized crime. International anti-drug trafficking
cooperation should be scaled up on the basis of broad
participation and shared responsibility, with a focus on
clamping down on the drug consumption market so as
to curb drug production and trafficking at the source.
Secondly, the international community should work
to strengthen coordination and cooperation between
regional and subregional organizations and United
Nations bodies to form synergies. China applauds
the strengthened cooperation between regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Economic Community of Central African States,
18-45118

19/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

on the one hand and, on the other, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in areas such as
combating drug trafficking with greater intensity, joint
border control and joint law enforcement, whereby
each institution can leverage its unique advantages
and expertise. The United Nations should continue
working in its coordination role to better marshal and
allocate resources and to provide a staunch buttress for
the efforts of regional countries and organizations.
Thirdly, we must work to tackle and try to
overcome the root causes of drug trafficking. Poverty
and underdevelopment serve as hotbeds for drug
trafficking and other forms of transnational organized
crime in West and Central Africa. We encourage the
United Nations agencies based in West and Central
Africa to work closely together, and we hope that
international partners will honour their aid and
investment commitments without delay, focusing
on helping the countries of the region with capacitybuilding and infrastructure development so that they
are in a better position to seek and achieve self-reliant
and sustainable development in West and Central
Africa at the earliest possible date.
At the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation,
held in Beijing in September, China announced its
commitment to cooperating with African countries
on matters of peace and security. Such cooperation
includes 50 assistance programmes aimed at combating
drug trafficking, strengthening border security and
enforcement, and combating piracy and transnational
organized crime, inter alia, with a view to endowing
African countries with greater capacity to maintain
peace and security.
China, along with the international community,
will continue to support Africa in tackling the challenge
of drug trafficking and help African countries achieve
peace, stability and development as soon as possible.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the
presidency for organizing this important meeting, as
well as the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury
Fedotov, for his briefing.
We are aware that the region of West Africa
presents multiple challenges. Violent conf licts, as a
principal factor, have placed the institutional structure

S/PV. 8433

of the countries of the area — and therefore their
populations — at serious risk. This is compounded
by transnational organized crime and petty crime,
which are additional factors that negatively affect the
deepening and prolongation of conf licts. Likewise, the
fragility of borders and the lack of available resources
to combat criminal activities in the region have fostered
the proliferation of controlled substances and their use
as a means of financing armed groups and terrorist
organizations.
The region therefore faces a challenge of a
transnational nature that requires a robust and crosscutting response from the international community,
based mainly on a broad degree of international
cooperation. We consider it imperative to adopt
urgent, serious and rigorous measures that are also
time-specific to counteract drug trafficking in and
around West Africa through a multidimensional
approach that neutralizes drug circulation at points of
origin, production, destination and consumption.
Furthermore, we believe that, in addition to
difficulties posed by the geographic backdrop,
limited State control in the affected territories
further exacerbates the situation, allowing criminal
organizations to adapt their illicit activities in order
to avoid losing their competitive edge and, of course,
profits. This adaptability translates into an increase in
their resistance and resilience to actions taken both by
the States of the region and by other international and
regional organizations.
The consequences of this scourge are very well
known in terms of its impact on the security sector and
the economic sphere. It deepens the fragility of many
States of West Africa, not to mention its negative effects
on the social sphere, since the sale and consumption
of illegal substances severely jeopardize the integrity
of the most vulnerable sectors of the population. We
must not forget that women and children are the targets
of violent extremism, armed groups and traffickers in
persons and in drugs.
Moreover, the link between terrorist groups
and transnational criminal organizations related
to these crimes is becoming increasingly overt, as
these organizations collect economic resources and
legitimize them through money-laundering and other
mechanisms that tend to diminish or eliminate State
control. In this vein, we commend the important
advances developed in the framework of cooperation

18-451189/17

S/PV.8433

Peace and security in Africa

between the Economic Community of the West African
States and UNODC.
A clear example of this is the support project for the
Regional Action Plan on illicit drug trafficking, related
organised crime and drug abuse, which is consistent
with the policies and strategies outlined by the region
and based on the pillars of the strengthening of justice
and law enforcement institutions, strengthening the
legal framework, reducing drug demand and building
capacities for investigation and monitoring. It is
therefore necessary to highlight the remarkable effort
and work and transcendental links and exchange of
information between the two organizations, which
have allowed these initiatives to show the way forward
in the fight against drug trafficking in West Africa.
We cannot fail to note the work of the West Africa
Coast Initiative, which is a project that, since 2009,
has pooled the efforts of the Department for Political
Affairs and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, UNODC and INTERPOL. The initiative
focuses on the most vulnerable countries and those in
post-conf lict situations to reduce their vulnerability to
drug trafficking and organized crime by strengthening
their national capacities, providing the necessary
assistance to strengthen the control of coastlines
and airspace, and training members of relevant State
institutions.
In conclusion, we echo the words of Mr. Jean
Lapaque, Regional Representative of UNODC for West
Africa, who said that the Sahel crisis
“violently reminded us of the precariousness of
peace in West Africa... the hybrid and transnational
character of the security threats in the West African
space... the existence of f lashpoints of tension that
could f lare up at any time... In addition to structural
and historical vulnerabilities of the past, there are
today new factors of cross-border conf licts... The
rise of these new threats constitutes a priority in
the agenda of the States and their partners... as they
jeopardize great advances in peace and security
achieved these past ten years.”
In this regard, we call on all States to address the issues
of West Africa and the Sahel through multilateral,
regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and to
work on strengthening effective measures to combat
and physically eliminate drug trafficking and, more
broadly, transnational crime.
10/17

19/12/2018

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): First of all, I would
like to thank the presidency of Côte d’Ivoire for
convening this very important briefing on the drug
situation in West Africa, and also express gratitude to
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his
comprehensive report.
This meeting provides a unique platform and
opportunity to share experiences related to the combat
against the production and distribution of drugs
through joint multilateral action. Drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime in West Africa remain
matters of great concern for us. In the affected countries,
including in West Africa, profits from drug trafficking
are used to destabilize States and also threaten both
development and stability. Besides their damaging
effects on people, they give rise to corruption and a
shadow economy, which are reinforced by moneylaundering and transnational crime and increased
funding to terrorist groups, thereby impeding sound
political stability and the progress of the African
region.
According to the World Drug Report 2018 released
in June by UNODC, Tramadol, an opioid used to treat
moderate and moderate-to-severe pain, has become
a growing concern in many regions of Africa and
Asia. The report also indicates that Africa and Asia
are emerging as cocaine-trafficking and consumption
hubs. It is well known that drug trafficking and related
illegal activities constitute the most serious threats to
security and human well-being worldwide.
My delegation makes the following observations
with regard to combating the drug problem in West
Africa.
The prompt and decisive action that is needed calls
for political will and regional collaboration to take
action at the regional and national levels. First, we
need to address factors that trigger distressing global
trends, instability, armed conf licts in many regions of
the world and refugee f lows, together with unresolved
problems of poverty and disparities in development,
all of which further derail progress and impede the
full effectiveness of our interventions. Therefore,
critical engagement is necessary to implement
different international programmes and projects
aimed at strengthening the security, judicial and law
enforcement sectors.
18-45118

19/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

We must aim for a major overhaul of the criminal
code, with a harmonization of legislation across
countries of the region. Our measures should be focused
on stricter law enforcement and justice systems,
together with early warning signals, intelligence
management and sharing, and rigorous border control,
with the help of UNODC and INTERPOL. All these
operations must be reinforced with capacity-building,
training and support by way of state-of-the-art detection
and communication equipment. We encourage West
African countries to continue to strengthen their
national institutional frameworks and responses
against these perilous threats, in close cooperation
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS), the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, United Nations
country teams, UNODC and INTERPOL.
Trafficking heroin from production centres to
heroin markets requires a global network of routes
and facilitation by domestic and international criminal
groups. In these circumstances, we need to relentlessly
search for ways to improve, strengthen and unite our
efforts. We should make better use of the enormous
potential of UNODC to share experience and best
practices, train personnel and develop effective tools
of practical cooperation. Capacity-building is the key
word for success.
This will be achieved only through a more effective
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. We welcome the continued efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States
to advance the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, including through the development of the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. We believe
that the establishment and deployment of the Group of
Five for the Sahel Joint Force will positively contribute
to maintaining stability in the region and help
countries, subregional organizations and UNOWAS to
address more effectively cross-border security threats,
including drug trafficking and piracy.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan is ready to work hand in
hand with others to improve and intensify the impetus
of mutually beneficial cooperation to mobilize all
possible efforts to counter the drug problem in Africa
and globally.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure at the outset to welcome Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on

S/PV. 8433

Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and thank him for his
informative briefing on drug trafficking in West Africa
and its impact on security and stability in the region. I
also thank the presidency for convening this meeting in
order to address an extremely important issue related
to security and stability in West African States.
On Monday, the Security Council heard a
briefing by Mr. Fedotov (see S/PV.8426), in which he
underscored the close interrelationship between drugs
and instability in Afghanistan. We are of the view that
the same applies to West Africa as well. Continued
instability in certain States of the region creates an
environment that could be exploited by organized
criminal groups to step up illegal drug trafficking,
and gives them the opportunity to strengthen the use
of commercial routes to forward drugs to their final
destinations. Those groups use some States of the
region as drug distribution centres, especially since its
geographic location puts it strategically at the heart of
established trade routes and networks.
There is an inherent relationship between
corruption and drug trafficking. Political and security
instability in certain States of the region directly
contributes to facilitating drug trafficking. Weak
Governments and failure to enforce the law in certain
States allow criminal groups to use the region as part
of their criminal network. Therefore, the focus must be
on building the capacities of West African States.
We appreciate the efforts that are being made by
the United Nations through UNODC and the United
Nations Office for West Africa. We also appreciate
the efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to combat drug trafficking.
We would like to point in that regard to its Regional
Response Action Plan to address the growing problem
of illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and drug
abuse in West Africa for the period from 2016 to 2020,
and we call on the States of the region to continue their
efforts to implement it. We welcome the ECOWAS
Drug Unit’s recent meeting in November on the issue.
We also welcome the midterm report of the
UNODC Regional Programme for West Africa, which
covers the most recent developments regarding efforts
by regional countries to enhance their capacities to
combat these threats. We commend the 924 activities
that UNODC carried out between July 2016 and July
of this year, and we urge the Office to continue its
efforts to advance the priorities outlined in the report,

18-4511811/17

S/PV.8433

Peace and security in Africa

including combating corruption, strengthening judicial
frameworks and supporting the Group of Five for the
Sahel in the area of cooperation between the police and
the judiciary.
In conclusion, the West African region has great
potential that if used well can undoubtedly bring about
steady increases in economic growth and development.
However, it is also facing many challenges, particularly
the presence of armed groups and illicit trafficking
networks, that threaten some States’ stability and
security. We commend and encourage UNODC in its
efforts to combat transboundary crimes and the United
Nations Office for West Africa for its contribution to
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, with a view to achieving
stability and development for the peoples of the region.
We fully support their work in that regard.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Côte d’Ivoire presidency for
taking the initiative to convene this briefing of the
Council on the very topical issue of combating drug
trafficking in West Africa. We also thank Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his
participation in the meeting and for his informative
and detailed briefing.
We are firmly convinced that effectively
countering the threat of drugs in the West African
States is possible only on a basis of coordinated
efforts by the entire international community, with the
United Nations playing a leading role. In that regard,
we confirm our unwavering support to the sanctions
regime targeting people and organizations linked to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida who
finance terrorist activity through proceeds from illegal
drug trafficking. The continuing mutual ties between
criminal activity, including drug-related activity, and
international terrorism, particularly where material
support for it is concerned, are very alarming. The high
indicators for pharmaceutical opioids for non-medical
consumption, synthetic drugs and heroin addiction
are particularly worrying. A number of States in the
region continue to be transit hubs for opiates from
Afghanistan and cocaine from Latin America. We are
hoping for a comprehensive review of all of those issues
in Vienna in March 2019 during the scheduled review
of the implementation of the Political Declaration on
the Prevention of Drug Abuse, Illicit Drug Trafficking
12/17

19/12/2018

and Organized Crimes in West Africa and the 2009
Regional Response Action Plan.
Among the priorities within the framework of
measures to deal adequately with the drug issue is the
quest for effective alternatives to this kind of criminal
business. In particular, the promotion of programmes
reconfigured to take local realities into account and
designed to create additional job opportunities in the
region would be of major help in that regard, and the
involvement of the business community, as well as the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, could make a significant contribution to that.
We believe it is vital to continue giving special attention
to preventing and suppressing the radicalization
of young people, while focusing on raising their
employment and education levels, including through
policies aimed at implementing specialized projects
under the auspices of the United Nations and UNESCO.
We also think it makes sense to continue
improving and strengthening border security, the
exchange of information and the training of lawenforcement personnel. We have been pleased with
UNODC’s success in extending expert assistance
to African States on ensuring security and stability.
We support UNODC’s work in that regard, and its
cooperation with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other regional
bodies. Needless to say, it is also important to develop
anti-drug cooperation among the countries concerned
themselves, in bilateral, regional, subregional and
multilateral formats, based on the principle of shared
and joint responsibility.
For our part, we have consistently taken measures to
assist African States in training personnel, particularly
in the areas of health care and law enforcement. We are
committed to continuing a constructive dialogue and
effective cooperation in the fight against drugs.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefing by Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC).
Peru has noted with concern the impact of the
world drug problem on West Africa, a subregion that
in recent years has become an area of production and
consumption as well as one of transit to European
18-45118

19/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

markets. Inadequate border controls and political and
socioeconomic crises have encouraged transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking, which corrupt
institutions and erode the social fabric. In some parts
of the region, rivalries between drug traffickers over
control of areas of inf luence exacerbate intercommunal
tensions. In some cases, a country’s authorities and
security forces may be co-opted. In many others,
links are established with armed groups and terrorist
organizations. Illicit drug trafficking often results
in vicious circles of violence and corruption that can
destabilize countries, undermine public safety and
increase the risk of violent conf lict. We would like to
highlight three actionable areas where we believe the
Security Council can contribute to combating those
threats. We consider them essential to preventing
conf licts, combating terrorism and consolidating
sustainable peace.
The first area is identifying and combating the ties
between organized crime and terrorism. Resolution
2195 (2014) recognizes the existence of that connection,
particularly in Africa. In May (see S/PV.8247),
the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2018/9) stressing the importance of increasing
our understanding of those ties in order to improve our
response. To that end, we believe it is important that
the Council and its Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
continue to expand their understanding of this issue
and adopt the necessary measures to deal with it
wherever it appears.
The second area is focusing on root causes. Peru
acknowledges that if we are to tackle transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking we need a
multidimensional approach that among other things
builds and strengthens capacities and institutions to
promote human rights, the rule of law and sustainable
development, in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We must also fight
corruption and promote the creation of opportunities
and decent employment, especially for young people
and rural communities. In that regard, despite the
challenges we continue to face, we would like to
highlight Peru’s successful model of alternative,
comprehensive and sustainable development, which has
enabled us to combat the f low of drugs by promoting
rural development.
We believe the third area to be strengthening
regional and neighbourhood cooperation. We think

S/PV. 8433

that it is essential for the international community
to fight threats from a regional and neighbourhood
approach since we face a phenomenon that is usually
cross-border in scope and develops patterns based on
the various geographic contexts in which it operates.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the Regional
Action Plan to Address Illicit Drug Trafficking,
Related Organized Crime and Drug Abuse in West
Africa, which was developed by the Economic
Community of West African States, with the support
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In
addition to other initiatives supported by that Office,
we also underscore the launch of the Compendium
of Best Practices on Drug Use. Prevention, Drug Use
Disorders Treatment and Harm Reduction in Africa, in
partnership with the African Union and in coordination
with the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
We also highlight the role of neighbourhood cooperation
through the establishment of joint commissions, which
in addition to helping combat criminal networks, serve
to strengthen the intelligence services and border
control required to combat illicit drug trafficking and
trafficking in persons, natural resources and weapons.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
for his very comprehensive briefing.
Over the past few years, drug use and drug use
disorder have become a growing concern in West
Africa. According to the World Drug Report 2018, not
only is West Africa a transiting hub for drugs but it has
also grown to become a consumption hub for cannabis
and cocaine. Addressing that challenge requires an
integrated approach to the drug problem that involves
tackling supply and demand together. In that regard,
Poland commends the UNODC presence in West Africa
through its Regional Office for West and Central Africa,
in Senegal, as well as the UNODC country office in
Nigeria. Cooperation with regional organizations and
States in the region is crucial. Therefore, we welcome
UNODC’s support for the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and its member
States in the area of border control through mentoring,
exchange visits, study tours and advance training on
specific issues.
Strengthening the capacity of ECOWAS and its
member States to take sustainable actions against drug
trafficking, drug abuse and transnational organized
crime is of utmost importance. We need to remember

18-4511813/17

S/PV.8433

Peace and security in Africa

that drug trafficking is one of the main sources of
income for terrorist groups, as mentioned by several
delegations already. If they are to be more efficient in
detecting illicit financial f lows, countries should focus
primarily on border security. However, bearing that
in mind, we cannot forget that the porous borders of
developing countries are one of the biggest challenges
they face in the course of the fight against terrorism.
We should be aware that drug trafficking will be one
of the main sources of income until the socioeconomic
problems of Africa are resolved and African citizens
are able to find beneficial and legal sources of income.
That is why supporting Africa’s development is
potentially the most effective tool for combating drug
trafficking and drug use disorder.
It is our obligation to provide capacity-building
and respond to requests for technical assistance. Those
actions, in order to succeed, need to be undertaken in
coordination with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations. Therefore, we commend
Project CRIMJUST, a joint initiative funded by the
European Union and implemented by UNODC, in
partnership with INTERPOL and Transparency
International, for contributing to effectively fighting
organized crime, in general, and drug trafficking in
particular, along the cocaine route in Latin America,
the Caribbean and West Africa.
We support the purposes of the project aimed at,
first, strengthening the capacities of criminal justice
institutions to detect, investigate and prosecute
drug trafficking and related crime cases; secondly,
fostering regional and interregional cooperation
among criminal justice institutions by promoting good
practices, information exchange and networking; and,
thirdly and lastly, enhancing institutional integrity
and accountability of criminal justice institutions
to reinforce mutual trust and confidence within and
between both regions, with the active involvement of
the civil society organizations.
In conclusion, let me express our full support to
UNODC’s work on drug trafficking in West Africa,
based on its Regional Programme for West Africa
(2016-2020).
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I say, at the
outset, how much we welcome Côte d’Ivoire’s initiative
to bring this issue back to the Council’s agenda, which
I think we last considered in 2013. It is a timely moment
to look at it.
14/17

19/12/2018

May I also welcome the briefing by Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and thank
UNODC for its efforts in that area, including, of course,
through its Regional Programme for West Africa.
Conf lict, corruption and ungoverned spaces
all allow criminality to f lourish. It can take many
forms and includes the trafficking of drugs, but not
only drugs. It includes the trafficking of people and
of weapons. Organized criminal networks can also
support and facilitate the emergence and operations
of terrorist groups. Indeed, it is quite frequent and
common that, in their early stages, terrorist groups
rely upon income from organized crime. Sadly, West
Africa has been affected by those issues in recent years
and we have seen that it is marginalized groups — be
they children, women or minority ethnic groups — that
often suffer the most.
The impact of such criminality is not only felt by
individuals; it is felt in communities and by States.
It undermines the rule of law, human rights and the
ability of States to provide services and pursue the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development for all of their
citizens. Cross-border criminal networks, smuggling
and trafficking goods and people across State
jurisdiction can also constitute a threat to international
peace and security. Drug trafficking is one form of that
challenge, but we saw the same argument convincingly
made in resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017) on the
trafficking of people.
As we have heard today, that has unfortunately been
the case in the West African region, which, as UNODC
has outlined, has become a significant consumption
and transit zone for heroin and cocaine, enabling
f lows towards destination markets. The money and the
violence that accompany that trade have devastating
consequences. As I have said, drug trafficking can
be both a means by which armed groups raise funds
but also a source of conf lict in themselves. Criminal
gangs can corrupt and weaken a State at just the time
that a strong State with strong institutions is needed to
prevent conf lict. I agree very much with those around
the table who have talked about the importance of
considering the issue holistically within the prevention
and peacebuilding setting.
We should note and welcome the efforts in the
region, in particular the work of the Group of Five for
the Sahel, for greater stability and in tackling terrorism.
18-45118

19/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

We also need to support the Economic Community of
West African States; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Chambas; and
the excellent efforts of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, as well as those initiatives
that address the drivers of instability, including, of
course, climate change, poverty, marginalization
and corruption. The United Kingdom is playing its
part. We are increasing our staffing and expertise on
tackling organized crime in the region and are working
with our partners in the region to counter trafficking
and strengthen the rule of law and border security, as
well as supporting development and the provision of
services.
There is no silver bullet to ending drug trafficking
and organized crime in West Africa or, indeed,
anywhere else. It will take a comprehensive approach
by the States in the region, holistically supported by the
United Nations family and its international partners.
We welcome the renewed focus on criminality brought
by you, Mr. President, in calling today’s meeting, and
we stand ready to assist all countries suffering from
this insidious threat, as we ourselves suffer too.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
meeting. I also would like to thank the Mr. Fedotov,
Executive director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his very informative
briefing.
Transnational organized crime causes and
aggravates conf lict, and that was one of the main
messages during the 6 November debate (see S/PV.8393)
on the role of policing in peacekeeping operations,
which included the participation of numerous United
Nations Police Commissioners. During that meeting,
we stressed that financial gains from organized crime
are a source of income that fund insurgent groups and
terrorists and thereby perpetuate the cycle of conf lict.
Like other forms of crime, drug trafficking fuels
corruption, terrorism and other illicit trafficking. It
transcends borders and affects the lives of millions of
people around the world, especially young people. To
counter drug trafficking in West and Central Africa,
we need an integrated approach. Let me mention three
main aspects in that regard: first, regional security
cooperation; secondly, criminal justice; and, thirdly,
sanctions.

S/PV. 8433

First, with regard to regional security cooperation,
regional problems require regional solutions, supported
by the United Nations where needed. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands is a staunch supporter of closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations like the African Union. As such, we
are a supporter of sustainable financing for African
Union peace support operations. In order to tackle
drug trafficking in West and Central Africa, regional
initiatives are key, and UNODC plays a crucial role
in facilitating such initiatives, including within the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
UNODC facilitates cooperation through projects
like the West Africa Coast Initiative and the Airport
Communication Project, which the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports. In the context of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), we welcomed the
regional approach to drug trafficking in the mandate
of its Joint Force. We support the G-5 Sahel Security
Platform, aimed at exchanging information on criminal
and terrorist activities in West Africa.
That brings me to my second point, concerning
criminal justice. Security and justice are two sides
of the same coin. Impunity for drug trafficking
undermines trust in public institutions and hampers
sustainable peace and security. A criminal justice
response is crucial to upholding the rule of law and
ensuring cooperation between local populations and
security forces. The role of the police is essential in
that regard. That was one of the reasons for which
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, together with Côte
d’Ivoire, drafted resolution 2447 (2018), on policing,
justice and corrections, which the Security Council
adopted unanimously last week. Furthermore, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands supports strengthening
the justice sector in Mali through the police
component within the G-5 Joint Force. In criminal
justice, cooperation to share evidence and ensure due
process is pivotal. Accordingly, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supported the secondment of a Nigerian
prosecutor in Italy to facilitate information sharing and
mutual legal assistance in the area of illicit trafficking.
We recommend similar secondments in other Member
States and institutions.
Concerning my last point — sanctions — criminal
networks thrive in conf lict and in situations in which
corruption and impunity are widespread. The Council
must use its entire toolkit to address threats against
international peace and security, including through

18-4511815/17

S/PV.8433

Peace and security in Africa

targeted sanctions against traffickers who spoil
peace processes and weaken institutions. We already
have good practices. In the Mali sanctions regime,
the production and trafficking of narcotic drugs is a
listing criterion, and in the Libya sanctions regime, the
Council targeted human traffickers. We have done it
before, and we must not shy away from doing it again.
In conclusion, drugs damage countries’ social,
health-care and economic systems. In my introduction,
I talked about an integrated approach to counter drug
trafficking. Ultimately, the Sustainable Development
Goals provide such an integrated approach. We must
ensure the rule of law and better living conditions
for our people so that drug traffickers cannot get a
foothold. Let this be our joint goal in our fight against
drug traffickers in West and Central Africa and around
the world.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Côte d’Ivoire.
My delegation welcomes the holding of this
meeting on the theme “Peace and security in Africa:
drug trafficking in West Africa as a threat to stability”.
My delegation commends Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), on his excellent briefing.
Drug trafficking today represents a public health
and national security emergency, and even a source of
subregional instability, as it deeply affects the social
fabric and undermines States’ ability to govern at the
political, economic and social levels. It is fuelled by
structural vulnerabilities and weaknesses in the social
and criminal justice system, as well as by increasing
levels of poverty, which drug trafficking networks and
terrorist groups exploit. Once considered a transit area
for certain types of narcotics, West Africa today has
become a production hub, a consumer market and a
destination point for every type of drug. In their fight
against the scourge of drug trafficking, the countries
of West Africa — already faced by difficulties
resulting from vulnerabilities in their border control
systems — must confront evolving security threats
owing to alliances between terrorist groups and drug
traffickers’ networks.
The drug phenomenon appears to be one of the
main causes leading to students’ failure in schools
and generates new forms of urban violence affecting
the safety and well-being of populations. Moreover,
16/17

19/12/2018

the phenomenon fosters the burgeoning of criminal
economies, which, through money laundering,
insidiously infiltrate the economic fabric of States,
particularly in the areas of transportation, the
hospitality industry and real estate. In Côte d’Ivoire,
the Interministerial Committee to Fight against
Drugs estimates that approximately 12 per cent of
the population between the ages of 15 and 64 use
drugs, and puts the amount of drugs seized between
2017 and the first half of 2018 at 286 tons. In an
environment characterized by the weakening of central
State authority and the armed assertion of tribal and
regional irredentism, the resources derived from drug
trafficking are both a high stake and an important lever
in inf luencing local and national political dynamics.
In replacing central State authority, elite members of
the local population and armed groups involved in
drug trafficking increase their inf luence on intra- and
inter-community relations, as well as on local political
dynamics.
Faced with the threat posed by drug trafficking to
stability in West Africa, the States of the region must
shoulder the primary responsibility of responding in
accordance with national and subregional strategies.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the fight against drug trafficking,
production and consumption is carried out by both the
Interministerial Committee to Fight against Drugs and
civil society organizations through an approach based
on prevention, care and suppression. With regard to
prevention, the Government is stepping up activities
involving raising awareness on the harm caused by
drug use in synergy with civil society. Care involves
health and social responses provided by specialized
institutions such as the Regional Law Enforcement
Training Centre. In terms of suppression, the national
strategy is aimed at tracking down drug traffickers
and combating money laundering through the National
Unit for the Processing of Financial Information.
The effectiveness of national strategies to
combat drug trafficking depends on their coherence
with subregional initiatives with the support of
key partners, such as UNODC. To that end, Côte
d’Ivoire welcomed the establishment of the Regional
Programme for West Africa 2016-2020 to support the
regional action plan to address illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse in West Africa of the
Economic Community of West African States. Such
programmes ref lect the commitment of the States of
West Africa to strengthen regional cooperation in the
18-45118

19/12/2018

Peace and security in Africa

areas of information exchange, judicial cooperation,
combating financial f lows related to drug trafficking
and preventing the diversion of resources used to
manufacture drugs. Likewise, my country commends
UNODC for its continued support for these regional
plans, which has included the establishment of joint
port control services and an airport communication
project that extends beyond West Africa.
In conclusion, my country would like to recall that
the collective commitment of the States of the region

S/PV. 8433

to pool their resources greatly depends on the success
of the fight against drug trafficking in West Africa,
which is a guarantee of the preservation of peace and
stability in the region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

18-4511817/17
