10

General Auembly-Seventh Ses•ion

619 (VU). Complaint of violation by Arab States
of their obligations under the Charter, United
Nation• resolutione and •pecific provi•ions of
the general armistice agreements concluded
with Israel, requiring them to desist f rom
policies and practices of hoetility and to aeek
agreement by negotiation for the eatabliahment of peaceful relation• with Iaroel

The General Asscmbl:y
Takes note of the communication 10 of 19 December
1952 from the representative of Israel to the Chairman
of the Ad Hoc Political Committee, stating that the
debate in that Committee on item 67 of the agenda of
the General Assembly had dealt fully witij most aspects
of item 68 and that the Israel delegation did not insist
on the consideration of the latter item.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

620 (VII). Admi88ion of new Membera

to membership in the United Nations, examining the
proposais and suggestions which have been made in the
General Assembly and its Committees or which may
be submitted to the Special Committee by any Members of the United Nations, such study to be con<lucted in the light of the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, the discussions in the
General Assembly and its Committees, the debates in
the Security Coum:il, the advisory opinions of the International Court of Justice, the other antecedents of
the question and the principles of international law;
3. To request the Special Committee to submit a
report on its work and its conclusions to the General
Assembly at its eighth session and to transmit that
report to the Secretary-General in time for distribution
to Member States at least two months before the opening of the eighth session;
4. To request the Secretary-General to place at the
disposai of the Special Committee the staff and the
facilities it requires for its work ;
5. To include the item "Admission of new Members" in the provisional agenda of the eighth session
of the General Assembly.

A

410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

The General Assembly,
Considering that, notwithstanding the efforts that
have been made for some years, it bas not as yet been
possible to solve the important problem of the admission of new Members to the United Nations,
Recalling that various States Members of the United
Nations have made specific proposais or put forward
suggestions with a view to reaching a satisfactory solution of the problem of admission,
Recalling that on two occasions the International
Court of Justice, at the request 11 of the General
Assembly', has given advisory opinions 11 on the abovementioned problem,
Recalling its resolutions 113 A (Il) of 17 November 1947, 197 B (III) of 8 December 1948, 296 K
(IV) of 22 November 1949, 495 (V) of 4 December
1950 and 506 A (VI) of 1 February 1952,
Bearing in mind that the applications for admission
of a large number of States are still pending,
Resolves:
1. T o establi.sh a Special Committee composed of a
representative of each of the following Member States:
Argentina, Belgium, Canada, China, Colombia, Cuba,
Egypt, El Salvador, France, Greece, Lebanon, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Philippines,
Union of South Africa, United KinJdom of Great
Britain and Northem lreland, Umted States of
America;
2. To instrwct \he Special Committee to make a detailed study of the question of the admission of States
10 See document A/AC.61/L.45.
11 See
113 B (rI) and 296 (IV).
11
Admu.ricm of a State to the United Naticms

See

resolutions

J

(C'-arter1
,•frticle 4), Advi.rory o,Mion, I.C.J. Reports, 1948, p. S7 ana
Com,,tence of Assembly ,-ega,-ding admusitm to th, United
Nations, Adf!ISOf'1 o,;nicm, I.C.J. Reports, 1950, p. 4.

B
The General Assembly,
Noting that, on 18 September 1952, ten members
of the Security Council supported 13 a draft resolution
recommending the admission of Japan to the United
Nations, but that no recommendation was made to the
General Assembly because of the opposition of one
permanent member,
Deeming it important to the development of the
United Nations that all applicant States which possess
the qualifications for membership set forth in Article 4
of the Charter should be admitted,
1. Determines that Japan is. in its judgment, a
peace-loving State within the meaning of Article 4 of
the Charter, is able and willing to carry out the obligations of th~ Charter, and shoul4 therefore be admitted
to membership in the United Nations;
2. Requests the Security CQuncil to take note of
this determination by the General Assembly with respect toi the application of Japan.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.
C

The General Assembly,
Noting that, on 19 September 1952, ten members of
the Security Council supported 16 a draft resolution
recommending the admission of Vietnam to the United
Nations, but that no recommendation was .made to the
11 See Official Recor-ds of th, Seet1rily COtlncil, Srvnith
Y ear, 602nil meeting.
H Ibid., 603rd meeting.
