; ,t’ :’
? <. )e>.
‘.”
i i ., ,,
!,
“,’
ix+:.‘

UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY CbUNiI
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

MEETING:

i,lE0 2 \I :i:;55

6 APRIL 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . , . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . , . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

.... ... .... .. ..

1,

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Special report of the Security Council Committee established in pursuance
of resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia on
the expansion of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia (S/11913) . . . . . . I .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l907)

,.... n..,..,,,....,..............

S/PV. 1907

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemetlts
of the OJficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions und
Decisiom of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1907th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
______~_-_-------~----~~-~~~_~~----~-----~
Prc~sidettt: Mr. HUANG

Hua (China).

I.

Adoption

1976, at 3.30 p.m.
---x-ll_----

against Southern Rhodesia [S/f 19131. In paragraph 13
of that report, the Committee has forwarded certain
recommendations to the CounciI which have been the
subject of intensive consultations. Members of the
Council have before them a draft resolution [S/12037]
which has emerged from those consultations. This draft
resolution has been sponsored and submitted by all
15 members of the Council.

Pt~sn~: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America,

Provisional

6 April

agenda (S/Agenda/l907)

3. In accordance with the arrangements worked out in
the course of our consultations, I propose now to put
the draft resolution to the vote, after which delegations
will be free to make whatever statements they wish.

of the agenda.

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Special report of the Security Council Committee
established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia
on the expansion of sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia (S/11913).

A vote WNS tnketj

by show of hcr/~ds.

4. The PRESIDENT
(trctnslation
fi’otn Chinese):
I shall now call on those representatives who wish to
make statements following the adoption of the
resolution.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

5. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, at the very outset of this first meeting
of the Council in April, I should like to express to you,
Mr. President, the warm congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the high office of President.
Your assumption of that office this month, when the
first issue to be discussed is the method of intensifying
the struggle for the liberation of Zimbabwe, is a
coincidence which we warmly welcome. You, Sir,’
represent a country, the great People’s Republic of
China, which has always been in the forefront in solidly
supporting the liberation struggle in Africa. Your own
personal commitment to the struggle for freedom and
human dignity, your great experience in the field of
international diplomacy and your energetic contribution to the work of the Council are all factors which
ensure a dynamic leadership for this Council. YOU can
be assured of the full and whole-hearted co-operation
of the Tanzanian delegation as you carry out Your
important responsibilities.

1I The PRESIDENT
(translcrtim from Chinese): It
is my first duty to discharge the pleasant obligation of
expression on behalf of all the members of the Security
Council the sincere appreciation we all feel for the
services rendered to the Council by the President for
March, Ambassador Thomas S. Boya of Benin, and
for the able assistance of his colleagues on the delegation of Benin. I ask the representative of Benin,
Mr. Paqui, to be so kind as to inform Ambassador
Boya of the sentiments expressed here today.
Adoption of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Special report of the Security Council Committee
established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesiaon
the expansion of sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia (S/11913)

6. Allow me also to convey our highest appreciation
to our colleague and brother, Ambassador Boya, the
representative of the sister Republic of Benin, who
served as President of the Council last month with
such distinction. Ambassador Boya presided over the
Council when it was seized of very serious issued
involving principles which are very dear to US. His

The PRESIDENT
(ttwt~slcrticm from
Chinese):
The Council has just included in the agenda the special
report of the Committee established in pursuance of
its resolution 253 (1968) on the expansion of Sanctions
2.

I

of decisions for the adoption of which the United
States itself is also responsible.

diplomatic skill, his patience and exemplary leadership
facilitated the work of the Council in tackling what
are commonly admitted as important and, in some
cases, controversial issues.

9. The appeal I have made reflects the concern of the
international community regarding the grave situation
in Zimbabwe. It reflects the wish of the international
community that the problem of Zimbabwe be solved,
It was with this objective in mind, namely, the termination of minority rule in Rhodesia, that the
Commonwealth countries meeting at Kingston last year
at the level of heads of Government agreed to recommend the expansion of the scope of sanctions. That
was an important agreement that took into account
the views previously expressed on that matter. And
the General Assembly, as well as its subsidiary body,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoptes,
has repeatedly called for the expansion of sanctions.
The most recent recommendations were made by that
Committee in its meeting at Lisbon last year and
endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution 3397
(XXX), in which the Assembly called on the Council
to widen sanctions to include all measures envisaged
in Article 41 of the Charter. That is a call which my
delegation fully endorses.

7. The resolution that the Council has just adopted
is a logical follow-up of a special report from the
sanctions Committee of the Council, a Committee
over which I had the privilege of presiding in the
course of last year. I believe the Committee’s report
reflects the seriousness with which the Committee did
its work. Hampered by the different political attitudes
in the Council, the Committee nevertheless managed
to come to a unanimous recommendation
on the
issue of expanding sanctions. Although that recommendation does not go far enough, my delegation
nevertheless believes that it is a step in the right
direction and an important one too. Tanzania has
repeatedly stated that sanctions cannot be effective
unless they are comprehensive and are effectively
supervised and fully implemented
by the whole
international community. We are still very far from
achieving that goal. Resolution 253 (1968) and other
resolutions are not yet comprehensive.
The provisions of Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations
have not been exhausted. The largest loophole for
sanction-breaking still exists in the Republic of South
Africa. Other States still present excuses, as the
annual report of the sanctions Committee
shows,*
as reasons for their failure effectively to implement
the letter and spirit of the sanctions resolutions. We
believe that these sanctions cannot be as effective as
we want them to be as long as these loopholes and
excuses exist. We believe that sanctions will have to be
extended to cover South Africa as long as the regime
there continues to support the rebel regime in Zimbabwe and as long as it continues to provide facilities
to the regime in Rhodesia enabling it to evade sanctions. We also believe that the full force of the provisions of Article 41 of the Charter should be applied.

10. The international community must send a clear
message to the illegal regime in Salisbury to the effect
that pressure will continue to be exerted until such
time as majority rule is achieved. My delegation will
also continue to support all proposals which have the
effect of tightening sanctions to the full extent, It is
in that context that I should like to take this opportunity here specifically to associate my delegation with
the Swedish proposal, as it appears in paragraph 7 of
the special report, that all aircraft of whatever
nationality be denied landing rights if they also land in
Rhodesia.
11. As I have indicated, the resolution fails far short
of the objectives and the goal which we should bc
striving to reach. But, as I said, it is a step in the
right direction. That is why my delegation was happy
to be associated with its drafting. That is why aIso
my delegation was a sponsor of the draft resolution
just adopted. It continues to be the hope of the
Tanzania delegation that the sanctions Committee
will in the course of this year explore other possibilities
for expanding sanctions so that we may eventually
get not only comprehensive mandatory sanctions but
also sanctions which are effectively supervised and
fully implemented,
so that they may achieve the
results we want. In this connexion, I wish to salute
the People’s Republic of Mozambique
for the COUrageous decision which it took recently and to point
to it as a shining example for the rest of the internutional community.

8. It is important to stress once again that all States
should vigorously enforce the sanctions already
decided upon by the Council. The report of the sanctions Committee clearly points out that in this context
there is a lot to be desired. I do not intend to take
the time of the representatives here to enumerate the
various violations of sanctions. I should, however, like
specifically to appeal to the Government of the United
States to halt the importation ofchromefrom
Rhodesia,
which takes place in flagrant contravention
of the
sanctions resolution. That resolution constitutes a
treaty obligation which all Members undertook to
perform. In so failing to carry out that obligation, the
United States only gives political encouragement to
the iEIega1 minority regime in Rhodesia. In this respect,
my delegation has noted with satisfaction that the
United States delegation has not only voted for the
current resolution, but in fact co-sponsored it. It
would, therefore, only be logical that this demonstration of opposition to the Smith regime, which we
welcome, be followed up by the scrupulous observance

12. The importance of the decision of Mozambique
is that it sends a message to Ian Smith that the illegal
regime will not find peace so long as it continues
2

to violate the wishes of the majority in Zimbabwe.
That should be the message of the international community as a whole. The resolution unanimously
adopted today is very significant in that context. It
is an unprecedented demonstration of total solidarity
on the part of the international community, for it is,
to my knowledge, the first time that the Security
Council has adopted a draft resolution sponsored by
all 15 members. The international
community has
therefore once again registered its intention resolutely
to oppose the illegal regime in Rhodesia and to support
majority rule there. It is our earnest hope that this
action will be followed by scrupulous implementation
by all States of the letter and spirit of the sanctions
resolutions. Only by such action can the international
community help to achieve the desired objective in
Zimbabwe, namely, majority rule, with a minimum of
sacrifices.

responsibility
of which I am only too conscious.
Ambassador Salim’s contribution to the work of the
sanctions Committee and as chairman of the Special
Committee on decolonization stands in need neither
of introduction nor of commendation. I do not, however, wish to miss this opportunity to thank him
once again for his valuable contribution to the work of
the sanctions Committee and to say that the Committee
will continue to look to him for guidance and assistance.
16. It gives my delegation great satisfaction to find
that all the members of the Council view the question
of Southern Rhodesia in the same light. The unanimous
sponsorship and adoption a short while ago of the draft
resolution on the extension of sanctions is a proof of
the world’s common and increasing concern at the
situation which prevails there. The unanimity with
which the draft was sponsored and adopted is a fact of
great significance which, we hope, will not be lost on
Mr. Ian Smith.

13. It must be stressed that the struggle in Zimbabwe
continues with the maximum determination
of the
African people there under the leadership of the
African National Council. Faced with the intransigence
and obduracy of the desperate racist authorities in
Salisbury, the freedom fighters have now resorted
to the intensification of the armed struggle to secure
their rights and regain their freedom and human dignity.
This struggle will be won by the Zimbabweans. Time
has run out for the illegal minority regime in Rhodesia.
The decision which the Council has adopted today,
though limited in scope, is an important contribution
to the cause of freedom and justice for all Zimbabweans. It is a significant reaffirmation,
at this
crucial moment, of the unity of purpose of the international community to see justice triumph in Zimbabwe.

17. The situation in southern Africa is evolving
rapidly. The day is indeed not far off when the majority
people of Zimbabwe will regain their inalienable
national rights. Whether this will happen through
peaceful means or violence is material to developments
elsewhere in Africa. The question is still open. Many
wise and far-sighted leaders of Africa have striven and
are still striving to seek a positive answer to this
question so that the fundamental rights of the people of
Zimbabwe can be peacefully recognized and restored.
the short-sighted
rulers in
18. Unfortunately,
Salisbury seem oblivious to the facts of history and
even to events which have taken place at their door
step. Their persistence in a policy which will lead to
their eventual downfall does not encourage hope for the
future.

14. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, it gives
my delegation great pleasure to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for April. The people and the Government of
my country greatly value and cherish the bonds of
friendship and mutual co-operation
which exist
between our two countries. My delegation assures you
of our support in the discharge of the onerous responsibility which you have assumed and is confident that
the Council will benefit greatly from your wise and
dedicated guidance. I should like to express my
delegation’s deepest appreciation to your predecessor,
the representative of Benin. He presided over our
deliberations
during
an exceptionally
diGcult
period. The successful outcome of the Council
meetings during March owes much to his patient and
tactful handling of the proceedings.

19. Yet if recourse to force is to be avoided in
Zimbabwe, as in the rest of southern Africa, then
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia must be made
more effective. They must be reinforced in impact
and extended in scope so as to become a decisive
factor. Moves to by-pass sanctions encourage the
minority regime in Salisbury, prejudice attempts at
negotiations and make more certain a violent outcome.
20. The fact is that United Nations sanctions have
not succeeded in convincing the minority regime in
Salisbury of the necessity to search seriously for a
peaceful solution. The negotiations held so far by
Mr. Ian Smith with t.he representatives of the Zimbabwe people have proved to be an exercise in futility
and prevarication. This is not for lack of vigilance on
the part of the sanctions Committee, whose task and
responsibilities
will increase and become more
extensive as the situation develops. Security Council
action of this kind can become really effective only
when it is universal. I should like, in this context, to
endorse the appeal addressed to the United States
by the previous speaker, the representative of the

15. The Council’s Committee
established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968) did my delegation the
great honour yesterday of electing me its Chairman
for the current year. In entrusting me with this task
the members of the Committee have shown me a mark
of their confidence, which I greatly appreciate. In
asking me to succeed Ambassador Salim of the United
Republic of Tanzania, they have placed upon me a
3

United Republic of Tanzania. We must try to close all
loopholes which enable the illegal regime in Salisbury
to survive.

tions. But I am glad to say that the specific proposals
in the resolution which the Council has just adopted
are ones on which all Council members are agreed,
and on the merit of these proposals there can be no
dispute.

21. Above all, the Council must make the Government of South Africa aware of its own role and responsibility. My country will continue to co-operate in
faithfully enforcing the United Nations sanctions. We
express the hope that all other Members, of the
Organization will be able to join soon in making the
system of sanctions weigh effectively on Southern
Rhodesia. The people of Pakistan are convinced that
the system of oppression in Zimbabwe and elsewhere
is on the retreat despite its apparent obstinacy before
the struggle of the people for freedom and in face of
the United will of the international community. Prime
Minister Bhutto stated at the twenty-eighth session
of the General Assembly that “injustice imposed on
the weak by the strong... breeds conflict and is the
greatest impediment
to peace”.3 My country is
determined to contribute in its own small way towards
the removal of injustice and causes of conflict.

27.., From my delegation’s point of view, the subject
of today’s debate is quite straightforward, We are very
glad that these recommendations,
unanimously put
forward by the sanctions Committee, have now been
unanimously adopted by the Council. Since the issue
before us is specific and technical, my delegation does
not regard this as the appropriate occasion for a
lengthy debate on the political developments in the
area.
28. The Council is well aware of the developments of
great significance taking place now in southern Africa.
It recently voted unanimously, in resolution 386 (1976)
to assist Mozambique in consequence of the decision
by that country to apply existing sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia.
Mozambique’s
decision was
warmly welcomed by my delegation, since in our view
it was bound to intensify the pressures on the illegal
regime of Mr. Ian Smith.

22. The PRESIDENT
(tr’crnslntion from Chinese):
Here, I should like to express congratulations
to
Ambassador Akhund upon his election to the chairmanship of the sanctions Committee. I also wish to express
our appreciation to Ambassador Salim for his efforts
and contributions during his term of chairmanship of
the Committee.

29. The then British Foreign and Commonwealth
Secretary recently made public a number of conditions
which would enable the United Kingdom to play a
specific role in the supervision of a peaceful settlement.
These conditions were that Mr. Smith shouId accept
the principle of majority rule; that he should agree
to elections for majority rule within a period of
18 months to two years; that he should agree that
there would be no independence before majority rule;
that the negotiations must not be ldng drawn out; and
that there would be assurances that the transition to
majority rule and to an independent Rhodesia would
not be thwarted and would be orderly. Mr. Smith’s
first reaction to these proposals has, I am afraid to say,
been negative, but this does not come as any particular
surprise to my Government, since we had doubts about
Mr. Smith’s willingness to be convinced of the need
for an urgent settlement. However, we hope that when
Mr. Smith and his colleagues reflect on the consequences of rejecting Mr. Callaghan’s proposals, they
will come to see that those proposals provide the only
alternative to a much more destructive solution. In
the changing political climate of southern Africa, we
believe that they offer the only way towards a peaceful
settlement.

23. Mr. THOMAS (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
although the witching hour of midnight hadjust passed
when we were concluding our debate on Angola last
week, and you, Sir, were like Cinderella destined to
assume your proper station when that hour struck, this
is the first occasion on which my delegation has had
the opportunity to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Council, and,we do so with confidence in your wisdom and in your experience. We also
trust, notwithstanding
that confidence,
that the
Council may be just a little less active in April than
it was in March.
24. At the same time it would be quite wrong not to
pay a tribute to your predecessor, the representative
of Benin, for the patience, good humour and skill with
which he guided the Council through what would, but
for the conduct of the President, have been a much
more difficult month.
25. I also take this opportunity to add the warm
congratulations of my own delegation to Ambassador
Boyd of Panama upon his appointment as Minister for
External Relations.

30. The United Kingdom Government has long held
the view that sanctions are, despite their shortcomings,
an important weapon in the international community’s
armoury against the illegal regime in Salisbury. Only
last week the nine members of the European Community, in deploring the fact that recent events in
Southern Rhodesia had made more difficult the
peaceful transfer of power to the majority, confirmed
that they would continue strictly to apply the decisions
of the Council concerning Rhodesia [S/12039]. We are

26. The sanctions Committee has over the past few
months most carefully been considering the question of
the extension of sanctions against Rhodesia. As its
special report makes clear, the Committee considered
a wide range of possible extensions, and not all the
suggestions put forward were acceptable to all delega4

convinced that if existing sanctions had been more
efficiently and universally applied they would have
had a considerably greater direct impact in the
economy of Southern Rhodesia, and thus on Mr. Smith
and his colleagues, than any possible extensions.
31, None the less, we recognize the importance of
bringing within the scope of mandatory sanctions
areas of economic activity which have not clearly been
covered by previous resolutions of the Council. We
share the belief that by adopting such measures now
the Council has taken a step of double significance.
First, it brings an additional category of commercial
transactions,
namely, insurance, trade names and
franchises, clearly within the category of prohibited
activity and should therefore put an end to them.
Secondly, it should serve to bring home to the illegal
authorities in Salisbury and their supporters that the
international community has now decided to increase
its pressure by applying an extension of sanctions: My
delegation believes that these new measures will
provide an additional warning and disabuse those
elements in Salisbury who may still naively believe that
sanctions will slowly be relaxed and will eventually
disappear.
32. It is for these reasons that my delegation
supported the resolution we have just adopted.
33. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I join with the others in offering you
my congratulations
upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for April. You
are assured of the full co-operation of the United
States delegation. I immediately congratulate you on
bringing in as the first resolution under your regime one
that is unanimous and therefore unique. I also extend
our appreciation to Ambassador Boya of Benin, our
President during the Council’s hyperactive month of
March.
34. This is the first Council meeting convened
specifically on the question of Rhodesian’ sanctions
since 1973. I welcome this meeting because it provides
an opportunity further to strengthen those sanctions.
It offers an opportunity as well to reaffirm our strong
opposition to the illegal Smith regime in Rhodesia and
to express the Council’s full support for the urgent
transfer of power to the majority of Rhodesia’s citizens.
35. For these reasons, the United States was pleased
to join other members of the Council in sponsoring
and adopting unanimously the resolution before us. We
support fully the extension of sanctions against
the illegal Government in Rhodesia to include insurance, trade names and franchises,
36. The United States has scrupulously enforced
sanctions against Rhodesia, except with regard to the
importation of Rhodesian minerals under the so-called
Byrd Amendment. The United States reports to the
Security Council’s sanctions Committee
in detail

every shipload of these minerals imported into the
United States under this domestic legislation. From its
very first days in office the Administration of President
Ford has supported the repeal of the Byrd Amendment.
This continues to be United States policy. We wish
once again to be able to say that the United States is
in full compliance with United Nations sanctions. We
recognize the need to repeal the Byrd Amendment not
only for the intended effect in Southern Rhodesia
but also in the interest of upholding our international
obligations. In the same spirit, my delegation urges
the Governments of those nations whose major violations are less well publicized to take all appropriate
steps to tighten their administration
of the sanctions
imposed by Council resolution 253 (1968).
37. The United States remains firm both in support
of United Nations resolutions which have condemned
the illegal Smith regime and in our commitment to the
implementation
of the principles of self-determination
and majority rule in Rhodesia. The position of the
United States on this matter was stated most recently
by President Ford in Chicago when he said, “The
United States is totally dedicated to seeing to it that
the majority becomes the ruling power in Rhodesia.”
The President added, “If we believe in the right of the
majority to rule in that situation,, there has to be a
change in the power as far as the Government is
concerned”.
38. The Council’s unanimous adoption of this resolution must constitute a signal to the Smith regime that
it cannot expect support from anyone in the international community in pursuing a policy which is morally
and politically wrong.
39. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): Mr. President, let me first of all congratulate you on your
assumption of the important post of President of the
Security Council and also to wish you success in your
responsible work. Permit me too to express my gratitude to your predecessor, the representative of Benin,
Mr. Boya, for his skilful conduct of the proceedings
of the Council last month.
40. The question
of the situation in Southern
Rhodesia, which is today before the Council, is an
extremely clear question. The fact is that for almost
12 years now the African people of Zimbabwe have
been oppressed by the white racist minority regime,
and the Security Council and the General Assembly
have acknowledged the right of the people of Zimbabwe
to self-determination
and independence in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). Both the Council and
the Assembly have recognized the legitimacy of the
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe to ensure that they
can exercise these rights. Finally, by decisions of the
Council, enforcement
measures of an international
legal character have been adopted against the Smith
regime, and the Council has adopted binding sanctions
against that regime.

41, Unfortunately,
these Council decisions relating
to sanctions have not been fully complied with. There
are overt violators of these sanctions, for instance,
the United States, which, in spite of Council decisions, has continued to carry out massive imports of
chrome and other raw materials from Southern
Rhodesia. There are also numerous covert violations
of sanctions on the part of certain other Western
Powers known to members of the Council. First
among the violators is South Africa, which is an
inveterate and, as recent events have demonstrated,
extremely dangerous enemy of all African peoples.

the Council in the very near future should reconsider
this question and adopt more far-reaching measures
against the racist regime of Southern Rhodesia.
45. We should bear in mind in this connexion that the
Council’s task is not only the strengthening of sanetions against Southern Rhodesia. Another and even
more important task is to achieve one of the major
goals of the United Nations in this regard, that of
ridding the people of Zimbabwe of the tyranny of the
white racists. This is an important part of the final
elimination
of the last hotbeds of colonialism and
racism in the world.

42. Of course, the Council’s first task is to put an end
to this violation of the sanctions and thus to strengthen
the blockade of the racist Southern Rhodesian regime.
The Council’s second important task is the intensification and expansion of sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia, and there are very good grounds for this.
If so far the Council has not been in a position to
do this, the responsibility for that fact lies with those
Western Powers which, by abusing the veto, have
repeatedly undermined more effective measures. It is
well known that the United Kingdom nine times and
the United States twice have unjustifiably
applied
the veto in defence of the Smith regime. This should
be particularly recalled in circumstances where certain
Powers in words claim the role of friends of Africa,
although their deeds testify something
different.
Accordingly, although we could agree with the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom
that the witching hour has passed, it would be wrong
to suppose that the witches referred to do not remain
among us. Such connivance with regard to the racist
regime of Salisbury should be ended.

46. The Soviet Union’s position of principle has
always been, and remains, one of whole-hearted
co-operation with the national liberation movements
and colonial peoples struggling for their freedom and
national independence. Only recently, at the twentyfifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, a foreign policy programme of further struggle
for peace and international co-operation and for the
freedom and independence of peoples was adopted.
Along with the measures contained in this programme
with regard to the further struggle for’the strengthening
of international
peace and the development
of
co-operation among States, there is also the following
statement of principle with regard to the struggle for
freedom and the independence of peoples:
“To consider as crucial the international
task
of completely eliminating all vestiges of the system
of colonial oppression, infringement of the equality
and independence of peoples and all seats of colonialism and racialism.”

43. As we know from its special report on the
expansion of sanctions which is now before the Council, the sanctions Committee studied in d.etail the
question of applying against Southern Rhodesia all
the measures provided for in Article 41 of the Charter;
in other words, the complete interruption of rail, sea,
air, postal, telegraph, radio and other means of communication with the Smith regime. These proposals
were supported in the Committee by 10 delegations.
We also know that the General Assembly, in resolution 3397 (XXX), once again stated its conviction
that the scope of sanctions against the illegal Smith
regime should be expanded to include all the measures
provided for pursuant to Article 41 of the Charter.

It is precisely this that will be the guiding principle
of the Soviet Union in its relentless struggle against
colonialism and racism.
47. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Mr. President, let me
begin by expressing my delegation’s particular satisfaction at seeing you, the representative of the People’s
Republic of China, over this meeting. I do so with the
full knowledge that your great qualities will be fully
and beneficially applied to the Council’s work. MY
delegation pledges its fullest co-operation with you.
48. I wish also to express my appreciation to Ambassador Boya of Benin who so genially, impartially and
skilfully guided our long and difficult deliberations
during the month of March.

44. The Soviet delegation believes that these considerations are entirely justified. In the light of these
well-known and obvious facts, the Soviet delegation
would have preferred to see the Council adopt today
a stronger, more comprehensive resolution against
the racist Smith regime. However, since the initiators
of the resolution, the African countries themselves,
view it only as an interim measure, pending the
Council’s future adoption of more decisive measures
against the racist Smith regime, the Soviet delegation
supported this resolution. We did so in the belief that

49. The unanimous decision the Council has just
taken on the question of the expansion of sanctions
aginst the illegal Smith regime in Southern Rhodesia
is of especial relevance and should be seen against
the background of the intensification of the struggle for
the liberation of Zimbabwe.
50. That the downfall of the racist Smith regime is
inevitable is now widely acknowledged. Thus, as We
6

observe the efforts of that rkgime to cling desperately
to its mythical notion of racial superiority and to
continue its domination over the people of Zimbabwe,
we recognize that the time is ripe for the Council
-indeed, for the international community as a wholeto articulate a programme of action which would
supplement the efforts of the people of Zimbabwe to
bring the racists to heel. It is in this context that my
delegation is of the view that the r&gime of sanctions
established by the Council through its resolutions 253
(1968) and 277 (1970) can only be considered as a partial
measure and that it is as timely as it is appropriate
for the Council to take decisions which will widen the
scope of sanctions imposed upon the regime in
Southern Rhodesia.

’

and competent guidance of Ambassador Huang Hua of
the People’s Republic of China, the Council will make
new progress towards fulfilling its responsibilities.
55. My delegation would like to congratulate Ambassador Boya of Benin for the patience, impartiality and
distinction he demonstrated as he presided over our
work during March, a month during which the Council
took up questions both important and difficult.
56. We should like also to congratulate our good
friend Ambassador Boyd of Panama on his appointment as Minister for External Relations of his country.
While we are sincerely sorry that he is to leave, we
are pleased that he has been called to take up that
important governmental
duty and that he will thus
be able to place all his talents at the service of his
country, whose interests he defended with brilliance,
dignity and devotion at the United Nations and in
particular in the Security Council. We extend to him
our best wishes for success in his new duties.

51. During the course of discussions in the sanctions
Committee, my delegation fully favoured the adoption of measures which would have effected the expansion of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in
accordance with all the provisions of Article 41 of the
Charter. We.would have been more satisfied had the
Council been able to reach agreement with regard to
other proposals made in the Committee.

57. The Security Council met today to adopt new
measures against the minority racist rigime of Southern
Rhodesia, which in 1965 unilaterally
declared the
independence of the territory. Romania stated at that
time that it did not recognize the so-called Republic
of Rhodesia,
illegally
proclaimed
by the racist
authorities of Salisbury. The position of my Government in this connexion remains unchanged.

52. But, as we widen the scope of sanctions against
the Smith rCgime, we must redouble our efforts to
secure the effective implementation
of existing
measures. Vigilance, not relaxation, is required. For
the Smith regime, which has managed to survive sanctions for 10 long years, has been buttressed by the
actions of some States whose economic and other
interests have been accorded pre-eminence over the
expressed aspirations of the majority of the oppressed
people of Zimbabwe to the right to rule their own land
and to live in it with dignity. If all States took the
appropriate steps to ensure at the national level that
the application of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia
is fully effective, our work would bl rendered less
difficult.

58. We scrupulously
and completely
respect all
United Nations resolutions, including decisions of the
Security Council, concerning mandatory sanctions
against the rigime of Southern Rhodesia. As is known,
Romania maintains no relations whatever with the
illegal rCgime of Salisbury.
59. My country has consistently advocated recognition of the rights of the people of Zimbabwe to selfgovernment and the establishment of a Government
reflecting the composition
of the population of the
territory which would guarantee broad democratic
freedoms and ensure the accession of the country to
independence.

53. My delegation is fully aware of the spirit of
compro’mise which was an intrinsic element in the
unanimity of our decision today. The resolution we
adopted earlier expands the sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia to include the areas of insurance, trade names
and franchises. My delegation is convinced that the
scrupulous observance of these and other sanctions by
all countries would help in the achievement of the
ultimate goal of bringing to an end the domination of
Southern Rhodesia by the illegal minority rkgime and
the frustration of the will of the people of Zimbabwe.

60. The prospects for decolonization
in other parts
of southern Africa have been enhanced by the accession to independence of Mozambique and Angola. My
country has warmly welcomed the decision of the
People’s Republic of Mozambique to apply economic
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.

54. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation
from
French): I should like to begin by stating how pleased
my delegation is to see, you, Sir, presiding over the
work of the Security Council. I should like to extend
to you, on behalf of the Romanian delegation, our
warmest congratulations as you take up the duties of
President of the Council and to assure you that we will
fully co-operate with you in the discharge of your
duties. We are convinced that, under the enlightened

61. We believe that the Security Council has the
duty to pursue relentlessly its action against the
minority racist rbgime of Southern Rhodesia in order to
ensure the freedom and independence of the people
of Zimbabwe. Now, 10 years after the Council adopted
the first embargo measures against Southern Rhodesia,
we are obliged to admit that the Council’s action
has not succeeded in putting an end to the rebellion
in Southern Rhodesia. The fact that the minority rkgime
7

is still in power there demonstrates that the sanctions
imposed by resolutions 232 (1966), 253 (1968) and 277
(1970) have either proved to be insufficient or have
been violated by some States interested in maintaining
the status ~LIO in Rhodesia. The sad reality is that the
illegal rbgime of Salisbury maintains itself by means
of foreign aid given to it by some States, in particular
by South Africa, in violation of the mandatory sanctions decreed by the Council.

myself with the congratulations offered you by other
members of the Council who have already expressed
satisfaction at seeing you, the representative of
China, a country with which France is happy to enjoy
the most friendly relations, assume the presidency of
the Council for April. I am convinced that under your
authority our proceedings will be conducted with
effectiveness and wisdom.
68. Permit me too to request Mr. Paqui to be good
enough to convey to Ambassador Boya our particular
gratitude for his having with such impartiality
and
courtesy conducted our extremely delicate proceedings
in March.

62. In view of the fact that the situation prevailing
in Southern Rhodesia constitutes a threat to international peace and security, the Romanian delegation
believes that the political and economic pressures
brought to bear on the illegal rCgime of Salisbury
should be increased. We must therefore strengthen the
measures that have been undertaken in order to
establish a complete and efficient system of sanctions
that would compel the r&gime of Ian Smith to renounce
its unilateral action of 1965 and to transfer political
power to a Government representing the whole of the
population of the territory.

69. I should like to take this opportunity to convey
my best wishes for success to Ambassador Boyd,
whose Government has just appointed him Minister
for External Relations, an office of very great responsibility. The distinguished diplomatic qualities displayed by Ambassador Boyd at the United Nations
are the best earnest of his success in the important
office to which he has been called.

63. The Romanian delegation therefore supports with
satisfaction the sanctions Committee’s
recommendations to expand the scope of the mandatory sanctions
against the racist r6gime of Southern Rhodesia.
I should like to take this opportunity
to thank the
Committee and, in particular, its former Chairman,
Ambassador Salim of Tanzania, as well as its new
Chairman, Ambassador Akhund of Pakistan, for their
tireless efforts to achieve a consensus on the measures
to be recommended to the Council.

70. The position of France with regard to the application of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia is well
known. On 29 May 1968 we voted in favour of imposing
mandatory sanctions against Rhodesia [resolution 253
(1968)] in order to provide the administering Power
with the assistance it sought. We established nationally
a system of regulations and penalties designed to deter
and punish all infractions. The system is well known for
its severity. We have striven since that time to keep
a very close watch. We felt that action incumbent
upon us because of the justice of the cause we were
defending, our sense of responsibility and our obligation to apply the measures taken within the framework
of Chapter VII of the Charter. Some results have
been obtained. They remain imperfect. As a member
of the sanctions Committee since 1968, the French
delegation has been in a position to appreciate the
inadequacies of the system we established. Accordingly, on many occasions we have supported initiatives
to increase the Committee’s effectiveness. Similarly,
we determined to give our entire support to the new
proposals for expansion just adopted.

64. Of course, the extension of sanctions to insurance, trade names and commercial franchises is a
very important measure towards the establishment
of a more effective sanctions system. That is why the
Romanian delegation supported the draft resolution
which has just been unanimously adopted. It is pleased
that the draft was sponsored by all Council members,
65. At the same time, and after having studied the
special report of the sanctions Committee,
the
Romanian delegation would like to state that it shares
the position expressed by the majority of the Committee members with regard to the need for the Council
to apply all the measures stipulated in Article 41 of
the Charter and to extend sanctions to South Africa.

71. However limited the effect of sanctions on the
evolution of the Rhodesia question, we share the view
of those who believe that, far from easing pressure
on the Salisbury authorities, the international community should maintain and even intensify it. The
French delegation therefore had no difficulty in
supporting the draft resolution the Council has just
adopted unanimously. We were even willing to sponsor
it, as the text demonstrates a genuine effort to obtain
the broadest possible support within the Council. The
French delegation has already had occasion to say in
the sanctions Committee that it approved the recommendations submitted to us, and we do feel that the
cancellation of insurance policies relating to goods
coming from or entering Southern Rhodesia is entirely

66. In conclusion, I should like to state that Romania
will do everything in its power to work towards the
recognition of and respect for the right of the peoples
of southern Africa to freedom and independence and
towards the elimination of the policy of racial discrimination and ~~pnrtlzeicl. I should like to assure the
Council that my country will act resolutely in the future
to implement United Nations resolutions, including
resolutions establishing mandatory sanctions against
the illegal rCgime of Southern Rhodesia.
67. Mr. de GUTRINGAUD
(France) (it~terprvfntior~
jbo/n French): Mr. President, I should like to associate
8

justified because it concerns international transactions
forbidden under resolution 253 (1968). We also most
willingly supported the recommendations
relating to
the extension of sanctions to franchises and trade
names.

on the occasion of Ambassador Boyd’s appointment as
Minister for External Relations. He will be with us
next week and will have an opportunity to express his
thanks personally.
79. With regard to the resolution just adopted
unanimously, I would once again like to note that the
delegation of Panama has not changed its conduct over
the year and has always made its position clear: it
wishes to co-operate so that all resolutions adopted
with regard to the present Government of usurpers
in Southern Rhodesia will be effectively complied
with.

72. The unanimous adoption of the recommendations submitted by the sanctions Committee leads
me quite naturally to address myself to its former
Chairman, Ambassador Salim of Tanzania. I should
like to convey to him the sincere congratulations of my
delegation. It was thanks to his constructive and
effective approach that the Committee was able to
conclude its work successfully. I should also like to
congratutate Ambassador Akhund, who has just been
unanimously elected to the chairmanship
of the
Committee for 1976. I should like to assure him of the
whole-hearted support of the French delegation in his
new tasks.

80. Given its position against colonization,
the
Government of Panama wishes once again to state that
it condemns all kinds of discrimination
and feels
solidarity with the people of Zimbabwe in its desire to
put a speedy end to the illegal rCgime that has been
imposed upon the majority of the population
of
Southern Rhodesia by a racist minority.

73. The technical aspect of the text we have adopted
should not allow us to forget the political dimensions
of the problem involved. Our objective in imposing
sanctions is nothing less than the restoration of justice
by the implementation of majority rule in Rhodesia.
Need I remind members that as far as the Council
is concerned it is the United Kingdom, the administering Power, that has the primary responsibility of
taking measures appropriate to the circumstances to
put an end to the Rhodesian rebellion.

81. As the Council can observe from our letter to
the Secretary-General,
distributed
as document
S/12027 on 29 March, Panama is itself experiencing a
similarly unjust situation because of a tiny group of
people living in the Canal Zone

74. it will surprise no one that France and its partners
in the European Community “vigorously support the
objectives laid down by the British Government on
22 March and the efforts it is making to achieve them”
[S/12039]. I am using the,terms of the joint declaration recently adopted by the European Council, which
has already been referred to by my colleague from the
United Kingdom. Of course, my delegation will support all the efforts of the administering Power to put
an end to a state of affairs we all find reprehensible.

Thus our people feels great brotherhood
people of Zimbabwe.

“who are pressing for the maintenance of sinecures
and discriminatory
practices in a colonial situation
that is clearly unfair to the Government and people
of Panama and contrary to the letter and spirit not
only of the Charter of the United Nations but also of
several General Assembly resolutions.”
with the

82. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, since this is our
first meeting in April, please accept my warm personal
congratulations and those of my delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
current month. We have full confidence in you]
wisdom, in your balanced judgement and in your long
experience. Those, together with your well-known
talents, give us full assurance that the Council under
your leadership will continue to work in the constructive and fruitful manner in which it has started its
work today.

75. In conclusion, I should like to express the strong
hope that the Council’s unanimous vote, which reflects
the determination of the world community, will help
make the Salisbury authorities understand that it is
time finally to choose the path of justice and reason.
76. Mr. STAGG (Panama)(irzte,p~~tcrtic)n~om
Spanis&: Mr. President, at the very outset let me express
to you our delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you serve
as President of the Security Council during the month
of April. We know you are an experienced and talented
diplomat, and we are convinced you will guide our work
efficiently and to a good end.

83. I should also like to express my delegation’s
sincere appreciation and pay my own personal respects
to Ambassador Boya, who served with such distinction and equanimity as President of the Council during
March, a month which kept the Council, and especially
the delegation of Benin, quite busy with many difficult
questions.

77. We should also like to acknowledge the wisdom
with which Mr. Boya, representative of Benin, guided
the debates during March, and particularly during the
discussion of the Angola question.

84. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Boyd on his recent appointment
as
Minister for External Relations of Panana. I, for one,
having been associated with our former Panamanian

78. I wish also to express my delegation’s thanks for
the words of appreciation uttered by various speakers
9

colleague for so many years in several bodies of the
United Nations, including the Council, will miss him
very much. I ask the delegation of Panama to convey
to him our best wishes for the discharge of his present
higher responsibilities for the benefit of his country
and of the international community.

encounter legislative limits in taking the necessary
steps to implement or expand sanctions. Such was
the case with Italy, as shown by the fact that for the
implementation
of the provisions of resolution 253
(1968) the Italian Parliament
had to adopt specific
legislation on the subject in order to amend previous
laws. As a result of the inquiry undertaken by the
Italian authorities in view of the new proposals
suggested by the representative
of Tanzania, the
Italian Government came to the conclusion it was
in a position to agree to the extension of sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia to trade names, franchises
and insurance. My delegation has thus been glad to
sponsor the draft resolution with the other 14 members.
of the Council, the more so since, in our opinion, it
lends additional impetus to the action decided upon in
resolution 253 (1968) and supplements that resolution.
If during the implementation
of these sanctions further
legislative action appears to be required for technical
reasons, the Italian Government will not fail immediately to submit to Parliament the necessary proposals
for its approval.

85. The decision we have just taken could not be
more timely. It comes indeed at a time when a deep
and justified concern is more and more felt in the
international
community
about the situation
in
southern Africa, and in Southern Rhodesia in particular. The meetings we recently had on Mozambique and Angola were the first natural reflection of
this increasing concern, as well as of the reaction of
the African countries and the world community
as
a whole to the course of events taking place in the
area. Whatever the differences in the views we may
hold as individual members of the Council on some
aspects of the situation, I believe we all agree that
southern Africa is now at the centre of attention in
the body of the United Nations mainly responsible
for peace and international security. Our unanimous
decision of today bears witness to this commonly
shared sense of responsibility.

90. The sanctions imposed on Southern Rhodesia
by the Council have shown the impressive cohesion
of the international community in its struggle against
Ian Smith’s illegal minority regime. Sanctions have
given his minority regime concrete evidence of its
complete isolation, providing the majority at the same
time with a clear demonstration
of the support it
receives from the international community.

86. The position of my own Government
on the
latest developments in southern Africa has already
been set forth in the statements I made on 17 March
[189lst
meeting]
and again on 31 March [1905th
mwting],
when the question of Angola was considered.
87. The Council has acted today on the basis of the
special report of the sanctions Committee.
This is a
commendable document which stands as evidence of
the concurrence of all Council members in a common
effort which draws its strength from the conviction
that we are pursuing the right course and aiming at
the right goal.

91. At the same time, sanctions have been a tangible
test for each country to verify its capacity to conform
to standards of solidarity, without which no international action can be efficient. Thus they continue to
represent a highly meaningful test case for Member
States. The opportunity is there for all to respond
by demonstrating,
in applying the sanctions firmly,
their clear will to support the Charter and the ideals
contained therein at whatever cost to national firms or
individuals. That was the will of my country, which
used to have a large number of economic interests
and exchanges of goods with Southern Rhodesia prior
to its breakaway from the United Kingdom. All trade
relations have been drastically forbidden by Italian
law in particularly restrictive terms. Suffice it to say
that any transgressor of sanctions is punished with
two years’ imprisonment.
That was the wit1 also of
the nine countries of the European Community, a5
stated explicitly a few days ago by the European
Council in its declaration on Rhodesia, to which the
representatives of the United Kingdom and France
have already referred in their statements. The nine
after confirming their statement of 23 February and
indicating their support of the objectives and the
efforts of the British Government, declared:

88. Indeed my delegation considers very positive the
fact that, overcoming some differences of view on the
approach to be followed, the sanctions Committee
was able to come up with a number of practical
measures broadening and strengthening the sanctions
currently applied by Member States against the Smith
regime in Southern Rhodesia. I refer, in particular,
to the broad consensus reached on measures suggested
by the delegation of Tanzania concerning insurance,
trade names and franchises. My Government firmly
supported the adoption of such measures, as appears
in paragraphs 16, 17 and 18 of the annex to the report
and as was indicated by the representative of Italy at
the 253rd meeting of the Committee on 30 October
1975.4

I may recall here that before giving its open
support to the specific proposals of the representative
of the United Republic of Tanzania, my Government
had carefully verified that they were compatible with
its current legal and commercial system. It is well
known that in the field of sanctions some countries

89.

“[The Nine] appeal solemnly to the Rhodesian
minority, which at present is opposing a system of
majority rule, to accept a rapid and peaceful transition to such a system.
10

“They confirm that they will continue to apply
strictly the Security Council decisions concerning
Rhodesia.” [S/12039.]

Council’s adoption last month of the proposal on
Mozambique,
has provided a further manifestation
of the determination
of the United Nations to do all
that is necessary to help establish a constitutional
Government
based on majority rule in Southern
Rhodesia. Although it may not go as far as some
Member States would have liked, my delegation
considers it practical and useful and a step in the right
direction. We are convinced that all States will support
the proposal and that their full enforcement
of
the new prohibitions contained in the resolution will
once again demonstrate their continued support of the
just cause of the people of Zimbabwe.

92. Speaking for my delegation, I should like in
conclusion to assure the President and members of
the Council that Italy will faithfully fulfil the new
obligations proposed in the report submitted by the
sanctions Committee sand embodied in the resolution
which the Council has unanimously adopted.
93. Mr. KANAZAWA
(Japan): I should like to begin
my statement by congratulating you, Sir, upon your
assumption of the presidency for the month of April.
In view of the friendly relations and the close cooperation existing between our two countries, my
delegation feels particularly happy to see you presiding
over the Council. I am confident that your outstanding
qualities as an experienced diplomat will enable you
to guide our deliberations smoothly and that with you
in the chair the Council will be able to discharge its
responsibilities successfully.

98. To our regret, the recent talks between Mr. Ian
Smith and Mr. Joshua Nkomo of the African National
Council have broken down. Mr. Smith, contrary to
all our hopes, still seems far from agreeing to the
principle of majority rule to be achieved within a
reasonable time and in accordance with acceptable
procedures. In the present circumstances, under which
the frustration of the people of Zimbabwe is increasing,
it is more urgent and necessary than ever for the
international
community
to help create conditions
which will bring a peaceful transition from minority
rule to majority rule.

94. I wish also to pay tribute to Ambassador Boya
of Benin for his admirable service as President of the
Council last month, a very busy month when, as we
all know, the Council dealt with questions affecting
Africa and the Middle East almost continuously. As
a distinguished diplomat, Ambassador Boya made most
valuable contributions to the Council’s success in
dealing with these important questions. We were all
most fortunate to have him as President.

99. Japan has faithfully enforced the existing sanctions against Southern Rhodesia, and we shall enforce
with equal vigour the new sanctions now imposed.
In this spirit we were happy to become a co-sponsor
of the draft resolution just adopted and voted in favour
of it. My delegation hopes that these additional sanctions will help compel the Smith regime to realize that
the historical evolution in Southern Rhodesia is irreversible and that no real solution is possible except
that of the establishment of majority rule.

95. I wish also to take this opportunity to join the
previous speakers in congratulating Ambassador Boyd
of Panama on his accession to the high post of
Minister for External Relations of his country and to
wish him every success in his new post.

100. Finally, I wish to reaffirm that the Government and people of Japan will fully support the inalienable right of the people of Zimbabwe to self-determination and will continue to co-operate with other
Member States to achieve United Nations objectives
in Southern Rhodesia.

96. The sanctions Committee considered last year
the question of the expansion of mandatory sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia. In considering the proposal
in the Committee that the current scope of sanctions
be expanded under Article 41 of the Charter, my
delegation shares the belief that, in view of the lack
of progress in reaching a solution in Southern Rhodesia,
additional international pressure, both political and
economic, was needed to induce the Smith regime to
seek a negotiated settlement for the termination of
minority rule. Therefore, my delegation took an active
part in the Committee’s consideration of the question
of the expansion of sanctions. We wish to express our
satisfaction
that the Committee
accommodated
divergent views and finally decided unanimously to
recommend to the Council the agreed areas for the
expansion of sanctions.

101. Mr. SUNDBERG (Sweden): Mr. President, first
of all my delegation would like to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month. We pledge our unreserved co-operation with you in your important task.
Your wide diplomatic experience and imperturbable
calm will certainly be great assets in the Council’s
work.
102. My delegation would also like to express its
gratitude to Ambassador Boya of Benin, who had
the heavy task of presiding over our deliberations
during the very busy month of March.

97. Today the Council unanimously adopted the draft
resolution in document S/12037 and thereby included
the areas of insurance, trade names and franchises
within the scope of the mandatory sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia. This decision, following the

103. Further, on this occasion I should like to express
our special thanks also to Ambassador Salim of the
United Republic of Tanzania, under whose wise and
11

skilful chairmanship the sanctions Committee laid the
groundwork for the decision we have taken here today.

saying anything that the outgoing President would not
say when I tell you and the other members of the
Council who spoke kindly of him that his efforts and
the results obtained have been overestimated. Having
recently assumed its role in the Council the Beninese
delegation has only tried to do its best. It humbly
believes that all that was achieved during the preceding
month can be ascribed to all the members of the Council in general and to the members of the non-aligned
movement in particular. In any case, please be assured
that the message that you have addressed to the
outgoing President will be faithfully relayed to him.

104. Economic sanctions are one of the most important means which the Charter puts at the disposal
of the Security Council for the preservation of international peace and security. It is the duty of the Council
and its sanctions Committee to see to it that the system
of sanctions against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia becomes as effective an instrument
of
pressure as possible.
105. With regard to the scope of the sanctions, the
Swedish Government has consistently advocated that
they be extended to cover further fields, as envisaged
by Article 41 of the Charter. Together with other
delegations in the sanctions Committee, we devoted
considerable effort to this end during 1975. The efforts
resulted in the Committee’s
report to the Council,
which in turn formed the basis for the resolution
just adopted. It is my delegation’s hope that the Council, in taking this decision unanimously,
will in its
measure have contributed to a further tightening of
the screws on the illegal minority regime. It is also a
warning to that regime that the United Nations is
firmly committed to continuing and intensifying its
action until that regime gives way to a Government
which is representative of the will of the people. My
delegation also proposes that the search for agreement
on still further extensions of the sanctions should
continue in the Committee
during the forthcoming
year, and we shall contribute actively in that search.

109. I should like to take this opportunity
to
discharge a pleasant duty, that of extending to you,
Mr. President, the most sincere congratulations of
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of April. Your long
experience both in the political life of the People’s
Republic of China and in diplomacy constitute, I am
convinced, a sure guarantee that under your presidency
our work will be crowned with success. We should like
to assure you of the full co-operation of our delegation.
110. It is a particular pleasure for me to extend to
Ambassador Boyd of Panama our most sincere congratulations on the occasion of his appointment to
serve as Minister for External Relations of his country.
We are convinced that in that high post he will be
successful because of the talent and the tact that he
demonstrated during the time we had the advantage of
getting to know him and to appreciate him.

106. The decision of the Government of Mozambique
some time ago to close its borders with Southern
Rhodesia represents a most important step forward.
It should serve as an example for those countries
which by deliberately failing to apply the sanctions
in part or in full bear a grave responsibility for the
failure so far to achieve the intended result. It imposes
an added obligation on the Council and its sanctions
Committee to intensify further its supervision of the
sanctions in order to close as far as possible all loopholes and lacunae.

111. The resolution which has just been unanimously
adopted is, to be sure, limited in scope, but by
expanding the sanctions against the illegal regime of
Ian Smith it eloquently demonstrates that all members
of the Council condemn the minority racist regime of
Ian Smith and wish to move forward by a further
tightening of the screws on the illegal regime in
Zimbabwe.
112. In looking through the report of the sanctions
Committee, my delegation is extremely pleased to see
the steps which led to the unanimous adoption of the
draft resolution
contained in document S/12037.
Coming after the courageous political act taken by
Mozambique when it decided to implement fully the
sanctions against Rhodesia, this decision should make
the white minority rkgime of Zimbabwe realize that it
would be in its interest to abandon its habitual
political short-sightedness,

107. But time is short. The Secretary-General’s
words some time ago about an escalating crisis and
possible bloodshed in the area should serve as a
warning to the world. The rising tensions within
Southern Rhodesia and the very understandably
growing impatience of the majority there make it
imperative for the Council to continue exploring all
avenues towards bringing maximum pressure to bear
on the present rulers in Salisbury. I should like to
conclude by pledging my delegation’s full co-operation
with all members in this quest. It is now more than
ever important to demonstrate the full solidarity of
the United Nations with the majority in its struggle
for a free and independent Zimbabwe.
108.
I9’rrnclr):

Mr.

113. My delegation is pleased to see the United
States among the sponsors of the draft resolution. its
presence there demonstrates the desire of this countrr
not only to implement the sanctions against the illegal
Smith regime but also to ensure that the spirit and
letter of Article 41 of the Charter will be respected,
for, in fact, what is important is not sponsoring a text
and even less voting for it, but ensuring that it is
strictly respected. That is why my delegation interprets

PAQUI
(Benin) (i/lterpretrrtion
,from
Mr. President, I do not believe that I am
12

_,..

the action of the United States as a solemn commitment to do everything to see to it that the sanctions
will no longer be violated.
114. The unanimous decision of the Council is, in
my delegation’s view, the best way to make the illegal
minority regime installed in Salisbury see reason and
the best way to give the struggling people of Zimbabwe
effective support which will help it in achieving final
victory, namely, the establishment of a black majority
Government in Zimbabwe, a Government which all
Africans hope to see.

119. Also, I should like to express our satisfaction
at the fact that the United States was among the
delegations which sponsored and voted for this draft
resolution. On this occasion I repeat the appeals made
to the United States by other delegations concerning
the application of sanctions against Rhodesia. I also
express our satisfaction that the United States delegation at least voted on the side of the black majority
in Rhodesia without feeling that this special majority
was engaged in any kind of conspiracy against
democracy.
120. The PRESIDENT
(tmnslatio~z J%N~ Chitleseh
Now allow me, speaking as the representative of
CHINA,
to make a statement on the extension of
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.

(Libyan
Arab Republic):
115. Mr, KIKHIA
Mr. President, first of all I should like to express
to you the congratulations of the Libyan delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for April. We are sure that under your wise guidance
our work will end in success. I should also like, on
this occasion, to stress the existence of the good
relations between my country and yours, the great
country of China and the great Chinese nation, which
contributed to the shaping of political history in
ancient and modern times.

121. The Chinese Government has always stood for
strict sanctions against the Southern Rhodesian
authorities. We consider that this is the unshirkable
responsibility
of the Security Council as well as a
support for the just struggle of the Zimbabwe people
for independence and liberation. Nearly eight years
have passed since the Council adopted resolution 253
(1968) on sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.
However, the result of the sanctions has not been
satisfactory.
According
to the incomplete
data
compiled by the Secretariat as of 7 May 1975,’ the
value of exports from Southern Rhodesia has been
increasing annually, reaching $640 million in 1973, an
increase of more than $166 million over the year i972.
The Council should pay full attention to these serious
violations of the sanctions and take effective measures
to prevent them.

116. On behalf of the Libyan delegation, I should
like to pay a tribute to our brother, Ambassador
Boya of Benin, for his able conduct of our work during
the month of March, and also to take this occasion to
express to our ex-colleague, Ambassador Boyd of
Panama, our congratulations on his assumption of the
responsibilities of his new office of Minister for
External Relations of Panama and to wish him success.
I reiterate on this occasion the solidarity of the
Government and people of the Libyan Arab Republic
with his country, Panama, in its fight to put an end to
the colonial situation in its region.

122. Earlier last year, some third world countries
put forward in the sanctions Committee
several
concrete proposals on the expansion of sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia. The Chinese delegation
supports these proposals. Regrettably, however, these
reasonable proposals have thus far not all been
adopted. This state of affairs has been reflected in the
special report submitted by the Committee.

117. Mr. President, I should also like to join with
YOUand other colleagues in a tribute to the work done
by our brother, Mr. Salim, as the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee and also to congratulate the new
Chairman, our brother from Pakistan.

123. In the opinion of the Chinese delegation, the
measures adopted by the Council on the expansion of
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia are far from
adequate. In order to make the Council sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia more effective, it is necessary to expand them to cover South Africa and to ask
the United States to cease immediately its importing of
chrome, nickel and other materials from Southern
Rhodesia in violation of the resolution on sanctions.

118. In connexion with the draft resolution on which
we have just adopted, I limit myself to reiterating the
position of Libya, which continues the fight against
the illegal racist regime in Rhodesia. The Libyan Arab
Republic, as always, is prepared to undertake any
necessary actions to terminate the rule of the minority
racist regime of Southern Rhodesia. We believe that
SUCh a racist regime must be eliminated
and that the
People of Zimbabwe be given their freedom and
independence. Also I should like to express the hope
of the Libyan delegation that all those who sponsored
and voted for this draft will join with us in our sincere
actions and in our fight against the illegal racist regime,
because we Africans believe that these racist regimes
are OUT bitter enemies in Africa, and we think that
this international hypocrisy must come to an end and
others mustfinally choose between us and our enemies.

124. In our view, the facts show that sanctions are
not the fundamental
solution to the question of
Southern Rhodesia. With the strengthening of the
struggle of the Zimbabwe people and the African
countries
against the Southern Rhodesian racist
regime, that regime, with the abetment of its supporters, is bound to step up its counter-revolutionary
dual tactics of deception and rabid repression to
13

undermine the just struggle.of the Zimbabwe people.
A fundamental solution to the question’. of Southern
Rhodesia can be found only.by relying on the strength
of the Zimbabwe people persevering in unity and
struggle, guarding against ,..fhe’ new super-Power
schemes of division, disintegration,
infiltration
and
control and carrying through to the end the struggle
against the Southern Rhodesian racist regime and for
the national liberation of the Zimbabwe people with
the support of the people of Africa and the rest of the
world. We hold that the Council should call upon all
the justice-upholding
countries and peoples to give
political and material assistance to the just struggle
of the Zimbabwe people.
125. The Chinese Government
and people have
always firmly supported the Zimbabwe people in their

struggle against colonialism and racism and for national
liberation. We will always stand together with the
Zimbabwe people and render them assistance within
our capabilities until they win final victory.

.Se,s,si~h,Pkwry
Meetings,
4 S/AC.15/SR.253.
J See Offlcicrl Racords
Special S~cpplermwt
No.

2122nd meeting, pa&. 36.
of the Security

Councd,

Thirtieth

2, vol, 11, annex VII, para. 1.

Yeor,

14
Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83.608Oi-AugUsU 1984-&i&
