UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

CONTENTS
agenda (S/Agenda/2409) , . . , #. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , , , . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda , , , . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . , , . . . . . , . . . . .

1

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the Chargi d’ Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to the PresidentoftheSecurityCouncil(S/15515)
.,....+....
...I......I..I.....

1

Provisional

S/PV.2409

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Qf$cial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered. in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

BRARY
Ml

2409th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President:

Mr. Wlodzimierz

NATORF

(Poland),

Pwscnt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama. Poland. Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2409)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December 1982 from the Chargi
d’Affaires a-i. of the Permanent Mission of
Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1551.5)

of the agenda

Adoption

16 December 1982, at 4 p.m.

of the agenda

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Letter dated 9 December from the ChargB d’Affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lesotho to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15515)
I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings of the Council on this item
12406th to 2408th nzceting], I invite the representative
of Lesotho to take a place at the Council table; I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Benin, Botswana, Egypt, Grenada, Guinea, India, Kenya. the
Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya,
Nicaragua,
Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, South Africa, Swaziland, Yugoslavia,
Zambia and Zimbabwe to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

2.

The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform

mem-

bers of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of the United Republic of Tanzania
and Yemen in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter dated 16 December from the representatives of Togo, Uganda and
Zaire [S/15526], which reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that the Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Johnstone Makatini, the representative of the African National
Congress of South Africa, during the course of the
Council’s consideration of the item ‘Complaint by
Lesotho against South Africa’ “,
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
wishes to accede to this request.
It II~.S so drcidad.

4. Mr. KAM (Panama) (intc)rpretation fi-~rn Spnnis/z): I consider it a privilege to greet you, Sir. in YOU1
capacity as President of the Council for the month
of December. My delegation extends to you its sincere
congratulations
and wishes to express publicly its
appreciation for the brilliant manner in which YOUare
conducting the work of the Council. During the days
in which you have presided over the Council, YOU
have confirmed your well-earned prestige as a talented
and skilful diplomat, This does honour to your great
country, with which Panama maintains cordial relations of friendship and co-operation.

including legal and constitutional
difficulties for some
members of the Council and for other Members of the
United Nations. Yet I must note in all frankness that
this is in contrast to the almost expeditious manner,
to the facility with which those same countries imposed
sanctions against a brother Latin American country
which early this year exercised its sacred right of
restoring its territorial integrity.

5. I wish to extend a cordial greeting to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho, Mr. Charles Molapo,
who has been with us throughout this week.
6. On behalf of Mr. Carlos Ozores and the entire
delegation of Panama, I express sincere gratitude for
the kind words which the members of the Council and
other delegations have addressed to us concerning
Panama’s presidency of the Council in November.

13. Like all other members of the Council, my delegation most vigorously condemns this new dastardly
act of unprovoked aggression by the racist r<gime
of South Africa, an act which was in flagrant violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lesotho.

7. Exactly a week ago today the international community learned with just indignation of the brutal
aggression perpetrated by the racist South African
rigime against Lesotho, which left more than 42 victims, men, women and children, and caused extensive material damage. The eloquent statement of
King Moshoeshoe II [2406th meting]. delivered with
the serene dignity that characterizes those who have
reason and justice on their side, makes it unnecessary for us to dwell on the details of that aggression,
which has been unanimously condemned by the international community.

14. My delegation expresses its gratitude to Lesotho
for its declared policy of opposition to qxrrthcid and
for its support of South African freedom fighters.
IS. We express our sympathy to the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC) and to the
oppressed people of South Africa, to whom we reaffirm our support in their struggle to eliminate rrpcwthcid and in their just struggle for liberation and the
building of a democratic society in which the South
African people will fully enjoy human rights and fundamental freedoms in conditions of equality.

8.

This new act of aggression by the South African
rCgime has now been added to the long
chain of violations which South Africa has been perpetrating consistently and arrogantly against the
Charter of the United Nations and resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

crprrrthcid

16. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

9. South Africa is continuing its unlawful occupation of Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian
people, its cruel exploitation of the people and the
natural resources of Namibia, and is continuing its
efforts to destroy the unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia.
The South African apartheid rigime has
increased its repression, indiscriminate torture, murder of workers, students and other opponents of ([porthcid, and has continued to impose death sentences
on freedom fighters. The Pretoria rCgime has intensified its acts of aggression, destabilization,
subversion and State terrorism against independent African
States, particularly
Angola, Mozambique,
Zambia
and Seychelles.

17. Mr. LEGWAILA
(Botswana): I should like to
begin by congratulating you. Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency for this month. We repose a great
deal of confidence in your ability to lead these meetings
to a successful conclusion. The same sentiments go
to your predecessor, who ably managed the affairs
of the Council last month.
18. Anyone who believes that Lesotho. completely
surrounded by South Africa and totally dependent on
it for economic survival, could be so callous. so suicidal as to allow its territory-let
alone its dangerously exposed and vulnerable capital-to
be used as
a launching-pad for a so-called terrorist campaign
mounted against South Africa by the ANC must be
SO gullible as to be irredeemably
capable of believing
anything. Just as my own country did, Lesotho proclaimed I6 years ago, on gaining its independence,
that because of its geographical predicament it would
not and could not allow its territory to be used as a
sanctuary for guerrilla activities against its powerful
neighbour. South Africa. Lesotho, like all of us around
South Africa. has remained faithful to this policy. It
has no choice.

10. Lesotho has been merely the most recent victim
of the delinquent conduct of South Africa, which is
defiantly destroying peace and endangering international security.
I I. My delegation wonders how many more acts of
aggression must South Africa perpetrate against its
neighbours, how much more racist oppression must
be tolerated, how many more victims must we mourn,
how much longer will Namibia be occupied before we
can hope that the Council decides to take effective
measures against the racist rCgime of South Africa,
including comprehensive mandatory sanctions.

19. Lesotho, more than any other country around
South Africa, has no other choice but to live in peace
with South Africa. It does not enjoy the comfort of
distance. It is totally beleaguered and ineluctably held
to ransom by geography and by one of the most brutal,

12. I know in advance that the question of imposing
sanctions against South Africa will give rise to enormous, almost insuperable, difficulties of all kinds,
2

unfeeling and merciless regimes that has ever scourged
the face of this earth. Lesotho, in other words, is the
very last country that should be suspected of harbouring. wittingly or unwittingly,
any ANC guerrillas. particularly in its capital, where some houses
are only a few metres from the fence which marks
the boundary between Lesotho and South Africa.

black South Africa? The rkgime has brutally deprived
them of their freedom and incarcerated them for life,
their only crime having been to aspire to be free and
to seek to live in peace and dignity in their own land.
Where are the Bikos, the Tiros, the Hector Petersons
and the Firsts? They have been brutally deprived of
their youthful lives, their only crime having been to
speak of freedom and justice.

20. But Lesotho. like the other majority-ruled
States
of southern Africa. has a soul it is not prepared to sell
at any price. It refuses to be intimidated:
it refuses
to be a puppet of South Africa. It refuses to give comfort to the policies of ~parthrid or to those who practise them against our fellow men in southern Africa.

25. South Africa sent its troops into Maseru last
week not to kill ANC guerrillas who were engaged in
some terrorist plot but to murder innocent refugees
and Basotho nationals in their sleep, to sow terror
among the people of Lesotho with a view to forcing
them to close their doors to refugees from South
Africa and to demonstrate in a most brutal fashion
what the future has in store for other neighbours of
South Africa. That is what we call terrorism. South
African troops have been occupying the southern
part of Angola for the past 18 months. That is terrorism. South Africa finances the terrorism of UNITA
[National Union for the Total Independence of Angola]
against the legitimate Government of Angola. That is
what we call terrorism. It gives all manner of sustenance to the National Resistance Movement in its
terrorist campaign against the legitimate Government of Mozambique. That is what we call terrorism.
It is the godfather of the so-called Lesotho Liberation
Army, whose acts of terrorism against Lesotho need
no reciting here. That is terrorism. Yes, it is responsible for the sudden proliferation
of dissident movements in the region whose murderous activities are
known to all.

21. Lesotho harbours no ANC guerrillas in Maseru
or anywhere else in its territory.
Lesotho,
like
Botswana, Mozambique,
Swaziland,
Zambia and
Zimbabwe, has given sanctuary and will continue to
give sanctuary to thousands of South Africans in
their flight to freedom from racial tyranny. They are
the innocent victims of South Africa’s murderous
raids into the neighbouring countries. The 42 victims
of South Africa’s brutal massacre in Maseru on
Thursday of last week were not freedom fighters
plotting an attack on South Africa, but innocent
refugees and Basotho nationals. They were murdered
in cold blood, not because they posed any threat to
racial tyranny in South Africa, but rather in an attempt
to intimidate Lesotho, to force it to seal its border
against the influx of refugees from South Africa.
22.

The price for the defence and preservation of
is paid in blood, the blood of the black
people of South Africa and of innocent nationals of
neighbouring States. South Africa is not embarked on
so-called political reforms: it is busy trying to reshape
racism. There is not even any attempt to get rid of
upnrthcid,
but only a deliberate campaign to protect
and preserve crpcirthcid at all costs.
rrprrrthcid

26. Yes, it is our contention that the white minority rCgime in Pretoria thrives on terrorism-terrorism perpetrated against black South Africans who
have refused and will continue to refuse and must
continue to refuse to be treated as aliens in their own
country. Aprrrtheid
is by conception,
design and
application a terrorist philosophy that, as the JohanncJ.rhtryq Star puts it. has to feed on the freedom and
happiness of the overwhelming majority of the people
of South Africa to sustain itself. The application of
the philosophy of Nprrrtheid can be enforced only
through the use of brutal force, as the 1976 massacre
of defenceless children in Soweto so brutally demonstrated. Those children paid with their very lives,
the ultimate price that the defence and preservation
of uprwthcdid exacts from its victims. They were massacred in the defence of npcrr-theid. Their young lives
were destroyed so that apcrrtheid may live.

23. Yes. South Africa’s apologists will argue that
the minority r@gime has every right to protect itself
against so-called terrorist attacks. Who perpetrates
terrorism in southern Africa, we ask. Is it those in
South Africa whose daily lives are subjected so cruelly
and so thoroughly to the inhumanities
of Npcrrthrid
and racism? Is it the thousands of refugees scattered
all over the world-men,
women and children who
have fled racial tyranny in South Africa to seek refuge
in the neighbouring States? Is it the Nelson Mandelas
or the other leaders of black South Africa incarcerated
for life? Is it the Bikos, the Tiros or the Ruth Firsts,
who have paid the heavy price for the defence and
preservation of an inhuman system which has caused
so much suffering to so many?
I

27. Lesotho does not give sanctuary to ANC guerrillas bent on overthrowing the white-minority rCgime
in Pretoria. Lesotho does not harbour terrorists in its
capital or anywhere else on its territory. Lesotho
harbours refugees, the victims of racial oppression in
South Africa. Lesotho is a defenceless victim of South
Africa’s terrorism, like the innocent refugees South
African troops mercilessly pursue into exile.

24. The perpetrator of terrorism in southern Africa
is none other than the white minority regime in South
Africa. That rCgime’s record of political intolerance
and violence is known to all. Where are the Nelson
Mandelas and several other prominent
leaders of
3

The attack left many dead, mostly children and women,
and much property and many houses were destroyed,

28. But I can assure the Council that neither Lesotho
nor the other majority-ruled free nations of southern
Africa will turn against South African refugees or
turn them over to their persecutors for the sake of
peace in servitude. It is our international obligation
as free peoples to open our doors and our hearts to
victims of political and racial tyranny in South Africa.
We will carry out this obligation
regardless of the
consequences. If the price of our uncompromising
fidelity to the principles we hold so dear as a free people is being invaded and murdered in the middle of the
night, so be it.

34. A few days before the attack on Lesotho, the
racist regime had also resumed its attacks on Mozambique, another independent country that has constantly been harassed by the racist regime of South
Africa. This latest attack on Mozambique by the racist
regime was conveyed to the Non-Aligned Group here
yesterday. It is quite clear that South Africa is prepared to extend its evil policies of apartheid beyond
its boundaries through use of its sophisticated military
power.

29. The international
community
equally has an
obligation to the victims of racial tyranny, not only
within South Africa itself but also in the countries
surrounding South Africa. The front-line States, and
that includes Lesotho and Swaziland, are acting not
only on their own behalf in looking after thousands
of refugees from South Africa; they are in fact performing a duty demanded of them by the international
community.
The international
community is therefore duty-bound to rise to the challenge and the threat
posed by South Africa to the security, the peace and
indeed the very survival of the free nations of southern Africa. Lesotho deserves not simply our sympathy
but our collective commitment
to rendering all the
necessary assistance we can to that beleaguered and
yet brave and proud action caught up in the belly of
a restless and vicious monster.

35. According to its own version, South Africa’s
attack on Lesotho was prompted by the presence of
the ANC, which was planning to attack South Africa.
The ANC is a liberation movement which operates
inside South Africa and is not only recognized by
Africa and the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
but also has the recognition and support of a much
larger part of the international
community. It is a
liberation movement dedicated to rid South Africa of
the evils there brought about by the racist system of
frptr/~hrid. It is precisely what the ANC stands for
that gives it such wide recognition in the world community. South Africa therefore has no legitimate right
of any kind to attack Lesotho. The ANC, as a liberation movement, has the full support of the OAU, and
we will continue to give it every possible assistance
in its legitimate struggle against the oppressive regime
until final victory is achieved.

30. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Kenya. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

36. Lesotho as an independent State has every right
to give assistance and sanctuary to those who have
found life intolerable in aparrhrid
South Africa. It
is the right of every State to assist the victims ofcrparthcid. and I should like to commend the Government
of Lesotho for its courage in extending its arms to
those refugees in the face of the brutal enemy which
surrounds it.

31. Mr. WABUGE
(Kenya): May I first express
my thanks to you, Mr. President, and the members
of the Council for allowing me and my delegation to
participate in this crucial debate prompted by the
racist regime of South Africa and its overall policy of
spreading rrprrrfhrid
policies to the neighbouring
States and beyond.

37. The day before yesterday, we listened with great
pain to the statement made by King Moshoeshoe of
Lesotho in the Council [ibid.]. He narrated very carefully the events of the early hours of 9 December
l982-the killing of innocent children and women and
the material damage caused in the commission Of
that overt aggression.

32. Mr. President, my delegation takes great satisfaction in seeing you, the representative of Poland,
presiding over the deliberations
at this important
debate. We of Africa are fully aware of the support
Poland has given us in the long history of the problem
we are now debating. We wish to register our appreciation for the support Poland has given us in all our
efforts to decolonize Africa.

38. South Africa’s behaviour and ill-intentions
are
known to us all. The attack was carried out to intimidate the Lesotho Government and force it to hand
over to South Africa genuine refugees who had escaped
from the repressive and oppressive racist r&-ne,
South Africa is trying to force the Government of
Lesotho to compromise and to accept the obnoxious
policies of apnr-rheid. The racist regime hates Lesotho
for the moral support that it has given to the oppressed
people of South Africa and for the help Lesotho has
given to the refugees who have fled there from South
Africa.

33. It was indeed with horror and shocked indignation that the international community learned of the
latest acts of aggression by the racist regime of South
Africa against the independent State of Lesotho, a
brutal attack on the capital of an independent State
carefully planned and carried out with a barrage of
rockets and bursts of machine-gun fire. In the course
of the attack, grenades were hurled from helicopters
onto houses. People running screaming from those
houses were gunned down by the attacking forces.
4

Y
39. In pursuance of its policies of seeking to perpetuate racist domination
in South Africa and maintaining its illegal occupation of Namibia, as well as
expanding its imperialist influence beyond its borders,
the regime has resorted to all kinds of aggression,
subversion, destabilizatioil
and terrorism against the
neighbouring independent States.
40. We recall South Africa’s repeated’ military
interventions in Angola, its occupation of the southern
part of that country, its constant acts of aggression
against Mozambique
and its attacks against Zambia
and Botswana and the other front-line States. The
attack on Seychelles by mercenaries organized by
South Africa is very fresh in our memories. Who can
believe that Seychelles, a small country very far away
from South Africa, poses any threat to warrant such
barbaric attacks by the racist regime?
41. The time has come when the international community must wake up to the gravity of the situation
in southern Africa. There is no longer any time left
for ambiguity and prevarication
over what South
Africa stands for. The time has come, as events have
proved, for the Council to be convinced that the
regime in South Africa and the system of rrpartlwid
represent a threat to international peace and security.
42. During the many years that the United Nations
has considered the problems of optrrthcid and the
serious threat coming from South Africa, a consensus
has emerged in the continent of Africa to the effect
that that evil Government must be brought to an end.
The world community
has encountered
powerful
resistance from the most powerful nations which,
although they claim to have recognized that trpartheid is a crime against the conscience and dignity of
mankind, have frustrated the efforts of the world community to take the only effective measures against that
regime. which include economic sanctions. We cannot forget that in April 198 It, after painstaking negotiations on taking concrete measures against South
Africa, the hopes of the entire world community were
shattered under the weight of a triple veto by France,
the United States and the United Kingdom, despite
a clear world-wide cry for action against South Africa.
43. It is precisely the use, or misuse, of the veto to
support Sout.h Africa that clearly encourages it to defy
the demands of the world community.
It is precisely
that kind of support and encouragement that emboldens South Africa to’ ignore the repeated appeals of
the world community. It is that support that encourages it to continue its illegal occupation of Namibia.
In ignoring the world call for the negotiation of independence for Namibia, it has found an ally to support
its utterly unrelated ideological demands. The present
impasse over Namibia’s
independence
is directly
related to the support which South Africa receives
from some of the Western Powers.
44. Enough resolutions have been adopted by both
the General Assembly and the Security Council con-

demning South Africa for its repeated acts of aggression against the neighbouring independent
States.
45. Condemnation is certainly not what will make
South Africa respect the demands of the Organization.
We have adopted enough of these resolutions.
We
want to make it clear to South Africa that the world
community is now ready to take concrete steps against
it for its continued defiance of the international
community. Therefore we urge those permanent
members of the Council that are the friends of South Africa
to declare without qualification that the situation in
South Africa poses a threat to international
peace and
security within the meaning of Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. The attack on Maser-u
was an unprovoked aggression committed
by South
Africa. We should start now all preparations
for the
effective measures and actions necessary to bring
the racist regime to its senses.
46. We remain confident that the struggle to put an
end to the apcrrrheid system will succeed. We urge the
world community to continue to give every assistance
possible to the liberation movements in South Africa
and Namibia so that they may carry on their legitimate
struggle until final victory is achieved.
47. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Benin. and I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
48. Mr. OGOUMA
(Benin) (intc~rprcttrtion
front
Frrnclz): Mr. President, first of all I should like to
express to you my appreciation for the honour you
have accorded me in permitting me to speak on behalf
of the People’s Republic of Benin before the representatives of the States members
of the Council.
I should like also to express to you the whulehearted
satisfaction of my delegation at seeing you preside
over the work of the Council at a time when the brothel
country of Lesotho has just been the victim of a dastardly and treacherous act of aggression on the part of
Pretoria’s troops. As you represent Poland, a country with which my own country has the honour of
sharing the same ideals of peace and justice, we have
no doubt that you will successfully guide the proceedings of the Council.
49. I should like also to express to your predecessor,
the representative of Panama, our great appreciation
for the way in which he conducted the business of the
Council last month.
The people of Benin
learned with consternation and indignation of the heinous act of aggression
committed against Lesotho, a friendly and fraternal
country and a member of the OAU and Member of
the United Nations. When that distressing news was
announced, the President of the People’s Republic of
Benin. head of State and President of the Natinn;ll
Executive Council, sent the following
message to

50.

-

his brother and friend. Prime Minister
Leabua Jonathan:

55. The people of Benin, who, unfortunately, know
only too well the cost of imperialistic
armed aggression from the events of 16 January 1977, share the
grief of the fraternal people of Lesotho and offer it its
militant support.

of Lesotho,

‘I We have learned with great surprise and profound indignation of the base, barbarous and inhuman act of aggression against your country and
people committed by the racist authorities of Pretoria.

56. The remarkable statement by King Moshoeshoe
before the Council [ihid.] testifies to the confidence
his people place in this important decision-making
body of the Organization.

“At this time of trial, I wish. on behalf of the
people of Benin, its vanguard party, the People’s
Revolutionary
Party of Benin, and its National
Executive Council and on my own behalf, to assure
you of our sympathy and our unswerving support.

57. Thus Benin wishes to express the hope that resolution 527 11982). adopted unanimously yesterday by
the Council, will be implemented.

“We firmly and vigorously condemn this barbarous act of aggression, which once again demonstrates the diabolical determination of the racist
forces of Pretoria to thwart by every possible means
the efforts of the free and independent States of the
region which are helping to bring about the emancipation of the black majority and the triumph of
the noble ideals of equality, justice and peace.

58.

Ready for the revolution-the

struggle continues.

59. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Nicaragua, and I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement,
60.

Mr.

MORA (Nicaragua) (inrat’On behalf of my delegation.
I should like first of all to thank you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Council for allowing me
to take part in this debate, which is of special interest
to our people and our Revolutionary
Government.
I should also like, Sir, to extend my warmest congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for December. I am convinced that,
given your outstanding qualities, you will successfully
fulfil your responsibilities this month.

pwtation

*‘Extending to you once again the expression of
our vigorous support, we beg you, Excellency and
dear brother, to accept t.he assurances of our high
and fraternal consideration.”
5 I. It cannot be repeated too often that this inhuman
act of aggression is part of a premeditated plan, a
diabolical strategy prepared by the racists of Pretoria to subjugate the peoples of the region for the
benefit of international imperialism.

CHAMORRO

fivrn

Sprrnish):

61. At the same time, I wish to pay a tribute to
Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos of Panama for’his efforts
and effective work last month as President of the
Council.

52. Thus, the intensification of the barbaric repression of the Namibian patriots, the policy of bantustanizntion, the efforts to destroy the national unity
and territorial
integrity of Namibia,
the ruthless
exploitation of its people, the militarization of the Territory of Namibia and its use as a base for committing
acts of aggression against the front-line States, particularly Angola, Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique-these
are all crimes which have created an
extremely dangerous situation in southern Africa,
53. One year ago, the Republic of Seychelles was
the victim of this fascist barbarism. Today it is Lesotho
that in its turn has fallen victim to the criminal policies
of South Africa.

62. Two days ago the King of Lesotho, in his brilliant statement before the Council [ihid.]. informed US
of the latest aggression perpetrat.ed against his country
and people by the racist South AFrican rCgime. We
were told how South Africa sought to justify the
deaths of 42 African brothers, many of them refugees. by resorting to the well-known claim that the
victims were aggressors and vice versa. We also heard
how South Africa sought to implicate Lesotho in an
alleged communist manoeuvre against the Pretoria
rCgime, trying thus to put the problem of southern
Africa in the context of East-West confrontation.

54. In spite of the many resolutions adopted in both
the Security Council and the General Assembly condemning the uparthcid
rigime, Pretoria continues to
defy the international
community.
This constant
defiance casts doubt on the capacity of the United
Nations, and in particular of the Security Council,
to translate into actions its own unanimously adopted
decisions. It reflects, above all, the acquiescence, and
indeed. active complicity of certain great Powers
with regard to South Africa.

63. We were also informed how the criminal acts of
the South African rCgime against Lesotho constituted
an act of revenge by South Africa for the firm and
dignified position assumed by that country in the face
of the pressure exerted by South Africa against it So
that it should cease to act as a country loyal to its
history and its principles, that is, through its participation in the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries 01
by welcoming refugees whose exodus was forced upon
them by South Africa itself.
6

64. All of these actions and arguments are only too
well known, since, unfortunately, we have felt them in
our own flesh and we hear them daily from South
Africa’s allies on our own continent, especially in
relation to the problems of Central America. That is
not merely a coincidence; but rather here as well as
there, reflects the systematic behaviour of some great
Powers. It shows, once again, the high price that
peoples have to pay to achieve or maintain their independence and how far those who seek to impose their
political and economic interests on peoples seeking
self-determination
are prepared to go.

of Namibia. In this connection, this world forum must
redouble its efforts to obtain the implementation
of its
resolutions, in particular Security Council resolution
435 (1978), which is the fundamental and only basis
for achieving a satisfactory transition from the colonial
status of Namibia.
71. In contrast with the warlike and intransigent
attitude of South Africa, we have witnessed the flexibility and readiness of SWAP0 to comply with that
resolution. The delaying tactics employed by South
Africa, with the support of its allies, in connection
with Namibia lose all credibility when that same South
Africa tries, to prove to the world that sovereign States
must take all the measures they consider necessary
to protect, themselves, as is being done against the
military power of the ignominious South African Government.

65. It is well known that in the Council itself South
Africa has an ally which defends its interests while
ensuring that resolutions adopted by the Council are
the least unfavourable possible for the Pretoria regime.
It is that same country which in the Council protects
Israel so that even the minimum treatment it deserves
because of its Pretorian behaviour in the Middle East
cannot be meted out.

72. On the other hand, we see that the powerful
friends of South Africa reward its good behaviour and
grant it a loan of $1 billion, through the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), while at the same time they
pressure multilateral banks to deny loans to poor countries struggling to achieve a better life.

66. It is well known that South Africa has unsuccessfully endeavoured to create puppet governments
that would enable it to perpetuate its domination in
southern Africa.

73. In a strange communique issued shortly after the
approval of that loan, the State Department of the
United States indicated that because the IMF was a
technical body there was no room in its decisions
for arguments of a political
character. This poor
reasoning would deserve a minimum of credibility if
it were applied consistently,
but, as we all know,
it is precisely the opposite that is true. The use of
political and economic pressure is what prevails.

67. In the case of Central America, we know of some
countries which are ready to wage war on Nicaragua
even at the expense of the sacrifice of their own peoples. We should mention here that the visit of the
sinister Israeli Defence Minister to Honduras two days
after President Reagan’s visit to that same country
clearly demonstrates the link between Washington and
Tel Aviv, two fundamental pillars of strategic alliances
of which the ramifications
also affect the African
continent.

74. In conclusion, I should like to express once
again the solidarity of our people and Government
with the people and the Government of Lesotho and
the other front-line States, which constantly suffer
from the acts of aggression of the racist Pretoria
regime. At the same time, we urge the international
community
to take appropriate measures in conformity with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations to prevent the continuation
of such crimes
and secure the implementation
of a just and lasting
solution in southern Africa.

68. The violation of the territorial integrity of Lesotho
and the massacres perpetrated there are but another
link in the chain of aggression which South Africa has
committed in southern Africa, including the escalation of repression against the inhabitants of Namibia
and South Africa itself, where brave patriots are
fighting to become the masters of their own destiny,
to which they are justly entitled.
69. This latest act of aggression is a new destabilizing
manoeuvre in southern Africa to suppress the liberation struggle being waged by the people of Namibia,
under its sole and authentic representative, the South
West Africa People’s
Organization
(SWAPO),
in
order to achieve its much desired and well-deserved
independence,

75. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Grenada. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
76. Mr. TAYLOR (Grenada): Permit me first of all
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of December. Being aware
of your talents as a diplomat, my delegation is confident that under your guidance the work of the
Council will undoubtedly be conducive to the cause
of peace and justice in southern Africa. May I also
take this opportunity to express my delegation’s profound appreciation of the efficiency with which YOUI
predecessor, Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos of Panama.

70. For us, the events that have taken place in
Lesotho are but one more proof of the contempt of
the South African Government for the many resolutions adopted by the United Nations in relation to
southern Africa, At the same time, this agression constitutes a new challenge to the United Nations, which
has important and special responsibility
in respect
7

carried out the business of the Council
month of November.

83. In conclusion, I wish to read the text of a message addressed to the Prime Minister of Lesotho from
Comrade Maurice Bishop. Prime Minister of my
country:

during the

77. The attack on Lesotho on 9 December is yet
another episode in a macabre series of acts of aggression perpetrated by the racist Pretoria clique, in defiance of the Charter of the United Nations and contrary to the accepted norms of international behaviour,
against States that cherish peace and freedom.
.

“The People’s Revolutionary
Government and
the people of Grenada have been profoundly saddened by the cruel and sadistic murder of citizens
of Lesotho and the patriots of the African National
Congress (ANC) by the bloody Pretoria r@gime.

78. Racist South Africa, aided and abetted by its
powerful friends and ideological
soul-mates, continues to disregard scornfully the innumerable United
Nations and other resolutions that call upon it to put
an end to its acts of aggression against its defenceless
neighbours. Even as we deliberate here in the Council
chamber, South African troops occupy a portion of
the southern province of the sister Republic of Angola.
Even as we express our profound condolences to the
Government and to the people of Lesotho and to the
patriots of the ANC, the Pretoria racists are stubbornly
denying our brothers and sisters in Namibia their
inalienable right to become the guardians of their own
destinies.

“We extend to you, the Government and people
of the Kingdom of Lesotho, as well as to the ANC,
our deep sympathy at the loss of life and the material
damage which has been caused.
“We regard the South African incursion into
Lesotho as a flagrant violation of the territorial integrity of your country, and we most strongly condemn
this open act of aggression by the forces of this contemptible gang of racists.
“As we mourn with you the untimely death of so
many of your people. we recognize that they are
the newest heroes on the road of Africa’s long
struggle to remove for ever the scourge of LI/?R~‘~hcid, racist bigotry and the Trojan horse of imperialism which-is the illegal rigime in Pretoria.

79. South Africa’s arrogance and its iron-clad defiance are. I submit, no accident. South Africa’s
aggression must be situated in the context of a wider
imperialist conspiracy to frustrate the noble and legitimate aspirations of the oppressed peoples and to
derail and ultimately overthrow progressive Governments. To this end. imperialism
has handpicked its
gendarmes to do its dirty work in the so-called troublespots around the world.

‘*We are likewise satisfied that the dedication of
the Government and the people of Lesotho to the
sacred cause of liberation is irreversible and that
you will continue to be identified with those who
relentlessly pursue the struggle to achieve freedom
and justice and human dignity for Namibia,and
for
the martyred people of South Africa.

80. In the Middle East, the agents of imperialism
have slaughtered thousands of Palestinian Arabs and
are at this moment occupying Arab territories. In
Central America, they murder hundreds of innocent
men, women and children and are reportedly poised
to strike at the heart of the sister Republic of Nicaragua,

“Long live the struggle of our brothers and sisters
of Africa.”
84. I wish also to say that we believe that history
is on our side. and therefore the people will triumph.

81. Racist South Africa is a creature of imperialism,
The abominable system of npcrrtlwid,
which holds
millions of our brothers and sisters in bondage, is
maintained fundamentally because South Africa continues to receive strong diplomatic,
political, economic, military and other support from its imperialist
backers.

85. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to.make his statement.
86. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): May I thank
you most sincerely, Mr. President, for this opportunity to participate in the deliberations of the Council on the question of South Africa’s unprovoked
aggression against Lesotho.

82. Day after day, the United Nations is treated to
sermons given by ideologues who pompously tell us
that there are two worlds, that there is a free world
and another world. Those ideologues, after engaging
in all sorts of semantic stunts, often remind us that
South Africa is a member of the so-called free world,
What freedom? Is it the freedom to murder and to hold
millions of people in captivity, or is it the freedom
to make the world safe for the transnationals? Those
of us who cherish true freedom have a right to know
what freedom it is.

87. Before I proceed with my statement on the
subject, I wish, Sir, to congratulate you on yout
assumption of the presidency for the month of December. I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the ,representative of Panama, who did such an
excellent job as President last month.
88. The recent. undoubtedly
premeditated
act of
aggression by the Pretoria regime against peace-loving
8

Lesotho clearly demonstrates South Africa’s determination to live up to its now all too familiar reputation as a criminal, mad, reckless and foolish neighbour. For only a Government inspired by savagery
and barbarism could brag about and derive satisfaction from the cold-blooded massacre of defenceless
and dispossessed refugees, women and children. This
inhuman act, directed by a Government of immoral
and irrational persons, is an act of genocide and
aggression against the people of Lesotho. Under international law, it is a very serious violation of that country’s territorial integrity.
89. The act is foolish and reckless because it threatens peace and security in the whole region. We call
upon all States and individuals professing a belief in
the rule of civilized law to denounce and condemn
in the strongest terms this uncalled-for aggression and
genocide. The racist ligime must be made to pay fool
the loss of human lives and the severe damage to
property in Lesotho. Also, because the act of aggression is a breach of international law and of the Chartel
of the United Nations, the Council must take appropriate action against the Pretoria Government.
90. Zimbabwe’s
sympathy with the Government
and people of Lesotho, our solidarity with the Basotho
people and our support for and solidarity with the
struggling people of South Africa have already been
conveyed to the Government of Lesotho. I wish, in
this regard, to read the message sent by Comrade
Robert G. Mugabe, Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, to
Mr. Leabua Jonathan, the Prime Minister of Lesotho,
as soon as the news of the massacre was received
in Harare. It reads:

“We offer our deepest sympathies to the Government and people of Lesotho, and more especially
to those whose loved ones fell in this heinous and
dastardly attack. We in Zimbabwe feel their losses
as our own and are one with them in the tears they
shed for the victims of Pretoria’s genocide. SO
often during our own hard struggle for liberation the
racist forces of Rhodesia tried to destroy us and
break our spirit by using the same sort of tactic as
used by the racists at dawn yesterday. But they
failed-and
they failed because we knew that we
were right, that our struggle was a just one and that
in spite of the odds weighing heavily against us we
would win in the end.
“And so it is in South Africa, For, as the struggle progresses, and as contradictions begin to show
within the crpartkid edifice, the enemy is becoming
more irrational and thus more savage and vicious in
his reactions. In hiq panic he is turning his guns onto
refugee camps, the shelters for women and children,
and onto a small and peace-loving nation.
“The Government and people of Zimbabwe condemn in the strongest possible terms this monstrous
act. We deplore the pain and suffering inflicted upon
the people of Lesotho. who, despite their small
numbers, have stood firm and proud in their opposition to the (tp(wth&d evil that surrounds them.
“We call upon the international
community to
condemn this murderous act of aggression and to
come forward to the assistance of the Kingdom of
Lesotho.
“In this respect, we fully support the call made by
the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho for an
emergency meeting of the Security Council.

“It is with a profound sense of horror and deep
shock that the Government of Zimbabwe learned of
the cold-blooded massacre carried out by the troops
of the racist Pretoria rkgime against the peaceloving and defenceless people of Lesotho in the
early hours of yesterday morning.

“The struggle continues.”
91. Finally. we can only say, as the delegation of
Zimbabwe, that we very strongly urge the international
community to respond to the calls and demands contained in resolution 527 (1982). unanimously adopted
yesterday by the Council.

“This latest example of savage aggression waged
in the bloody name of rrprrrthc~id and in total defiance of the international laws governing respect
for the national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of an independent State, left many dead and
wounded in its wake. As usual. the racist troops
did not content themselves with the slaughtering of
defenceless refirgees, but proceeded to murder
innocent women and children before fleeing back to
their racist bases.

92. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the rcpresentative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
93. Mr. RUPIA (United Republic of Tanzania): May
I first, Sir, offer you the very sincere compliments
of
my delegation on your assumption of the post of President for the month of December and wish you all
success in your work. Well-deserved congratulations
also go to your predecessor for the way he conducted
the Council’s work during the month of November.

“Coming after the Matola massacres in Maputo
last year and the continuous massacres in south
Angola in the last two years, we see a pattern here
of intensified aggression in the whole region. The
two attempts to enter Zimbabwe which have been
uncovered and neutralized confirm that the racist
rkgime is bent on naked aggression and destabilization of the whole region.

94. The day before yesterday [ihid.], the Council
had the privilege of receiving a first-hand account from
9

no less a person than the head of State of Lesotho,
King Moshoeshoe II, of the most recent act of aggression by the NPN&LJ~~ Pretoria rkgime. So naked and
brazen was this criminal act that there is no room for
anybody to doubt the wickedness of the perpetrator.
As a result, the Council, without debate, was unanimous in convicting and condemning the Pretoria
rigime as an aggressor and demanding from it full
compensation for the damage done to Lesotho.
95. We view the action taken by the Council as no
more than firm recognition that an act of aggression
has been committed by the Pretoria regime. It is cleat
that the remedy for the damage has yet to be found
and that a permanent solution to the problem has not
even been considered. For this is not the first time a
complaint has been made to the Council about such
an act of aggression. Not a single country neighbouring
South Africa has not been attacked or had its sovereignty violated, not only once but several times.
96. And there is no doubt that this is not going to be
the last unprovoked act by that rlgime against neighbouring States, condemnation by the Council notwithstanding. This latest act of aggression by the
Pretoria regime is therefore simply a reminder to the
Council that a cancerous situation exists in that part
of the world which, if no timely cure is applied, cannot
but worsen and ultimately result in international conflagration.
97.

In an attempt to rationalize its criminal act, the
Pretoria rigime explained that Lesotho was
threatening its security. Indeed, it is in the name of
its security that the Pretoria regime has been perpetrating acts of aggression against all its neighbours.
The Council has correctly called on South Africa to
look elsewhere for the cause of its sense of insecurity,
for even if the rrptrrthcid rCgime has not yet itself
realized it, the Council, indeed the rest of the world,
is fully aware that that so-called insecurity is simply
the restlessness of a rCgime besieged by its aparrhcid
and fascist policies. The policies of clpclrthcid can
never be embraced by the people of South Africa.
The racist minority in South Africa cannot blame any
neighbour for the resistance that is mounting within
South Africa. It cannot blame any other country for the
exodus of refugees from opcrrfhcid South Africa. If
anything. we can only assure the racist minority that
there will be no comfort for it within South Africa
until and unless the obnoxious policies of opart/Trid
are eradicated.

more evident is that with the attainment of independence by the countries neighbouring
South Africa,
the last pocket of oppression and fascism has been
totally exposed. The fire of liberation is at the doors
of South Africa. There can be no escape from it. The
only security for the racist minority lies in welcoming
the wave of democracy into that country.
99. While we shall not tire of calling upon the Pretoria rkgime to abandon its nparthcid
policies, we
remain convinced that with the comfort afforded it
by certain Western Powers that rlgime will not readily
listen to these warnings. Those that collaborate with
South Africa therefore bear a direct responsibility for
the behaviour of the aporzhPid Pretoria r&ime. If the
Council is seriously concerned about peace in southern Africa, it must recognize that link and look for a
solution on the basis of that fact.
100. We do not believe that it will have any effect
for the Council to continue regretting the criminal
acts of the Pretoria rCgime while some of the very
influential members of the Council continue at the
same time to extend all the economic and military
assistance the rigime badly needs to survive. Indeed,
it is most unfortunate that this body, the last resort in
the maintenance of international
peace and security,
should by its equivocation invite for itself the cynicism of those that would look to it for their redemption
from criminal oppression. The Council, therefore.
must seriously consider the imposition
of comprehensive sanctions against South Africa.

crptrrrhcid

98. That the crprrrthid Pretoria rigime had to go out
and pick quarrels with neighbouring States comes as
no surprise to us. For, unlike South Africa, those
neighbouring
States are free States, and a fascist
regime has never been known to be at ease with democratic neighbours. The fact: that nationals of South
Africa should find sanctuary in the territories of neighbouring countries is in itself an indictment of the
rkgime in its country of origin. However, what is even

101. We call in particular on the Western permanent
members of the Council to reconsider their policy
towards South Africa so that the Council can fulfil
its responsibility
regarding the future of southern
Africa. It is only then that the problem of the security of the States neighbouring South Africa will be
properly addressed.
102. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yemen, who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab
States. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
103. Mr. SALLAM (Yemen): Mr. President, I should
like to express our gratitude to you and, through you,
to the other members of the Council for giving us this
opportunity to participate in the debate on the complaint by Lesotho against South Africa, concerning
the latter’s recent act of aggression against Lesotho.
104. Furthermore,
in my capacity as Chairman of
the Group of Arab States, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency’for
the month of December and to express the firm conviction of the Group that your dedication, leadership and diplomatic skills will enable the Council, the
main body entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and security, to live up to its obligations

IO

and uphold the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations relating to such flagrant violations of its principles.

States, and that applies to the entire continent of
Africa, for its strategy is predicated on diverting world
public opinion and mankind as a whole from condemning its oprrrthrid system as a crime against mankind and as the greatest threat to international peace
and security. By introducing evasive and cosmetic
changes in its internal policy of npnvthcid. Pretoria
is convinced that it can placate world public opinion
and dampen the fervour of the struggle waged by the
indignant population. Likewise, South Africa seeks
to buy time in order to consolidate its military capability, both nuclear and conventional,
in order to
frustrate the aim of the front-line African States to
act as a leverage and sustenance for the struggle of
the peoples of Africa, and specifically the Namibian
people’s struggle to achieve its internationally
recognized rights, independence and freedom. By so
doing, South Africa is holding the whole continent
of Africa hostage to its potential military and striking
power.

105. The Council has been convened on an urgent
basis once again to deal with yet another unprovoked
act of aggression by South Africa against neighbouring
independent and sovereign African States. Mozambique, and then Angola, have in the past been victims
of aggression, and more recently. on 9 December,
columns of racist South Africa’s so-called Defence
Force (SADF) invaded Lesotho, inflicting heavy and
wanton damage and causing the loss of the lives of
at least 42 innocent civilians. Men. women and children, refugees displaced and forced out of their homes
and native land in southern Africa, are being bombed
and shelled in their camps. Many of them had originally fled their country because they were unable to
bear the humiliation, torture and absolute degradation
perpetrated against them by the Pretoria clique,
blinded by its so-called white supremacy and bent on
practising all forms of racism and racial discrimination
in order to deprive the majority of the native population of South Africa of the exercise of their elementary
human rights, including the right to live their daily
fives in dignity and respect.

109. One wonders how long South Africa and its
counterparts will be allowed to establish counterlegitimacy to the legitimacy of the United Nations,
its resolutions. its Charter, the norms of international
law and international
consensus. And for how long
are we going to pretend that an aggressor must be
persuaded rather than penalized? The answer to this
is obvious: when we see that aggression, without
sanctions, opens the floodgates for a series of violations, aggressions and brutality.

106. It is well known to the international community
and to world public opinion that, each and every time
it commits acts of aggression in defiance of all the
norms of international law and elementary behaviour
which govern relations between States, South Africa
fabricates lies and halF-truths to cover up those acts.
Such was its method on this occasion, after its act of
aggression against Lesotho.
107. In his statement of 14 December,
Lesotho said:

110. In this connection, we call upon the members
of the Council to exert the utmost pressure on South
Africa to make it desist forthwith from its present
policies of aggression, wanton destruction and State
terrorism. For we believe that former pronouncements by the Council and scores of condemnations
of South Africa have proved ineffective. Instead, they
have been construed as encouragement by the aggressor, whose built-in contempt for unanimously adopted
Security Council resolutions, and whose intent to
demolish the credibility
and effectiveness of the
United Nations mechanism in order to perpetuate its
racist, fascist and colonial-settler policies are too well
known to be mentioned, Therefore it is incumbent
upon the permanent members of the Council to carry
out their obligations in the maintenance of international peace and security and to take effective measures in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter,
in order to apply mandatory and comprehensive sanctions against South Africa, as has repeatedly been
requested by the General Assembly and the nonaligned countries.

the King of

“The reasons are well known to the members of
the international community. In the first place, the
Pretoria regime resents our oft-expressed abhorrence, in line with the whole of civilized mankind,
of the obnoxious policy of npcrrtlzeid. They hope to
intimidate us into dissociating ourselves from the
world-wide condemnation
of the policy of nprr~‘thcid and from offering moral support to the oppressed people of South Africa in their struggle for
justice, freedom and equality. They resent our membership in the Southern African Development
Coordination Conference, whose main objective is to
reduce our undue economic dependence on South
Africa-an
objective that would give us greater
freedom of action. They are opposed to our membership in the Organization of African Unity and
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. In short,
South Africa is against the very existence of a
sovereign and independent African State within
its geographic boundaries which will not do its
bidding.” [Ihid., prrm. 30.1

111. We in the Group of Arab States have unanimously called for the imposition
of sanctions as
decided by the Arab League Council at its meeting
held at Tunis in September 1981, at which it emphasized and reaffirmed the firm resolve of the Arab
States to isolate the South African regime and to
implement a boycott against it in all fields, particularly

108. It is evident and amply clear that South Africa
neither seeks nor wants peace with neighbouring
11

in petroleum and oil, as decided by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of -Arab Petroleum
Exporting Countries in its resolution 26/5, adopted at
its thirty-sixth session, held at Kuwait on 5 May 1981
[S//4750.

onllc.r].

112. Our brothers and sisters in South Africa, in
Namibia and in the neighbouring States of South
Africa have borne more than their share of oppression, of suffering. of injustice and of death and destruction. We take this opportunity to salute thei!
freedom fighters in their just struggle and to assure
them that the Arab nation. one and all, will continue
to extend its total support until all vestiges of racism
are erased from our globe,

Azania and all those committed and dedicated to the
total liberation and unity of Africa. The perimeter of
liberation has now reached the very doorstep of the
last bastion of Western colonialism,
imperialism and
racist minority rule in Africa. The rrporrh~~id colonialism of the white minority rulers of South Africa will
fall just as the Portuguese African empire and others
did before it, notwithstanding
Western imperialist
support led by the United States.
118. Invading Lesotho and killing innocent Azanian
refugees and the local inhabitants will not divert the
attention of the oppressed from waging the consistent
and determined
struggle to overthrow the settler
colonialism
of the racist minority and imperialism
in our country. Our struggle has entered its final
and decisive phase of armed struggle-the
principal
method for liberation, the only means to recover our
true humanity and humanize the dehumanized racists,
and the only way to ensure genuine victory and the
repossession of the usurped fatherland, the basis for
national independence and self-determination.

113. The PRESIDENT:
1 wish to inform the members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
16 December from the representatives of Togo,
Uganda and Zaire [s//.5.527], which reads as follows:
“We. the undersigned members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that the Council extend an invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. I. F. Mafole, the
representative of the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania, during the course of the Council’s consideration of the item ‘Complaint by Lesotho against
South Africa’.”

119. The “total strategy” of the racist minority
rulers of South Africa is too well known to us to
deserve repetition here. Angola, Mozambique and
other front-line States are living victims of this strategy
of war against the liberation movements and those
supporting the just struggles of the oppressed in
Namibia and Azania. The Cassinga and Nyazonia
massacres of Namibian and Zimbabwean refugees are
still fresh in our minds. The recent invasion of Lebanon and the massacre of Palestinian refugees by
Zionist soldiers in Beirut and Damat is not different
from what happened at Cassinga, Nyazonia and today
at Maseru. They are the same, and from similar desperate, oppressive, repressive and murderous racist
ligimes of our time. The blood of the innocent at Cassinga, Sabra, Shatila and Maseru will continue to
nourish the spirit of resistance of the dispossessed,
oppressed and exploited peoples of Namibia, Palestine
and Azania. The massacre of unarmed Azanian refugees and Lesotho nationals is yet another of the most
odious and serious of crimes for which the terrorist
upclrthc+d rkgime will have to answer when the time
of reckoning comes.

If I hear no objection. I shall take it that the Council
wishes to accede to this request.

114. The PRESIDENT:
I invite Mr. Mafole to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
115. Mr. MAFOLE: In thanking you, Mr. President,
for allowing us to address the Council, let me also
take the opportunity to join those who have preceded
us in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of December.
I 16. I should like to take this opportunity to thank
the Government and the people of Lesotho for the
continued principled support, hospitality and protection they have always offered our people and will continue to do so because our struggle is theirs, our suffering is theirs and our happiness is theirs. We are one
people.

120. Sharpeville and Soweto are still green in our
memories. and now there is Maseru with over 4,Oinnocent refugees and Lesotho nationals killed. These
were men, women and children with flesh, blood,
bones and feelings like you and me. Their lives have
been brutally snuffed out by the most barbarous and
inhuman rCgime of the twentieth century. supported
and encouraged by some of the most powerful and
civilized nations of the world.

117. It is the view of the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania (PAC), custodian of the true aspirations of the
African masses of Aznnia, that no amount of intimidation or terror by blitzkrieg-type invasions and attacks
in independent States that are neighbours of racist
South Africa will reverse the irresistible course of
events or history, nor will those acts of aggression
and the wanton destruction of human life and property
dampen or daunt the spirit of resistance of the dispossessed, oppressed and exploited African majority of

12 1, Where can our people go? Tortured, per=cuted, prosecuted and murdered daily in the country
of our birth, and pursued even outside. What options
do we have left? In 1960 and 1976, we were massacred
at Sharpeville and Soweto, respectively, and today in
12

Maseru. What have we learned from those tragic experiences? Only to be massacred. That seems to be the
lesson we have learned, and the representatives here
all know about this tragic situation. What is theil
answer to this brutal and barbarous killing of our people’? Are condemnations enough for an answer’? We
know that economic sanctions have been frustrated
by those who have the power and leverage over
racist South Africa. But of course, we do not despair.

not so surprising because this is, after all, the United
Nations, and there never was the slightest intention
that .the Council should consider both sides of the
case, or that it should attempt to encourage a peaceful
resolution of this matter instead of exacerbating it.
128. It is alarming that States from which one would
have expected better have associated themseIves with
this kind of behaviour. Those countries represented
in South Africa are well aware of what happens in
Lesotho. However, in the Council, States are evidently not concerned so much with facts as with
effect. It is to be hoped that they are ashamed when,
in private, they endeavour to reconcile the truth with
the positions which they assume at the United Nations.
But be they ashamed or not. the South African Government will steadfastly maintain its position that it
will not tolerate the granting of sanctuary to terrorists who plan and execute sabotage and violence
against South Africa.

122. We have the answer. The oppressed people
have the answer. In 1960, we were prepared to die for
our freedom. But 1976 taught us not only to die for
our freedom but also to kill for it. This is the path
that we have chosen, because it is the only one that
will restore our true humanity; the only one that will
bring genuine liberation; and the only one that will
restore our usurped ancestral and natural heritage,
that is. our fatherland.
123. The only option remaining therefore is armed
struggle involving the entire oppressed and exploited
African people of Azania and their liberation movements. It is a people’s war under the broad united
front of all existing liberation movements, patriotic
and democratic forces that will bring an end to aggression, subversion, repression and murder in southern
Africa. PAC is committed
to armed struggle because
this is the only way that will bring peace and security
in southern Africa, by overthrowing and destroying
trpcr/&,id colonialism
of the white settler minority
and imperialism-the
causes. of destabilization
and
war,

129. It is also somewhat ironic that the Council
should have felt itself qualified to pass judgement
on
South Africa’s recent action against ANC terrorists
in Maseru in the resolution which it adopted yesterday afternoon. Only last week, nine members of the
Council supported a General Assembly resolution
(rc.wlrltiotl 37/6’1A, of 9 Dwonhor lY82], which commended the ANC for’intensifying its campaign against
the institutions and people of South Africa. By a
distorted brand of logic, clandestine marauders are
applauded when committing
acts of violence: when
counter-action
follows, they are transformed
into
refugees.

124. In conclusion, I wish to say that no oppressed
nation which took up arms to fight was ever defeated.
The Azanian nation is not an exception. Victory is
certain.

130. The action of the United Nations in endorsing
this resort to violence against a Member State is in
direct contravention of the principle of the Charter
that international disputes should be settled by peaceful means. How in these circumstances can the United
Nations presume to pass judgcment on South Africa
when, in direct violation of its own Charter. it has
incited and encouraged the pattern of terrorist aggression which Icd directly to the limited action forming
the subject of the complaint today before the Council, and when the resolutions of the United Nations
have urged war and forgotten peace?

125. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
126. Mr. STEWARD (South Africa) I should like to
congratulate you most sincerely, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
127. I must at the outset protest against the manner
in which the Council has conducted its consideration
of this matter. Despite the fact that South Africa is
a party to this dispute and despite the fact that it
requested to address the Council in terms of Article 32
of the Charter of the United Nations, it was not per;
mitted to speak before the Council adopted resolution
527 (1982). It is perhaps understandable
that those
members of the Council with an imperfect understanding of the rules of fair play and of the judicial
principle of rrucli alto-rrm partem should have gone
along with this procedure. What is incomprehensible
is that other States should have decided to condemn
South Africa without even going through the form of
allowing it to state its case. But then perhaps it is

131. How in these circumstances can South Africa
be expected to have any confidence in the Council’s
ability to carry out its functions with the meticulous
impartiality required by the Charter? How, indeed, can
any State confidently put its case to the Council,
when its members have once again proved themselves to be so partial and its actions so irreconcilable
with the Charter?
132. Resolution 527 (1982) is grotesquely one-sided.
No mention whatsoever is made of the terrorist
activities of the ANC which gave rise to South Africa’s
action, No mention is made of the fact that Lesotho
has allowed its territory to be used as a springboard
13

for attacks against its neighbours. We must reluctantly
conclude that the members of the Council are not
concerned about attacks launched by terrorists against
South Africa and against its citizens of all races. This
comes as no surprise in respect of those members of
the Council that, in contravention of the Charter,
openly support the terrorist activities of the ANC. It
is. however, disturbing that other members of the
Council should have decided to go along with a formulation which so blatantly ignores the role played
by ANC terrorism in this matter.

of siting its bases in residential areas, with women
and children in close proximity. This is a well-known
terrorist device used by, among others, the Palestine
Liberation Grganization (PLO) in Lebanon, The ANC
headquarters were deliberately
located in civilian
houses spread throughout the residential suburbs of
Maseru to render action against them more difficult.
138. The ANC command in Lesotho has been responsible for various acts of sabotage in South Africa,
Transkei and Ciskei. The attention of the Council is
drawn to the cold-blooded assassination in the streets
of Umtata. Transkei, by a Lesotho-based ANC execution squad, of a former official of the ANC who had
become disillusioned
with the extent of communist
influence and control over the organization. The South
African Government
repeatedly
objected to the
presence of ANC terrorists in Lesotho in a number
of discussions with the Lesotho Government. The
Lesotho Government was informed of acts of violence
and sabotage as well as plans for committing subversion in South Africa by persons who had fled to
Lesotho and found a haven there, and details of ANC
terrorists were provided to the Lesotho authorities.
The Lesotho Government was on numerous occasions asked to remove the ANC terrorists’ from
Lesotho,

133. The representative of the United Kingdom, in
particular, seemed to be quite content to turn a blind
eye to terrorist attacks against South Africa. Evidently-and
incredibly-his
country expects the
Republic to do likewise-as
though South Africa
were under some moral obligation to endure such
attacks without defending itself. The representative
of the United Kingdom also referred to the statesmanship and restraint of Lesotho [2407r/? mreting].
Does
the United Kingdom
really believe that Lesotho
showed statesmanship and restraint when it accused
the Republic of trying to overrun and rule its neighbours as colonies? While we are on the subject of
colonialism.
what. may we ask, did Britain do to
prepare Lesotho for independence and to ensure that
it would be a viable State? What. indeed, is it doing
now to assist Lesotho?

139. Thus, for example, the South African Government addressed representations to the Lesotho Government concerning the presence of a leading ANC
terrorist who engaged in subversive activities against
South Africa. The Lesotho Government intimated
that this person would be removed, and this was done.
However, soon afterwards he was replaced by an
even more dangerous individual, resulting in a worse
situation. In addition to specific incidents, a number
of ANC terrorists who have infiltrated into South
Africa and independent
neighbouring
States from
Lesotho have been arrested, and large arms caches
have been uncovered.

134. As for the calls for compensation, the present
Government of Lesotho has to accept responsibility
not only for this incident but also for the damage
caused in South Africa as the result of sanctuary
afforded to terrorists by Lesotho.
135. For too many years have Members of the
United Nations turned a blind eye to the activities of
organizations such as the ANC. For too many years
have they equivocated, tolerated and condoned the
blatant violation of the central principles of the Charter
by offering no more than token opposition to the General Assembly’s promotion of violence by such organizations. Indeed, many of these States have lent the
ANC overt or covert support in an attempt to ingratiate themselves with radical opinion.
136. South Africa is, therefore, the last country that
should bear responsibility for creating the situation
that led to the action of a small unit of the SADF
against ANC targets in Lesotho on 9 December,

140, The Lesotho Government has repeatedly been
warned by the South African Government that murder
and sabotage planned and executed by the ANC ot
other terrorist groups from within its territory would
not be tolerated, and that it would have to bear the
consequences of harbouring
these elements. The
Lesotho Government
has maintained
that it has
granted asylum only to genuine refugees from South
Africa. The facts, howevereindicate otherwise. Known
ANC terrorists have been permitted free rein to plan
and execute operations against South African targets.
141. The South African Government has also on a
number of occasions proposed to the Government of
Lesotho that joint border patrols should be instituted
to control illegal border crossings in the interest of the
security of both South Africa and Lesotho. This
elicited a negative response. A further proposal that
officials be stationed on each side of the border to
facilitate daily consultation
on border problems
proved similarly unacceptable.

137. These targets served as planning and control
headquarters as well as bases for launching acts of
violence against South Africa, Transkei and Ciskei.
The South African action was aimed exclusively at
ANC terrorists and their bases and can in no sense be
construed as hostile to the people of Lesotho. Indeed,
the South African unit had firm instructions to avoid
contact with civilians in carrying out their task, The
members of the unit made every effort to adhere to
these instructions. It is a matter of considerable regret
to the South African Government that civilians have
died or suffered as a consequence of the ANC’s tactic
14

142. In talks with Lesotho
representatives
on
19 August and 28 November 1’981 and 19 March and
2 September 1982, South African representatives
pointed to the serious stresses being placed on South
African-Lesotho relations by the continued presence
of ANC terrorists in Lesotho. At these meetings,
there appeared to be an understanding on the part of
the Lesotho Government for the South African position, and For months the South African security authorities patiently restrained themselves in the hope that
this understanding would be translated into positive
action leading to the removal of this evil. However,
this never materialized, and the ANC terrorists have
been allowed to remain in Lesotho and continue their
role as a major destabilizing element in the surrounding
areas and in Lesotho as well. The destabilizing effect
of the presence of the ANC on Lesotho is known to
cause concern to certain members of the Lesotho
Government.
In this connection,
a member of the
Lesotho Government indicated that in his view South
African security forces should simply take the required
action against ANC terrorists in Lesotho without
involving the Lesotho Government.

tion of terrorist activity embracing the perpetration
of bombings, sabotage and bloodshed in South Africa.
Transkei and Ciskei, after repeated warnings and
appeals had gone unheeded.
147. The South African Government
wishes to
emphasize that its policy with respect to the Government and the peopfe of Lesotho has been geared
towards peaceful coexistence. It remains ready to
co-operate in ensuring harmonious relations with all
its neighbouring States. It will be appreciated,
nevertheless, that no Government deserving of the name
can permit the fabric of its society to be mutilated OIdestroyed by the vicious and unrestrained
deeds of
conscienceless men bent on sowing death and destruction wherever they move. No one should therefore be
left in any doubt concerning South Africa’s determination to continue taking whatever steps may be necessary to defend its territory and its citizens from unprovoked and cowardly acts.
148. The accusation has been levelled against South
Africa that it has been actively engaged in the destabilization
of its southern African neighbours.
It
has even been claimed that deterioration
in the economic situation of these countries is to a large extent
the result of a deliberate South African strategy aimed
at the disruption of their economies in order to keep
them dependent on South Africa. The exact reverse
is the truth. South Africa better than anyone realizes
that its own interests demand that there should be
political, economic and social stability and development in southern Africa. The destabilization
of the
region is as inimical to the security and progress of
South Africa as it is to the potitical and economic wellbeing of Lesotho and other contiguous States. Indeed,
South Africa should be regarded as one of the most
significant stabilizing factors in an area which suffers
from certain built-in and externally imposed destabilizing factors, such as a lack of natural resources, a
high population growth rate, ethnic diversity, traditional land tenure systems and interference by certain
outside Powers for their own selfish purposes.

143. Lesotho is regarded by the ANC as geographically and strategically well-placed for the planning,
co-ordination
and execution of acts of terrorism in
large areas of southern Africa. According to information at the disposal of the South African Government,
plans were well advanced for the perpetration of a
number of deeds of terror by the ANC in South Africa,
Transkei and Ciskei during the coming festive season.
This evidence is indisputable and is supported by the
fact that several well-trained terrorists have been
deployed in Lesotho from elsewhere in southern Africa
during the past month in order to unleash their programme of violence against the people of South Africa,
Transkei and Ciskei.
144. The operation against ANC terrorists has
brought to light, infer alio, the following plans of the
ANC aimed against South Africa and neighbouring
States: first, sabotage against an important railway
complex and other South African transport service
installations;
secondly, an assassination attempt on
the life of the President of a neighbouring
country;
and thirdly, the identification for attack of a number
of other targets in neighbouring States.

149. Illustrative
of South Africa’s role and intentions is the fact that it has always been ready to export
large quantities of staple grains and many other foodstuffs to neighbouring States. Lesotho is one of the
countries which enjoy the same reduced prices as
consumers in South Africa on maize-related products,
resulting in an annual saving of almost $4 million.
Ironically,
this figure coincides with the amount of
damage recently caused to electrical
installations
in the province of Natal by ANC terrorists, who fled
to Lesotho and were then allowed to proceed abroad
from there. South Africa has moreover
initiated
a ploughing and planting programme
in Lesotho
involving loan finance provided by the South African
Government, and this has been lauded by the Lesotho
Prime Minister as an important factor in Lesotho’s
drive to achieve food self-sufficiency.

145. The revised strategy of the ANC calls for more
overt infiltration
of terrorists into South Africa,
Transkei and Ciskei and the establishment
of arms
caches. These terrorists are to be responsible for
deeds of terror of increased intensity in areas bordering on Lesotho, and specific targets allocated to
terrorists
by the command
structure in Lesotho
include political leaders in independent States, infrastructural objectives in South Africa and independent
neighbouring States and community centres for blacks
in Port Elizabeth and Uitenhage.
146. The sole purpose of the pre-emptive action by
the South African unit was thus to prevent an escala15

150. South Africa has a highly developed transport
infrastructure. which is used extensively by its immediate neighbours, including, in particular, Lesotho.

States, including Lesot.ho, to examine patients and
to perform operations. As regards animal diseases,
South Africa’s Onderstepoort
Veterinary Research
Institute annually dispritches millions of doses of
42 different vaccines to many African countries,
including Lesotho.

1st. South Africa’s economy also offers substantial
employment
opportunities to Basotho. Most recent
figures reveal that 141,000 Basotho are employed
in South Africa, of which 110,000 work in the mining
industry. This figure accounts for roughly half the adult
male population of Lesotho. The remittance of theil
wages makes up more than 40 per cent of Lesotho’s
gross national product. The amount of $77 million of
the mineworkers
wages is paid annually to them
through the Bank of Lesotho, while an additional
approximate amount of $80 million is transferred by
the mincworkers themselves as cash remittances to
Lesotho, In addition, goods to the value of about
$ I 44 million
annually accompany Lesotho mineworkers returning from South Africa. More than
20.000 Rasotho are employed in other sectors of the
South African economy. of which the most important
are construction. with 6,181; government services,
with 3,985; manufacturing. with 3,851; and agriculture,
with 1,941, Large sums are taken back by them to
sustain and support their families in Lesotho. These
remittances must of necessity constitute a substantial,
if not essential. contribution to the economic stability
of Lesotho.

154. In the field of communications,
South Africa
supplies infrastructure and essential services to its
neighbours, and all the international
telecommunications traffic of certain adjoining States, including
Lesotho, continues to be routed through South Africa,
without interference.
155. In the commercial sphere. Lesotho is a cosignatory with South Africa of the customs union agreement dating back to 1910. and its import requirements
are largely supplied from South Africa. Lesotho’s
share in the customs pool is the most important single
component of its national revenue, ranging up to
65 per cent in 1981. Lesotho’s share for 1983- 1984 is
estimated at $99 million.
156. In other words. co-operation between South
Africa and its immediate
neighbours, including
Lesotho, ranges virtually across the whole field of
human endeavour, and it is therefore clear that Lesotho
enjoys considerable material benefit from its proximity
to South Africa.

152. ‘I’hc South African Government urgently appeals
to the Lesotho Government to reconsider its attitude
to the harbouring of terrorists whose avowed aim it
is to plan and assist in the implementation
of acts of
subversion and violence in the Republic of South
Africa and other neighbouring territories. The South
African Government believes that, the majority of
Basotho do not support the Government of Lesotho
in the stand it is taking on this matter, and the Government of Lesotho will have to accept the responsibility if employment opportunities for its citizens
are placed in jeopardy as a result of more stringent
movement-control
measures that South Africa will
have to introduce on the border unless the Lesotho
Government changes its attitude. There is, of course,
free movement of persons across the border between
South Africa and Lesotho. There are approximately
1.5 million crossings annually through border posts,
while 600.000 persons living along the border have
been issued with special border traffic permits allowing
them freely to cross the border. If the Lesotho Government remains intransigent as regards the activity
of Lesotho-based ANC terrorists. it would be a matte1
of great regret to the South African Government were
it to be compelled to consider instituting more restrictive measures to control movement across the border.

157. Why then are such manifestly fabricated allegations that South Africa is destabilizing its neighbours
so freely bandied about? The answer is obvious. South
Africa remains the perennial scapegoat for Governments unwilling and unable to face their own political
and economic realities, to confront and find solutions
to the overwhelming and intractable problems facing
their countries and peoples in an era of socio-political
and economic instability,
158. In the case of Lesot.ho, it is no secret that the
political life of Lesotho is characterized by internal
instability, and in this potentially turbulent environment the ANC presence in Lesotho has become a
useful tool to be exploited as a distraction from the
unpalatable evidence of armed and violent political
opposition which threatens the continued existence
of the Leabua Jonathan Government.
It will be
recalled that the Lesotho Constitution was suspended
at the time.of Lesotho’s first post-independence eiection on 27 January 1970. and a state of emergency was
declared after it had become apparent that Prime Minister Leabua Jonathan’s Basotho National Party had
lost the election. As a direct consequence of the Prime
Minister’s inability since then to implement his many
promises to hold free elections, Lesotho has itself SUffered a resurgence of terrorist activity ‘aimed at subverting its present Government.

153. In health matters, South Africa’s hospital facitities are utilized for specialist treatment by all its
neighbouring
States, including Lesotho. and the
private sector in South Africa has sponsored free
medical assistance by means of projects that send
medical personnel over weekends to neighbouring

159. At this point, let me state categorically that the
South African Government has consistently adopted a
policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of all
16

its neighbouring
States, including Lesotho. It is a
basic and generally accepted rule of classicai international law that the jurisdiction
which a Government
exercises within its territory carries with it the obligation to prevent the commission in its territory of harmful acts against other States. This obligation is inherent
in territorial sovereignty. And today, this rule is reinforced by the common superior interest of all States
in not permitting within their jurisdiction
the commission of acts which are injurious to the peace and
security of another nation.

to the international c ommunity. As one whose calmtry has suffered enormously from fascist aggression.
you.
Mr. President, are no doubt most scn\itive tcj the
serwmness of the situation under considcr;itioil.
“”

It

is

thanks

to

YOUi’

diplomatic

skill

;ind

out-

standing ability that the C ouncil has been able to adopt
resolution 527 (1982) condemning racist South African
wsression against a peace-loving countrv w]ll,)sc
people and *urs are bound together by a common bigtol-Y Of resists colonial conquest and whose destiny
and ours are inextricably
intertwined.

160. The choice for Lesotho is clear. It must decide
whether it will continue to offer sanctuary to the ANC
and other terrorists or whether it wishes to contribute
to peace and stability in the region. The South African
Government has repeatedly offered to enter into nonaggression agreements with its neighbours, and this
offer remains open. Why is it that Lesotho is unwilling
to accept this offer? If it were to accept, it could end
the present.confrontation
and contribute substantially
to peace in the region. Only Lesotho can furnish the
reason for its failure to accept South Africa’s offer.
Violence can, in the view of the South African Government, be eliminated through an understanding of
this nature. It is the profound hope of the South African
Government
that the Lesotho
Government
will
respond in a positive manner.

lCh- MW I convey to you, Sir. to the nlcmbers of
the Council, and to King Moshoeshoe 11 anil the
kmho
delegation in particular. the profound r<crct
Of mY President, Oliver Tambo, at his inability ,
through no fault of his own, to attend this meeting of
the Council, which is of such singulal. importance to
mY organization and the oppressed people of South
Africa.
167. Let me remind you that today. 16 December. as
the Council is in the process of expressing its rcvulsion and outrage at the vile conduct of the Prctori;r
regime, the fascist I-UI~TS of that country art: cc~cbrating their annual day of commemorution of their
conquest and sub,jugation
of my people. 111 their
ceremonies, the slave-masters of Pretoria are completely oblivious of the fact that it was ahout this time
21 years ago that peace-loving mankind. in recognition ofthe non-violent struggle waged by the opprecsed
people of South Africa under the leadership of the
ANC, caused to be awarded to its illustrious leader.
Albert Lutuli, the celebrated Nobel Peace Prize
winner.

161. The PRESIDENT:
In connection
with the
opening remark of the representative of South Africa,
I would like to state the following. First, in the official letter from the representative
of South Africa
addressed to me, which I have before me, there is no
specific request for him to be allowed to speak before
the voting on the draft resolution. Secondly, as members will recall, during our informal consultations we
unanimously agreed to have the voting on the draft
resolution first and only afterwards to conduct deliberations on the agenda item. I can only add that of
course the attempt by the representative
of South
Africa to lecture the Council on its rules of procedure
was not entirely surprising, at least to the President.

168. It is ironic that during the same year- that thi?
distinction was conferred on the leader of my organization. the racist rigime.
in response to the call hy
the ANC for the holding of a national convention to
map out the route towards a democratic South Africa.
finally
slammed the door against peaccf1.11changt: and
non-violent struggle by, among other things. mobilizing
an overwhelming force of its police and arm),
to crush merci]ess]y a peaceful strike organized hy
the ANC. A new phase in the protracted str’t&~]<? of
my
people
for a non-racial democratic State WXY thuh
fol.ced
upon
the
scene.
Thus
it
is that today %‘6
are a]so celebrating
the twenty-first anni\‘cr%iry c)f
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
,,sL,,~i~,,~~~.the Spear of the Nation. the iirmcd
wing of the ANC. In our celebration Of this :Intlivcrsary. we draw inspiration
from the famous I)ec];%ltion of the founding fathers of the United statC% of’
America. which reads:

162. The next speaker is Mr. Johnstone Makatini of
the African National Congress of South Africa, to
whom the Council has extended an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
163. Mr. MAKATINI:
On behalf of the ANC. 1 wish
to thank you, Mr. President. for giving me this opportunity t.o address the Council on the dastardly act
committed by the Pretoria clpa,thcJid rCgime on 9 December, the eve of Human Rights Day. My thanks
also go to all the other members of the Council fol
similarly according me this opportunity.

off such a Government
inspirlltjOn
we dso
tlrk
ration of Human Rights.’

164. Let me hasten also to congratulate you. Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency at a moment when
the Council is seized of a matter of the gravest concern
17

. . . **’
from the Universal 15X1:1as we]] as from the rcsolu-

tions adopted by the Council and, in particular, those
of tke General Assembly, which recognize the legitimacy of our struggle in all forms, including armed
struggle, for the seizure of power by the people in
South Africa.
169. On this day of historic importance to my organization it is appropriate for the members of this Council to cast their minds back and recall the events that
have led to the present phase of our struggle. This has
become even more important after hearing the statement made by the representative of the racist Pretoria
rigimc,
170. At this stage, Mr. President, I must say that it
is perhaps only thanks to your protection that I can
occupy this seat that he has just vacated,
171. The Council and the international community
well know, these are the descendants of a people
which in 1836 trekked beyond the borders of a colony
which they had settled for just under two centuries,
in protesi against its falling into line with that import.ant advance in the history of mankind, the abolition
of slavery. They left to set up, as their infamous
manifesto declared, a State in which there would be
no equality between black and white in Church or
State.
172. Having with vastly superior arms succeeded in
conquering our people and seizing their land, they
proceeded to treat them in a manner consistent with
the provision of their manifesto, which said that the
universal description of slavery as a crime against
humanity was ungodly and itself a crime against
them, a chosen people of God.
173. They enslaved us and, with the support of the
people who declared slavery a crime, have to this day
kept us in bondage.
174. Against this yoke of oppression we struggled
continuously,
until we had exhausted all peaceful
means open to man.
175. I should like at this stage to give a very brief
account of what Lesotho means to our struggle in the
region. Lesotho has a long history of gallantry and
heroism. When, during the colonial wars of conquest,
its territory was invaded, first by the Boers and then
by the British, it fought valiantly against overwhelming
odds to defend its territory, which was gradually being
whittled away by the land-hungry colonizers. By an
astute combination of diplomacy and heroic resistance
by a sagacious father and leader, Lesotho was able to
resist total subjugation.
176. When in 1910, after subjugating the Boers in the
Anglo-Boer war, Britain created out of its various
colonies in the region the so-called Union of South
Africa, with political power consolidated in the hands
of the white settlers, it pledged to allow in due course

the annexation of Lesotho, Botswana and Swaziland
to that infamous union. Once again, Lesotho had to
live under the shadow of foreign conquest and fol
over five years had to campaign against this trading
in human souls. When, in 1966, Lesotho finally won
its independence, the determination
of the fascist
rigime in Pretoria to subjugate this brave people
remained unaltered. As has been eloquently explained
to the Council by King Moshoeshoe [240&h ,neclingJ,
to this day Lesotho’s sole preoccupation is to stave off
South Africa’s imperialist designs on its territory, It
is the sacred duty of the United Nations to assist
Lesotho in its just struggle for survival.
177. We have listened to .a lot of allegations made
by the representative of the Pretoria rCgime. It is
obviously not possible to deal with all of them because, as all will agree, the greater part of his statepent turned out to be a prppaganda campaign for the *
Pretoria rigime.
which, finds itself algost totally
isolated by the international community. But a few of
his points merit our immediate attention.
178. I think it is important for the Council to refer
back to the history of the rulers in the present-day
Government of South Africa in order to understand
their mentality, in order to understand the incorrigibly fascist character of the architects of nparrheid.
We wish in particular to recall that this system, which
has been unanimously condemned as a crime against
humanity and which we consider to be an offshoot of
nazism, flourished at a time when Europe was faced
with the rise of Nazi Germany.
179. The people who are in power today in South
Africa became proud, self-confessed disciples of
Hitlerite
Germany; a number of them even committed acts of sabotage in southern Africa in preparation for the conquest of that region by Nazi Germany,
and some of.them were detained during that period.
180. It is also important to remind the Council that
we are dealing here with people whose aggressive and
expansionist designs in Africa can be proved by theil
legislation in favour of military intervention in all
African countries south of the equator. It is important also to note that we are dealing here with a statement by a representative of a rCgime which has not
respected-indeed,
which has flouted-every
ideal
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. ,
181. He comes here to say that Lesotho has a
choice and that he expects a positive response from
Lesotho, a response which would in fact mean that
Lesotho must cease to comply with the -Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees signed in Geneva in
195 I 2 and the Protocol thereto of 1967: and with
United Nations resolutions adopted in accordance
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. If
that happened, South Africa would then have the
right, as I interpret the statement the ‘Council has

i
:
1
!
j
!
i
:
j

IARY
heard, to repeat what the Council is in the process of
condemning.
What Lesotho is being asked to do is
to align itself with the NPC/I.~/ZL& rkgime against the
liberation movement.

States, Algeria, Viet Nam, Angola, Guinea-Bissau
and so many others. Wherever there has been colonial
subjugation
there has been resistance in favour of
liberty. We are not going to be an exception.

182. What are the objectiies of the ANC, as opposed
to what I have referred to as being entrenched in the
South African constitution,
namely that there should
be no equality between black and white, either in
Church or in State? The policy of the ANC is clearly
articulated in the Freedom Charter. which was adopted
on 26 June 1955 at Cape Town, at the Congress of the
People. In that political programme we clearly state
that we, the people of South Africa, declare that OLII
country and the world should know that South Africa
belongs to those who live in it, black and white, that
no Government
can justly claim authority unless it
is based on t.he will of all the people, and that we strive
for a democratic State, guaranteeing the birthright of
all South Africans, regardless of race, colour or creed:
that is treason in South Africa, and that is what Lesotho
and other neighbouring countries are being called on
to join South Africa in fighting against. These principles are in keeping with the objectives of the Charter
of the United Nations, of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and, indeed, of the Declaration of
Independence of the United States.

185. It is important for me to say, even at the risk
of repeating myself, that we of the ANC have never
failed to express the pride we take in our total solidarity with Lesotho in its courageous stand of asserting
its independence. We trust that after listening to the
penetrating analysis of the politics of the region made
by the King of Lesotho, the international community
will not confine itself to merely condemning the fascist
South African aggression, but will take this opportunity, collectively and individually,
to support the
King in his campaign for Lesotho’s unfettered right
of sovereignty within the belly of this apcrrthcid beast,
to borrow a phrase from the representative of Uganda
[2407rh uzwting, prrrrr. I/4], and for the right to grant
political asylum and refuge to the opponents of the
inhuman system of crporthcid.
186. We hope that by having voted in favour of resolution 527 (1982), those members of the Council which
boast of their alliance with fascist South Africa are
indicating the beginning of a change of attitude.
187. It is unnecessary for me to refute all of the
brazen lies spoken here today by the representative
of the crpar/hcid rigime in support of that rigirne’s
naked and unprovoked aggression against Lesotho.
That was adequately done by the King of Lesotho.
Suffice it to say that there is abundant evidence that
our freedom-fighters operate in the very heart of our
country.

183. Allegations have been made here that the ANC
is using Lesotho as a springboard for so-called terrorist activities in South Africa. Nothing could be
further from the truth. What I am saying was repeatedly affirmed and reaffirmed by Pretoria’s Minister
of Defence, Magnus Malan, when he was campaigning
for the total mobilization
of the entire white community by extending the age-limits for whites liable
for military conscription to the range of 16 to 6.5 years
of age. He said that without such an extension South
Africa could not win thl war being waged by the ANC,
because the ANC was not waging a border war but an
area war. In other words, inspired by and drawing
strength from the position of the international
community which recognizes the legitimacy of struggle
in all forms for the eradication of a system which is
universally
condemned as a crime against humanity,
but also mindful of the vulnerability of countries like
Lesotho and mindful of the fascist character of the
oprrrthc)id rCgime, which will exploit every available
pretext in order to commit aggression against those
countries, the ANC has deliberately and consistently
pursued forms of struggle entailing the infiltration
of
manpower into South Africa and the establishment
of cells inside South Africa.

189. On Ihe other hand, we find that the upcrrthrid
rigime does not stop at massacring peaceful demonstrators in the streets of Johannesburg or Soweto or
Port Elizabeth or Langa; it does not stop at violating
the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of neighbouring countries in order to kill ANC supporters or
sympathizers who have been granted asylum in those
countries.

184. We are not apologetic about waging armed
struggle against a rkgime which is the only one since
Nazi Germany whose policies have been accused of
being a’crime against humanity. We believe that this
is our contribution
to the struggle for the preservation of peace in this world. in addition to its being
an inescapable duty on the part of our people. following the examples set by the peoples of the United

190. It even goes to the extent of bombing our offices
as far afield as London. And now it has committed
this unprovoked
aggression against Lesotho, which
has resulted in the death of dozens of innocent refugees, and Lesotho nationals in particular. including
women and children and even a couple on their honeymoon who had arrived in Lesotho a day before the
attack.

188. One such piece of evidence is the fact that
two years ago the ANC unilaterally presented to the
International
Committee of the Red Cross in Geneva
a declaration in which it committed itself to what it
described as humanitarian conduct of the war and
pledged to do everything possible to avoid the loss
of civilian lives.

III

191. The representative of the Pretoria rkgime says
that his Government will steadpdstly hold its position,
will not tolerate Lesotho’s granting asylum to the
opponents of the apartheid system. This reminds me
of what I heard the racist Minister for Foreign Affairs
say in reaction to the resolution adopted yesterday.
He called it a travesty. In other words, the collective
position unanimously adopted by this august body is,
in the eyes of the representatives of the racist rigime,
a travesty. This reminds us of the position they took
regarding the emancipation of slavery. They said it
was ungodly. It reminds us of the numerous, endless
arbitrary arrests and trials, the sentencing to death of
freedom-fighters whose only crime is aspiring to what
are considered basic human rights all over the world.
To them, all these are travesties.
192. I think this is important particularly for those
who have taken a position they describe as constructive engagement with the South African rlgime. based
on friendship and alliance with the apartheid rkgime.
It is important that they understand notjust the character but the mentality of these friends and allies of
theirs. I think the best characterization of this comes
from a well known South African historian by the
name of Professor Edgar Brooks, who at one time
was a member of the ruling Nationalist Party. In a
book published some time in the 1970s. he says that
anyone who tries to promote dialogue between the
international
community and the present rulers of
South Africa can be compared to somebody who tries
to promote a duel between a whale and an elephant.
There is no meeting place.

that there could be no peace, stability or security in
southeru Africa unless the nportheid system was
totally eradicated and replaced by a democratic State.4
And it must move in unison in accordance with the
position the General Assembly has adopted on several
occasions: that aptrrtheid cannot be reformed, but
must be destroyed. Because what are we witnessing
right now?
196. We have listened here to an attempt to justify
these policies of destabilization.
The representative
of the Pretoria rkgime says that countries of the region
such as Lesotho are unable to deal with their political,
social and economic problems. What he really means
is that the trpcrrthrid rCgime is recruiting, arming,
training and financing criminal elements not just from
Lesotho but from the various countries of the region,
and they are being deployed back in their countries in
order to destabilize and even to topple Governments
that dare stand firm in compliance with United Nations
resolutions that oppose the uprrr’thcid system.
197. These armed bandits have in fact become an
extension of the South African secret service and
army. They are being groomed. And here I want to
cast my eyes on the Middle East, because that is
what he did, talking of the PLO as though we are not
capable of doink this.
198. What is unfolding is in fact a very cruel scenario
similar to what we have just witnessed in the Middle
East. It is being said that these armed bandits are
being groomed to play the role of the Phalangists in
southern Africa.

193. We are dealing here with a religious people
that believes it is a God-chosen race and en.joys divine
inspiration to keep the blacks under subjugation, FOI
ever. Hence this d&y, in condemning them, we are
not limiting ourselves to the position they took in their
Constitution,
when they trekked northward, complaining against the emancipation of slavery, saying it
was ungodly, but we can draw examples from the
position they have taken recently.

199. As I have said, it is not possible to deal with
all the allegations that have been made here except to
remind the representative of the Pretoria rlgime, who
speaks as if the world is out of step and they alone are
right, that for about 20 years a consensus has been
building in the form of resolutions adopted by this
august body, pleading, appealing to the apnrthcid
rigime, and eventually condemning and prescribing
punitive measures such as the boycott. He should be
reminded that the ANC, like other liberation movements that preceded it in Africa and elsewhere, continues to gain support, And here I want to seize this
opportunity to salute those countries that have been
unswerving in their support for our struggle.

194. Members have read a lot about the highly
orchestrated campaign described as constitutional
dispensation or changes, in terms of which some
limited political rights are to be granted to the so-called
Coloureds and Indians. Of course they do not tell the
world that this makes this section of the oppressed
black community
liable for military conscription.
but they do go further, and say that this will never
be extended to the 22 million blacks, because. as one
of the Cabinet Ministers says, the blacks are not sufficiently developed mentally: they are incapable of
understanding the complex democratic process.

200. Finally, in dealing with these allegations it is
important to remind the world and again to try to
make people understand the type of people with whom
we are dealing when they commit such crimes and
then blame Lesotho and the ANC for having integrated
itself with what is called the civilian population in
order to make difficult I do not know what. In chef
words, we are subhuman, we must live in the bush,
and we are no longer entitled to live with our brothers.
Lesotho is not entitled to grant political asylum and
refuge to South Africans.

195. I am trying to say that it is time for the international community in unison to reflect on the position taken by the Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries at their Sixth Conference, held
at Havana in September 1979, when they concluded
20

RARY

201. That recalls to mind what the representative of
South Africa cited as examples of what has been done
in trying to resolve the problem peacefully with
Lesotho. One is reminded of the explanation given
after the murder of Steve Biko-that
he struck his
head against a wall. The rCgime has tried to suggest
that Dr. Agett and a number of other political detainees
who have been killed either in torture chambers or in
prison cells were in fact carrying out an order from
ANC that they must commit suicide. They end up
forgetting some of these unfounded claims. No doubt.
those they advanced today will be forgotten in a few
months and new ones will be fabricated.
202. In fact, South Africa’s hostility towards Lesotho
stems from the latter’s strict compliance with United
Nations resolutions in pursuance of the international
fight against the rrporthcid system. This has taken the
form of Lesotho’s refusal to establish diplomatic
relations with the Pretoria rCgime. It stems also from
Lesotho’s refusal to recognize the Transkei and other
bantustans,
its strict compliance with the Geneva
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees’ and its
rejection of the so-called Constellation of Southern
African States-in terms of which South Africa would
of course be the imperialist master while it continues
to enslave the Basotho brethren in South Africa.
Lesotho is called upon to collaborate with the crpnrfheid rigime or else be repeatedly attacked.
203. Therefore this is not aggression against Lesotho
only. It is aggression also against the international
community,
against the United Nations, against the
Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
and its Protocol, and so on. It is therefore urgent and
imperative that the international community go beyond
rhetorical support and token condemnation.
204.
It is important at this stage, while expressing
our hope that the unanimous decision taken yesterday
marks the beginning of a new era, by way of burying
the past, to say that the South African rtgime has
indeed been encouraged to carry out, not only brutal
repression in South Africa but also brazen acts of
aggression, by acts and statements of solidarity that
have emanated from certain quarters. We hope
that the adoption of that resolution means that that
is coming to an end.
Lastly, we salute Lesotho for the courageous
stand it has taken in continuing to provide succour to
the victims of the terrorist rrpcrrtheid rlgime. We are
gratified at the assurance given to the Council by the
King of Lesotho that Lesotho remains committed to
its obligations under the Geneva Convention on refugees. Lesotho deserves concrete support from the
international
community in carrying out this brave but
difficult task.
205.

While the memory of numeroUS
acts of aggrcssion committed by South Africa lemains
undimTed
and the printing ink on many relevant United
Nat’ons
resolutions is still fresh, the international
community
learned with profound shock and indignation
Of LLnew
flagrant violation of all the norms of inkrnational
law*
an arrogant flouting of the principles
and Provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations.
207,

208. In the early hours of 9 Decembel’.
under the
cover of night, a well-prepared.
unprovoked
and
cowardly attack, was carried out by South
African
commando forces. That armed invasion
resulted in the
loss of innocent lives. human suffering
and destrnction of property. The sovereignty,
air space and territorial integrity of Lesotho, a non-aligned
country
were
brutally
conducting
peace-loving
policies,
violated, An attempt has been made once l&n
to
intimidate its authorities into refusing
to give sanetuary to the victims of crptrrrhcid in accordance
with
its traditional practice, humanitarian
principles
and
international obligations.
209. The day before yesterday,
we listened
with
great attention to the important statement
made to the
Council by King Motlotlehi Moshoeshoe
II of Lesotho
[2406rl7 ,ncefin,q]. We shared his concern
at the naked
act of aggression and the groundless accusations
made
by the Pretoria rigime to justify it. We convey to him
and to the people of Lesotho expressions
of our deep
sympathy and condolences to the bereaved
families.
210. We have just heard the statement
of the representative of South Africa. It can convince
nobody. Its
arrogant and deceptive tone can only give additional
proof of the real hostile policy of South Africa towards
African countries.
21 1. The premeditated
aggressive
act committed
by South Africa is yet further evidence of an arrogant
challenge to the entire world. It constitutes
a serious
threat to peace and security in southern Africa. It cannot be seen as merely an isolated incident,
but is an
integral part of a planned scheme of aggression,
terror
and intimidation,
implemented
with the use of force,
in cold blood, ruthlessly and in defiance
of world
public opinion. It constitutes a part of South Africa’s
plan of aggression reflected in repeated
invasions
of
neighbouring
States, including
Lesotho.
One
must
also realize that the territory of that State has been
subjected not only to military
but also
economic
aggression.
212. It is obvious that without the unquestionable
and dc>fi/c.to unconditional support, both political
and
military,
rendered by its Western friends
and zl]]ies
-first and foremost the United States-the
Pretoria
rkgime would not be able to conduct
its aggressive
policies. The assistance given by those
countl-ies
to
South Africa has for long been supplying
the political
enCOLU%gement
and logistic
support
that enable the
inhuman racist rCgime to maintain
the policy line of

The PRESIDENT:
As there are no other
speakers, I should like to make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of POLAND.

206.

21

III

nrovocntion and onslaught. This nolicv
.
. serves the
strategic interests, and allows the implementation
of
the shadowy and hostile objectives, of imperialism and
neo-colonialism,
213. Poland’s consistent engagement in the work
and activities of the United Nations is reflected in our
contribution to the decolonization process-intc~
u/irt,
in our work in the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in the past and in the United Nations
Council for Namibia at present. Our invariable
approach derives from one of the principles of OUI
foreign policy: the principle of solidarity with the
newly emerged countries, which. in hard battles with
colonialism, won their national independence and now
are striving for the attainment of their political, economic and social goals.
214. Needless to say, the repeated acts of aggression
and State terrorism carried out by South Africa against
Lesotho and other African States constitute a serious
threat to the security of the entire continent of Africa.
Hence our firm support for the decisive steps that
the Council could take in discharging its duties and
responsibilities concerning the maintenance of international peace and security.
215. We therefore voted in favour of resolution 527/
1982, considering it the minimum action that the Council should undertake. It was with satisfaction that we
took note of the result of the vote and listened to the
unanimous condemnation of South Africa’s aggressive action and its policy. expressed in numerous
statements. including those made by the representatives of countries which maintain strong economic,
political and military links with South Africa.
2 16. We cannot be fully satisfied by the statements
and the words of condemnation alone, for we must
not forget whose veto in this chamber blocked, not
so long ago. the adoption of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against the South African rigime.
However. the unanimous decision of the Council in
this case permits US to hope that, when there is the
political will. the Council is able to act swiftly in
discharging its responsibilities,
217.

220. He criticized Britain for granting us independence. He fails to realize that we asked for independence and it was granted to us without bloodshed,
South Africa is in trouble at the moment because since
1912 the ANC has been calling for equality. It is
carrying on a very noble struggle. It does not intend
to oppress the white man in South Africa, but it wants
him to act as an equal. and this the South Africans
are not prepared to do.
221. The representative dealt at great length with the
powerful economy of South Africa. This is the mistake that the South Africans are making. It is true
that they have a powerful economy, but they seem to
think they can use it to manipulate and control neighbouring States. In the course of this debate, which we
have all appreciated, the countries in the neighbourhood of South Africa have indicated that they will
not be manipulated, and Lesotho is one of them, South
Africa has it in mind that, because of its economy, it
can tell us who our friends should be and whom we
should accommodate-all
because of its powerful
economy.
222. The South African representative made a number of very strange observations, but one of them that
is very true is that Lesotho has refused to enter into
a non-aggression pact. Why have we refused? It is
because we think that the region has no enemies; it
does not need common defence pacts. The only problem facing that region is clprrrrhcid. If we were to enter
into a non-aggression pact in an area where we believe
there are no enemies, we would be saying that we
enter into a non-aggression pact to fight the South
African people, the black people of South Africa, who
are fighting for equality. That is the explanation of
our refusal to enter into a non-aggression pact. All the
little homelands and bantustans-Ciskei,
Transkei,
insignificant creations of South Africa-have entered
into non-aggression pacts with South Africa. The
leader or chief minister of the Ciskei-I
am not sure
what he is called-was the first man to say he was
jubilant about what had been done in Maseru. He did
not say it himself. It was dictated from certain quarters.
223. The King of my country has alleged, and rightly.
that we shall keep ANC refugees and any other refugees in Lesotho. In this regard, let me indicate that we
are extremely satisifed with the ANC refugees in
Lesotho. They have not embarrassed us. They have
complied strictly with the terms and conditions of
their asylum. That is why we have on a number of
occasions asked South Africa to indicate any farmhouse, any railway, anything on the borders ofLesotho
that has been destroyed or harmed by people who
come from Lesotho. The examples we have been given
are Cape Town, which is 1,000 miles away from
Lesotho. Port Elizabeth, Islanda, Umtata. We have
no communications
whatsoever with those areas.
They do not want to accept the fact that South Africa
is filled with opponents of npnrthcid.
They want to
imagine that they come from Lesotho.

I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT.

218. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho,
Mr. Charles Dupe Molapo. has asked to be allowed
to speak. I now call on him.
219. Mr. MOLAPO (Lesotho): I do not intend to
reply to what the representative of South Africa has
said. but while I am thankirig members of the Council, it might be pertinent if I were to make observations on a few of the things that the representative of
South Africa said.
22

IY
224. We thank the Council very much. We promise
that we shall not act in a rash or an untoward manner;
we shall keep our heads cool. We want peace in the
region, but we realize that the strong South African
economy will be destroyed in the course of the struggle against trpcrrtheid. The representative
of South
Africa said that my people were working in South
Africa. Therefore, that economy has been built on the
sinews of my people. We are not so willing or anxious
to have it destroyed, but we see the tragedy facing that
country as long as nprrrtheid persists. And those countries which think that they love South Africa must
pressure it not to destroy this economy.

226. In conclusion, I must say that the Prime Minister of my country is not in fear of his Government
falling.
227. Mr, President, I thank you and all the other
members of the Council for having adopted the resolution.
228. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

NOTES

225. South Africa has threatened that it might close
our borders and that it might make movement difficult. I regret that that threat was made in this chamber, but I am sure that the Council is aware of it.

I General Assembly
resolution
217 A (III).
1 United Nations,
Trvr~ty Scrk~s, vol. 189, No.
’ hid.,
vol. 606. No. 8791, p. 267.
d A/34/542.
Politica! Declaration,
para. 78.

23

2545, p. 137.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
l’rom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United Nations.
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des vcntes. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations.

NW

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librcro
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sent en vente darts les librairics
et Its agences
de vutre lihraire
ou adressez-vous
i : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de Ias Naciones
todas partes de1 mundo.
Conrulte
Ntteva York o Ginebra.

Lilho

PURLICATTONS

depositaims
du
Unies, Section

UNlDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Section
dc Ventas.
