United Nations

S/PV.9268

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9268th meeting
Thursday, 23 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Borg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Xhaçka
Mr. Parga Cintra
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Mr. Ampratwum-Sarpong
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05696 (E)
*2305696*

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The proposal of the Secretary-General in Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982) has the potential to deliver
the reforms that the world needs at the Summit of the
Future. But that will happen only if all of us invest
in revitalizing the multilateral system. It will not just
happen by itself, as we sit in our positions and expect
others to do the job, nor will it happen if countries stick
to narrow, nationalist agendas.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite His Excellency Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles,
High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Borrell Fontelles.
Mr. Borrell Fontelles: This is my third briefing
to the Council as European Union (EU) High
Representative, but it is the first time I am able to
join Council members in person. Every time I have
participated, I have warned in my briefings about a
deficit in multilateralism. I have described how a rise
in power politics has led to more distrust, more point
scoring and more vetoes, including here at the Security
Council — more vetoes and fewer agreements. I have
also described how the price was being paid in terms
of problems not solved, conflicts that fester and people
left at the mercy of events.
I fear the situation this year is even worse and will
become worse. The United Nations and the multilateral
system are under threat as they have never been before.
Earlier this month, the Secretary-General sounded the
alarm bell, and he was right in doing so. The SecretaryGeneral warned that time is running out for the world to
avoid meltdown. He called on everyone to act decisively
before it is too late.
Indeed, we are facing a global emergency. We
see a proliferation of conflicts, the climate crisis,
systematic attacks on democracy and human rights,
and ever deeper global inequalities. The problems are
mounting, and our collective capacity to find solutions
is declining. If problems are mounting and the capacity
to solve them is decreasing, we certainly face a bigger
crisis, which we cannot afford.
2/21

23/02/2023

The EU is trying to do its part. We do our part.
We have always been a strong supporter, investing in
the United Nations, both politically and financially.
Allow me to say that the European Union and its
member States are the largest collective contributor
to the United Nations budget. We have always backed
the three pillars of the United Nations — peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights.
What a beautiful set of words: peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights.
We know that each one depends on the other two
for success. They are not isolated objectives. They are
extraordinarily interlinked. Peace and security are
preconditions for sustainable development but without
sustainable development, we will not have peace and
security, and without both of them, we will not have
human rights.
That is why we need to address all security
threats, new and old, with a holistic approach. But
equally, that is why we must counter the worsening
human rights situation we see in many countries. We
remain committed to all human rights — individual
and collective, and civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights — especially this year. As Council
members know, this year marks the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Universal means that human rights do not
belong to any specific culture. They are universal. It is
also a good moment to recall that human rights are not
only universal but also indivisible, and that they apply
to everyone and everywhere.
In the same vein, I think that we need to renew
our commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development precisely because we see increasing
global inequalities. The Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) summit later this year will be a crucial moment
to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
As a sign of its commitment, in July, the European
Union will submit its voluntary review on the SDGs
at the high-level political forum on sustainable
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

development. That will be an opportunity to share our
efforts to support the achievement of the SDGs at home
and around the world with the broader United Nations
membership and to point to the challenges, as we see
them. Let me summarize how we see them.
First, there has been a year of war against Ukraine in
addition to the global consequences. As I said yesterday
before the General Assembly (see A/ES-11/PV.17), this
war was and remains a clear case of aggression, in
breach of the Charter of the United Nations. It is not a
European issue. It is not about the West versus Russia.
It is about the kind of world in which we want to live.
That is not a world where no one is safe and where
the illegal use of force is somehow normalized. That
is why international law must be enforced everywhere
to protect everyone from power politics, blackmail and
military attacks. In a sentence, we need to ensure that
aggression fails, and that international law prevails.
Many people are clearly asking about peace, but the
real questions are: what kind of peace are we talking
about, and how do we achieve it? We need peace, and
the Ukrainian people deserve peace, but not just any
peace. We need a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace, in line with the Charter of the United Nations.
The first obvious step to peace is for the aggressor
to stop its attacks and withdraw its forces from
Ukraine. Until then, the European Union will continue
to give Ukraine all the support that it needs to defend
its population, and we will do so for as long as it takes.
The two tracks — supporting Ukraine and seeking
peace — go hand in hand. It is not either/or; it is
both things. We count on the entire United Nations
membership to show its support for those principles in
Ukraine and elsewhere. It is a moment for countries to
take a stand and to be counted.
Meanwhile, the European Union will continue to
help the rest of the world to cope with the fallout of
Russia’s aggression. That is what we have been doing
for a year now, and successfully. Food and energy prices
are now declining, partly thanks to the “solidarity
lanes”, which have enabled the export of 50 million
tons of grain from Ukraine, and the vital Black Sea
Grain Initiative, brokered by the United Nations.
Let me recall that the Black Sea Grain Initiative
comes up for renewal in mid-March. It needs to be
prolonged. It is the food for millions of people around
the world that is at stake. Jointly with States members of

S/PV.9268

the EU, we have increased our financial contributions
to handle the fallout from the war. We have provided
€18 billion to tackle food insecurity until 2024, and
half of those resources will go to Africa and the Middle
East. We know that it will not be enough, but we can
perhaps say that there is strong support for those who
are suffering the shock waves sent by that propagation
of war affecting the entire world. It is the war and its
consequences that are jeopardizing millions of people
from the point of view of their livelihoods, facing
energy and food prices that they cannot afford.
Let us talk about climate. Climate is a test case for
multilateralism, but it is also a security issue. Let us
look beyond the war in Ukraine. Looking beyond the
war in Ukraine, we see the climate crisis as a textbook
example of where we need effective multilateral action.
I am sorry to say that we are not getting it. We need it,
but we are not getting it.
We see unprecedented floods, droughts and
heatwaves. Every scientific report concludes that time
is running out and that we need far more ambitious
climate action. That means accelerating the green
transition, but, again, in a just way. The green transition
has to be just, or it will not happen, because those least
responsible for causing the problem are the ones that
will be most affected by it. That is why we want to
contribute to that just transition. We are the world’s
largest contributor of public climate finance worldwide,
with €23 billion a year.
As I said, climate change is also a security issue. The
climate and security nexus will increasingly dominate
the global agenda. That also means that the Security
Council will have to shoulder its responsibilities
regarding that issue.
Let me continue discussing peace and security
beyond the war in Ukraine. Unhappily, it is not the
only conflict in the world. Let me turn to the specifics
of the cooperation between the European Union and
the United Nations on peace and security. Indeed, all
European Union crisis management operations work
with the United Nations as their partner. We are proud
of that. We are proud of being a strong a partner of
the United Nations in any crisis management process.
Our strategic partnership on peacekeeping and crisis
management dates back at least two decades.
A few weeks ago, we celebrated the twentieth
anniversary of our first civilian mission, the European
Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,

23-056963/21

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

established 20 years ago. Twenty years later, the EU has
21 civilian or military missions deployed around the
world, mobilizing more than 5,000 people working for
peace and security. The most recent missions include
not only our military assistance mission in support
of Ukraine, clearly, but also a presence in Armenia
and, more recently, a military partnership mission in
the Niger.
Let me stress that the mission in the Niger
demonstrates our willingness to remain engaged in
the Sahel. The European Union is not abandoning the
Sahel. It is working with its partners to the extent that
they want. The mission’s explicit partnership approach,
built on the clear demands of the Niger’s authorities, is
aimed at increasing its effectiveness in that area, one of
those at greatest risk anywhere in the world.
I will now turn to the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI, which is contributing
to the implementation of the United Nations arms
embargo. While it was the United Nations that declared
the embargo, it has to be implemented, not just declared.
Someone has to ensure that is executed effectively on
the ground. And IRINI is the toughest way to provide
support for the arms embargo, through inspections on
the high seas off the coast of Libya of vessels suspected
of breaking the embargo. IRINI remains the only actor
doing that.
Let us talk about terrorism, how it affects African
countries and how helping African countries in the
fight against terrorism is another key priority for the
European Union. We have several missions that provide
military and civilian support to African countries,
the latest example of which is the European Union
Training Mission in Mozambique. Five of our civilian
missions include a counter-terrorism mandate. As
United Nations peacekeeping marks its seventy-fifth
anniversary, we must use this opportunity to maximize
the impact of United Nations operations. We support
the Secretary-General’s call for a New Agenda for
Peace. We are committed to continuing our support
for African-led peace support operations and for the
ongoing discussions on using United Nations assessed
contributions for operations authorized by the Security
Council. Regional organizations such as the African
Union and the League of Arab States, together with
the European Union, play a key role in preventing and
addressing crises. I believe that we are well placed as
a peace actor by virtue of our wider array of policies
and instruments, combining mediation, prevention,
4/21

23/02/2023

diplomacy, security, trade, development cooperation
and humanitarian tools. All of those together can
enable us to engage throughout all phases of a conflict
if it cannot be prevented.
We are currently providing such support in
20 conflicts throughout the world. In 20 conflicts
throughout the world, we are there, supporting civilians
and trying to improve the situation. And we will
reinforce our capacities to that end. This is therefore
not just about Ukraine. We are paying attention to
everything that matters in the world and maintaining
our global engagement, because we know that while war
has returned to Europe, it has not stopped elsewhere.
I want to stress that the European Union will remain
fully engaged in all crises around the world, financially
and politically.
I would now like to devote the final part of my
briefing to addressing some specific cases and regional
crises. I want to start with the devastating earthquakes
in Syria and Türkiye, which have resulted in more
than 40,000 victims and the destruction of hundreds of
thousands of homes. We are providing assistance to both
countries, in close cooperation with the United Nations.
We immediately sent medical teams, and we will
organize a donors’ conference next month to finance
the reconstruction. At the same time, we were already
sending people to fight the enormous wildfires in Chile.
We are trying to ensure that assistance reaches people in
need everywhere in northern Syria, whether they are in
areas that are under the regime’s control or not, because
human beings deserve assistance regardless of whether
the regime controls the territory or not. In the wake of
the earthquake, we decided to introduce an additional,
albeit time-limited, humanitarian exemption to our
sanctions regime in order to ensure that humanitarian
aid can reach the Syrian population in need as quickly
as possible.
Let us not forget Afghanistan. Two years ago,
Kabul fell, but Afghanistan is still there. Developments
there have gone from bad to worse because of the
Taliban’s action and inaction. The systematic gender
apartheid in public life that the Afghan regime is
imposing on Afghan women and girls, who account
for half of the population, is totally unacceptable. We
therefore cannot continue business as usual. But at the
same time, we cannot punish Afghan women twice by
halting assistance where it can still be delivered. Can
we first watch the Taliban punish them, after which
we punish them once again by cutting assistance? No.
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9268

If assistance can be delivered with full respect for
key principles and values, we will continue to do it. I
thank the United Nations for its high-level engagement
and coordination on the ground, including with the
European Union.

be hosting a high-level meeting with the Belgrade and
Pristina leadership, the President of Serbia and the Prime
Minister of Kosovo, in order to see if the engagement
is serious and solid and presents a clear path to the
normalization of relations between the two countries.

With regard to the situation in the Sahel, I want to
approach it from a security perspective. Let me say a
few words in French, as I know how important the issue
is for France.

There are many more countries and crises that I
could mention, but let me leave it there. I have been
talking for too long. On behalf of the European Union,
I thank the Council for giving me this opportunity
to explain to the world that beyond the Ukraine war,
we remain committed to many crises. We and many
people around the world are doing our best to improve
the peace and security situation. I look forward to the
comments of the Ambassadors here today, and I thank
everyone for their continued cooperation.

(spoke in French)
In the Sahel, the security situation continues to
deteriorate in an increasingly complex political context.
But there too our commitment remains steadfast,
because we know that when we act, we are doing
so in a way that addresses security needs as well as
those on the governance and humanitarian fronts. We
have adapted to the changing dynamics by responding
cautiously and carefully where necessary — in Mali
and Burkina Faso — and by readjusting our bilateral
response with partners who are more willing to work
with us. In that regard, I already mentioned the Niger,
and I would add Mauritania.
(spoke in English)
With regard to the Western Balkans, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina I welcomed the unanimous decision to
extend the executive mandate of the European Union
Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR
Althea) for an additional year. I am grateful for that
decision, as it ensures that Althea can continue to
support the authorities in maintaining a safe and secure
environment for all citizens, and I know how much the
people of Bosnia-Herzegovina appreciate the mission.
The EU candidate status provides a clear signal that
the country’s future is in the European Union. I met
with the political leadership last week and addressed
the need to deliver on the necessary reforms in order
to make faster progress on that path, which is the best
way to ensure peace, stability, democracy, freedom and
progress for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I am working on the EU-facilitated Belgrade-Pristina
dialogue as its coordinator, with the help of the
United Nations. With regard to the normalization of
relations, we are at a crucial juncture, and I hope that in
the next few weeks I will be able to announce positive
results. The European Union has presented a proposal
to the parties that would put the normalization process
on a solid, forward-looking track. On Monday I will

The President: I thank Mr. Borrell Fontelles for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign and European Affairs and Trade
of Malta.
I would like to begin by welcoming Mr. Borrell, the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, to the Security Council
today and thanking him for his briefing.
As a committed supporter of multilateralism,
Malta attaches great value to strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. They are an integral part
of the multilateral system and can make a significant
contribution through their unique knowledge of
their region and its particular circumstances. As a
proud member of the European Union (EU), it goes
without saying that Malta strongly supports enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU.
That cooperation has been paying dividends for a
number of years, and we are firm in our belief that it
will continue to yield tangible results in 2023 and the
years to come.
The principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and the values of the European Union are
fully aligned, and we believe that this complementarity
makes the two organizations natural partners. The
European experiment, born from the ashes of the Second
World War, is an example of how multilateralism and
regional integration bring peace, stability, prosperity
and growth. The EU’s strategic relationship with the
United Nations must continue to strengthen respect

23-056965/21

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

for the Charter and international law, including human
rights, the rule of law and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. A robust and dynamic collaboration between
the EU and the United Nations will help us contribute
more effectively to peace and security and to addressing
global challenges that require a global approach.
To that end, Malta welcomes the invaluable
contribution of the Secretary-General in presenting a
comprehensive vision that outlines the necessary steps
for renewing our multilateral approach. Together with
the EU, Malta is fully committed to supporting and
effectively contributing to the parallel processes that
we have initiated through the Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) report. We truly believe that multilateral
and constructive engagement on such initiatives has
the potential to bring about the changes necessary
for ensuring that the United Nations can continue to
effectively address the most pressing global issues.
We are living through challenging times. The EU
and its member States have consistently underlined the
need to work together towards a common goal — that
of upholding the Charter and a rules-based order. We
have been faced with the reality of our interdependence
many times, and yet we have still been unable to come
together to address global challenges, including climate.
We continue to fail to recognize that a unilateral failure
today will translate into collective ramifications for
the many in years to come. In that regard, we have a
responsibility to ensure that where possible, regional
and international organizations can come together
to provide that much-needed convergence and
collaboration. Regional collaboration and cooperation
are indispensable to the proper functioning of our
interconnected and globalized world. Through active
collaboration, we can make sure that the common good
is upheld, safeguarded and pursued.
The existing comprehensive United Nations-EU
approach to crisis management, mediation and peace
operations, including the support provided in various
regions, has helped several countries navigate the
difficult path from conflict to peace. We also welcome
the fruitful United Nations-EU trilateral cooperation
with the African Union in tackling security challenges.
For example, the EU ’s contribution to the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia has enabled
the Mission to effectively carry out its mandate. We
reaffirm our support for thematic joint efforts that can
help us to better address today’s challenges through
the implementation of humanitarian principles, the
6/21

23/02/2023

agendas on women and peace and security and children
in armed conflict, as well as access to quality education
and climate-change frameworks.
In conclusion, Malta’s commitment to peace,
dialogue and multilateralism remains stronger than ever.
We believe that strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU can only enhance our ability
to prevent and resolve conflict and advance the broader
goals and objectives of the Charter.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs of Albania.
Ms. Xhaçka (Albania): Let me start by thanking
High Representative Borrell Fontelles for his
in-depth perspective on the cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union (EU). His
personal and regular participation in the meetings on
this topic testifies to the importance that is attached to
this cooperation, which is indispensable to international
peace and security and global socioeconomic
development. In the face of the ongoing challenges
in Europe and around the world, we need to further
reinforce that cooperation in the service of a common
agenda with the strengthening of multilateralism at
its core. The two organizations have a particularly
crucial role to play on a wide range of issues, such
as maintaining peace and security, meeting global
humanitarian and development needs, promoting and
ensuring full respect for human rights and mitigating
climate change, as well as respecting international law
and strengthening accountability for serious violations
of that law.
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified military
aggression against Ukraine has brought war to Europe
on a scale not seen since 1945. By helping Ukraine
defend itself, the European Union and its member States
are showing concretely what solidarity means. They are
helping a sovereign nation to resist the brutality of an
invasion whose sole aim is to wipe a country off the
map and subjugate its people to satisfy the desire of
an empire. Albania has joined the wide range of policy
responses from the EU and its member States to the
aggression, aimed at reducing Russia’s ability to finance
the war on the one hand and helping the economy and
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

functionality of Ukraine on the other. We support
every form of cooperation between the United Nations
and the EU regarding accountability for the crimes
committed in the war. A comprehensive, lasting
and just peace cannot be built on impunity, and the
perpetrators should be held accountable for their crimes.
The new threats and challenges to the European
security architecture need a stronger and more
consolidated Europe. The merit-based EU enlargement
process in the Western Balkans should be speeded up
and the progressive rapprochement made more flexible
and creative. The more prosperous that region is and the
closer it gets to Europe, the more secure the continent
will be. From a broader point of view, the European
Neighbourhood Policy needs upgrading. The EU and
United Nations should increase their cooperation in
regional conflict resolution, beyond the support for
dialogue and mediation. We commend the cooperation
between the EU and the United Nations in Africa.
The European Union’s strategic partnership initiatives
with the United Nations in Africa, such as the EUUnited Nations Global Terrorism Threats Facility and
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, have created
important synergies between the two organizations.
To end on a specific note, my country is not yet a
member of the European Union. It is only a candidate
engaged in negotiations to join the Union in future. We
want to do so because it is a place where we belong
in every way — because we voluntarily align with its
policies, we adhere to and share its values, and we want
to be part of the security and prosperity it has built
and expanded.
The European Union is today by far the most brilliant
project human history has ever known. Whoever has
any knowledge of history knows the dramatic European
heritage — made of conflicts, wars, territorial changes
of all kinds, of immense and uninterrupted suffering.
Out of this, the European Union has proved convincingly
and irrefutably that it is the most efficient investment
in prevention — yes, prevention, which is the weakest
point of international cooperation. If we were looking
for any concrete materialization or true meaning of the
word “prevention”, it is the united Europe. A long-term
vision, clear determination and strong leadership made
former belligerents come together, former enemies
agree and build their future in cooperation and shared
benefits, in freedom and with rules, not to the detriment
of some, but to the benefit of all.

S/PV.9268

This is what the EU can offer to the United Nations
and the world: a way to build the future based on the
rights of individuals who come together in collective
efforts through the rule of law to enjoy the dividends
of democracy. This is why any claims whatsoever
that Europe has fomented or wants war in its vicinity,
endangering itself and the entire continent, are
ridiculous, preposterous and absurd. Europe and those
who align with it want peace, work for peace and project
peace. Nothing will change the hard truth. Russia has
started the war. Russia may and will end it.
Mr. Ampratwum-Sarpong (Ghana): I thank
Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, for his briefing and the highlights he gave on the
security concerns of the European Union (EU) as well as
the strategic and policy approaches the EU is pursuing
in response to existing and other emerging threats.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union has always been an important and
reinforcing factor for our shared aspirations for global
peace and security. The partnership, framed by Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter, affirms the agency
of regional bodies in the maintenance of international
peace and security. As the continent of Europe faces the
worst security and geopolitical crises in recent times,
it is important that the channels of cooperation are
strengthened to help overcome prevailing challenges.
Since the Security Council’s last consideration of
this agenda item eight months ago (see S/PV.9065),
the security situation in Europe and across the world
has rapidly deteriorated, with many conflict situations
showing signs of possible escalation. The year-long
aggression against Ukraine by the Russian Federation
has spurred new crises and aggravated many others.
Apart from the humanitarian burden on neighbouring
countries where millions of Ukrainians have sought
refuge from the war, the energy crises and elevated high
costs of living threaten social and political stability in
many parts of Europe. The measures being implemented
to protect the European economy from high gas prices
and disruptions to energy supplies in the region would
help to alleviate the burden of the war. We encourage the
continued support of the European Union in addressing
the humanitarian aspects of the war.
Since the onset of the war, the European Union
has taken a strong and principled position against the
Russian Federation’s aggressive acts towards Ukraine

23-056967/21

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and has been supportive of Ukraine’s efforts to defend
its sovereignty and territorial integrity. However, the
war raises serious considerations for Europe about the
collective-security mechanisms and how they may be
strengthened for all.
We encourage closer cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union towards the
immediate de-escalation of tensions and cessation of
hostilities. We encourage the EU as a regional force and
key actor of the collective security of Europe to foster,
through dialogue, the peaceful and comprehensive
resolution of the conflict in Ukraine. We stress that,
of necessity, peace in Ukraine must be founded on
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
As the war in Ukraine takes centre stage in
international affairs, it is vital not to lose sight of
other smouldering situations. We wish in this regard to
highlight the following, First, averting a renewed war
between Armenia and Azerbaijan is critical to avoid the
bloodshed and destruction that accompanied the 2020
Nagorno-Karabakh war and the intermittent border
clashes between the two countries. We consider the
establishment of a civilian European Union mission in
Armenia as an important contribution to stability and
building trust between the two sides, and we welcome
the EU’s commitment to supporting de-escalation
and the acceleration of key actions, including border
demarcation and normalization efforts.
In respect of the Cyprus problem, we remain
concerned by the current political stalemate. We urge
the EU to continue its support for a comprehensive
settlement of the dispute on the basis of the Security
Council’s resolutions. Our combined efforts must, at
present, be geared towards building confidence to open
up channels of cooperation between the two Cypriot
communities and pave the way for much-needed
political dialogue.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the joint efforts of
the United Nations and the EU through the Security
Council’s renewal of the mandate for the European
Union military operation in the country has been an
important contributor to maintaining a safe and secure
environment. While progress towards EU integration
has been slow, it remains important as a strategic
approach in ensuring lasting peace in the country and
within the Eurasia region.
The support of the European Union in strengthening
the African Peace and Security Architecture remains
8/21

23/02/2023

a critical contribution to maintaining long-term peace
and security on the continent as well as globally.
We welcome ongoing capacity-building and
technical assistance missions that are helping to
adapt responses to the changing security landscape in
Africa. In this regard, we call for enhanced support for
regionally led peace and security initiatives through
the provision of adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding, including the use of assessed contributions
of the United Nations. In Somalia, for instance, the
European Union’s continuous support for the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS) and the
effective implementation of the Somalia Transition Plan
remains crucial, even as we note the funding shortfall
for ATMIS.
We recognize the European Union’s contribution to
humanitarian needs arising in other areas of conflict,
particularly in Afghanistan, Myanmar, Syria and
Yemen. We also welcome the EU’s mobilizations in aid
of communities affected by the recent earthquakes that
struck parts of Syria and Türkiye earlier this month.
In conclusion, let me take the opportunity of
today’s meeting to reiterate the importance of regional
and subregional organizations for collective security
beyond their regional space. While the war in Ukraine
is taking place on the continent of Europe, the stalemate
it has created in the Security Council is complicating
our efforts in Africa to defeat terrorists and violent
extremists and achieve the Africa we want. It is equally
not lost on people all over the world that the ramifications
of the war in Europe continue to poison relations among
States, undermining our ability as the United Nations
to address the multiple sustainable development crises
we face and respond to the aspirations of our people
everywhere
The European Union has shown deep commitment to
and leadership in deepening cooperation at all levels for
the achievement of global goals, including international
peace and security. We encourage the European Union
to strive to do more and urge the United Nations to look
at further strengthening the cooperation of the EU as
we work towards restoring the unity of purpose and
effectiveness of the United Nations.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Minister Borg, for
presiding over this important meeting. I would also
like to thank High Representative Borrell Fontelles for
joining us today.
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Almost 25 years ago, hundreds of Emirati troops
were deployed to Kosovo to support stabilization
efforts there. That initiative complemented the role
of the United Nations, the European Union (EU) and
other international partners in ensuring post-conflict
recovery in the Balkans. That deployment illustrates
something that I want to stress today: the United
Arab Emirates and the European Union may not be
direct neighbours, but we have many neighbours in
common and our mutual challenges must be addressed
collectively. That idea could not be more relevant today.
The relationship between the EU and the United
Nations is based on a common commitment to
multilateralism, the rule of law and support for the most
vulnerable. Today I would like to address some of the
global challenges where cooperation exists and where
it could deepen. Those include scaling up climate
ambition, countering extremism, empowering women
and girls, addressing the risks of nuclear proliferation
and promoting peaceful and inclusive solutions to
crises around the world.
In a world marked by growing fragmentation, the
EU’s emphasis on connectivity, the establishment of
strong global trade partnerships, digital transformation
and standard-setting to promote scientific and
technological progress resonates deeply with the United
Arab Emirates. But we recognize that the EU is much
more than that; it is also a key geopolitical actor whose
commitment to playing a constructive role on many
issues on the Council’s agenda we commend. As the war
in Ukraine continues, we must redouble efforts to bring
it to a just end. We must also ensure that other crises
are not ignored, and welcome the EU’s commitment
in that regard. That needs to be visible in concerted
action — not only in word, but also in deed — working
with partners in other regions as well. In our region,
peace and stability for Libya, Yemen, Syria, Palestine
and Israel must also be achieved, not to mention nine
open conflicts on the African continent.

S/PV.9268

agree more. The idea that chaos, having gained a foothold
somewhere, will not have a ripple effect somewhere
else is a mirage. In the end, it will. Emerging risks to
our collective stability, such as food insecurity, techenabled extremist incitement and nuclear sabre-rattling
all require international cooperation.
That also requires addressing protracted conflicts
that continue to negatively impact the lives of
millions of civilians. In a moment of unprecedented
displacement, from Syria to the Sahel, there needs to be
a change of paradigm in the way we support conflictresolution efforts and manage the flow of those fleeing
instability. Promoting sustainable peace and economic
opportunities in countries of origin should be a key
element in addressing that issue, alongside continued
compassion for those most in need.
Secondly, supporting those in need or at risk is
a shared priority and should be recognized as such.
Together, the United Nations, the EU and the United
Arab Emirates have a strong commitment to supporting
those affected by war and natural disasters. That entails
ensuring that civilians from Afghanistan to Yemen to
Syria receive vital, life-saving aid based on needs and
not on politics. The EU is one of the Organization’s
largest donors, providing critical financial and political
support to front-line humanitarian efforts. The United
Arab Emirates is host to the world’s largest humanitarian
hub at the International Humanitarian City, where
prepositioned bilateral and international assistance,
including from the EU, is sent where needed. Most
recently, nearly 90 planes full of emergency aid from
the United Arab Emirates were dispatched in response
to the devastating earthquakes in Türkiye and Syria.

With that in mind, I would like to touch on three
specific areas of common concern.

The United Arab Emirates is also proud to work
with the United Nations and EU to support women
and girls. Without women’s empowerment, security
and stability will not be sustained. As we witness the
reversal of women’s and girls’ rights in almost every
region around the world, promoting the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in all aspects of
public life is key.

First, addressing security risks remains key to
stability and prosperity. This autumn, EU Commission
President Ursula von der Leyen acknowledged in
Manama that it took the EU too long to understand
the impact of certain security risks beyond the Middle
East. As she said, “the world needs a stronger security
architecture against the spread of chaos”. We could not

Thirdly, scaling up climate ambition is an urgent
task. Climate mitigation and adaptation efforts must go
hand in hand, and the EU is an essential partner to achieve
that objective. That work is essential to both ensuring
sustainable development, especially for developing
countries most vulnerable to climate change, as well
as to maintaining international peace and security. As

23-056969/21

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

host of the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the United Arab Emirates is committed to
keeping alive the 1.5°C global climate target. Climate
change is an existential crisis, and we cannot simply
confine the 1.5°C goal to the dustbin of history. At
the same time, we also recognize the importance of
securing financing for climate adaptation for the global
South, particularly with the increasing frequency and
devastation of extreme-weather events.
The European project was initiated by countries
that had just fought a terrible war. They came together
with the dedicated ambition to set up a common
market for coal and steel. Fast forward 70 years and
they became a Union that contributes effectively to so
many areas critical for international peace and security.
From the perspective of the Gulf today, and indeed the
Arab world, that journey from confidence-building to
political integration and a common agenda remains an
inspiring example. We hope that we can all reach for
that inspiration again today in pursuit of a new peace.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening us today for
this important discussion, and I join others in thanking
the High Representative for his briefing. It is good to
see him in person.
As we heard today, this has indeed been a
challenging year for the multilateral system. Russia’s
full-scale invasion of Ukraine saw the return of war to
Europe. The knock-on effects have made it harder to
tackle the most pressing global challenges, exacerbated
food insecurity and prolonged the damage wrought by
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
In this challenging context, we welcome the positive
role played by the European Union (EU) and other
regional organizations in championing multilateralism
and supporting the Security Council on international
peace and security. I would like to highlight three areas
in particular.
First, we recognize the EU’s efforts to address
global challenges. The United Kingdom is proud of our
work alongside the EU to establish energy transition
partnerships, which have helped coal-dependent
emerging economies make a just energy transition
by building on the model pioneered at the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. As we
just heard from the representative of the United Arab
10/21

23/02/2023

Emirates, we look forward to continuing this work
through the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties.
We also welcome the EU’s considerable support for
the Organization’s Education Cannot Wait fund. As a
co-founder of the fund, the United Kingdom values that
support to high-quality education in emergencies.
Secondly, we recognize the EU’s contribution to the
Organization’s work. That includes cooperation with
United Nations peace operations and peacebuilding, for
example in Mali and Somalia, and efforts to promote
regional stability. We expect that the EU Military
Partnership Mission in the Niger will play a vital
role in supporting stability in the Sahel, as the High
Representative described.
In Europe, we strongly support the EU’s role in
upholding peace and security in the Western Balkans,
including through the EU-facilitated Serbia-Kosovo
dialogue and the ongoing important role of the European
Union Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Finally, the United Kingdom welcomes the
EU’s support for Ukraine. The EU has given vital
humanitarian assistance and helped tackle global food
insecurity by supporting the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
As we map out Ukraine’s reconstruction, we look
forward to working with the EU on preparations for the
2023 Ukraine recovery conference, to be hosted by the
United Kingdom and Ukraine in London in June.
In these times of crisis, the role of the EU in
tackling global challenges and assisting the United
Nations in its work encapsulates the need for
responsible multilateralism. We need an engaged role
for regional organizations to address the problems we
face and uphold the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely
debate on the cooperation between the United Nations
and the European Union (EU). I also thank Mr. Josep
Borrell Fontelles, the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
and Vice-President of the European Commission, for
his briefing.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
underscores the importance of the work of regional
organizations in maintaining peace and security.
Thanks to their expertise, they play a key role in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. That is why we
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

welcome the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations such as the African Union,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the League
of Arab States, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and, of course, the European
Union, our immediate neighbour. The motto of the
European Union, “United in diversity”, resonates with
the fundamental values of the United Nations. In its
Preamble, the Charter invites us to “practice tolerance
[...] and to unite our strength to maintain international
peace and security”. The same motto reflects the
identity of Switzerland, a country with four national
languages. We also share with the EU the vision of
an international order based on international law and
effective multilateralism.
Today’s discussion comes at a time when
multilateralism is under pressure. It is therefore all the
more relevant to recall the values that unite us. The
High Representative’s appeal to the General Assembly
for a just and lasting peace in Ukraine reflects the
commitment of the EU and its members to the Charter
and to respect for its principles. Switzerland shares
that commitment and emphasizes that respect for those
principles is in the interest of Europe and the world as a
whole. A commitment to peace, sustainable development
and human rights guides the United Nations, the
European Union and Swiss foreign policy. That common
ground is reflected in close cooperation in various
contexts and on various thematic agendas. By way
of illustration, I would like to highlight three points.
First, we welcome the joint efforts of the European
Union and the United Nations to promote peace and
prevent armed conflict around the world. We welcome
the importance placed on respect for international law in
those efforts, such as for example in the tripartite project
of the African Union, the EU and the United Nations on
the human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework for peacekeeping operations.
In the Western Balkans, the EU plays a key role in
the implementation of Security Council mandates.
That is particularly true of the European Union Force
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Operation Althea, to which
Switzerland contributes. In a cross-cutting way, the EU
is an important partner in the promotion of the women
and peace and security agenda in various contexts on
the agenda of the Security Council.
Secondly, like the EU, we pay particular
attention to the protection of civilians and respect for
international humanitarian law, including by working

S/PV.9268

for the protection in armed conflict of children and
other non-combatants, such as the wounded and sick,
whether in Ukraine, Syria or elsewhere. We support
justice for all victims and are committed to the fight
against impunity, because we know that there can be no
lasting peace without accountability.
Thirdly, we are also united in the belief that
security risks must be addressed in a broader sense.
Food insecurity and conflict create a vicious cycle
that affects many parts of the world, of which Yemen,
Afghanistan and the Horn of Africa are only a few
examples. We include in this the fight against climate
change, which exacerbates food insecurity and can
therefore have implications for international peace
and security.
Switzerland shares firm convictions with the
European Union and the United Nations. We believe
that disputes can and must be resolved peacefully, that
dialogue and respect are the best means to achieve that
and that diversity is an engine for peace and prosperity.
We will continue to cooperate closely with the European
Union and the United Nations, in the Security Council
and outside it, as well as in the implementation of Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982). Together we can forge
global partnerships to implement our common motto,
“United in diversity”.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would like to welcome His
Excellency High Representative Borrell Fontelles in
person to the Security Council and thank him for his
detailed and insightful briefing. We also thank you,
Mr. President, for hosting such an important meeting
at an opportune moment and a time when we need
cooperation and solidarity.
Regional organizations play an indispensable
and complementary role in enabling the Security
Council to fulfil its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security. Cooperation with
regional organizations is built into the Charter of the
United Nations, and as they enlarge and deepen their
mandates, they become more and more important
as partners. In that context, Japan values the strong
cooperation between the European Union (EU) and the
United Nations under the framework of Chapter VIII of
the Charter.
We appreciate that the EU has consistently
demonstrated its leadership and commitment,
garnering vital international attention and support on
current issues on a global scale. For example, the EU’s

23-0569611/21

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Global Gateway initiative is important to the creation
of sustainable and trustworthy connections for tackling
the most pressing global challenges. We welcomed the
announcement of a huge investment package at the EUAfrican Union and EU-Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Summits last year.
Japan is more than willing to work with the EU to
promote international connectivity, as well as green
and digital cooperation. Our security cooperation has
also deepened. The EU and Japan have conducted
more than 25 joint anti-piracy exercises in the Gulf of
Aden. Japan and the EU are global strategic partners in
support of the three pillars of the United Nations, as the
High Representative mentioned — peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights — as we share
the fundamental values of democracy and freedom. We
deeply appreciated the EU and its membership’s active
participation in the open debate in the Security Council
last month on the rule of law (see S/PV.9241) that Japan
convened as President of the Council.
In the midst of a tumultuous situation, the EU is
playing an indispensable role for the international
community through its solid and strong support for
Ukraine and other regional partners. We have worked
together tirelessly and will continue to do so for
international peace and security on various issues, as
well as on Ukraine, reaffirming the indispensable role
of the EU as a strong partner of the United Nations.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I welcome
you, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malta, as
you preside over today’s meeting. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Borrell Fontelles, High Representative
of the European Union (EU) for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, and thank him for his briefing.
Strengthening cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations is both a clear provision of
the Charter of the United Nations and an important
embodiment of multilateralism. China supports the
United Nations in its cooperation with the EU in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter. We are pleased to see the EU’s enhanced
strategic autonomy, its more significant role in
international affairs and its greater contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
China expects the EU to prioritize the practice
of genuine multilateralism. In today’s world, where
transformation and conflict are intertwined, the EU,
as an active advocate of multilateralism, should take
12/21

23/02/2023

the lead in practicing true multilateralism, abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and maintain the multilateral system with the
United Nations at its core. It is our hope that the EU
will adhere to the principles of sovereign equality and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, respect
the social system and development path independently
chosen by each country and actively cooperate with all
parties within the framework of the United Nations.
China expects the EU to work towards the goal of
creating a stable international security environment.
No country can cope on its own with the increasingly
complex international security challenges, or can
a country extricate itself from the interdependent
security concerns of all. It is our hope that, in the
conduct of its foreign relations, the EU will afford
equal attention to, and respect for, the legitimate
security concerns of all countries. It should persist with
efforts to resolve disputes and conflicts by peaceful
means while promoting global security governance in a
coordinated manner.
China expects the EU to work towards facilitating
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), especially in those developing countries
currently facing difficulties and challenges due to the
energy, food, climate and debt crises, among others.
We expect the EU to leverage its own advantages and
resources to provide targeted financial and technical
support to developing countries in order to meet their
needs. We welcome the greater synergy between the
EU and the United Nations, positively complementing
the work of the Organization to help and support
developing countries in achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the SDGs.
The Ukraine crisis poses an enormous challenge
to security in Europe. Properly resolving the crisis
requires exploring how to build a balanced, effective
and sustainable security architecture in Europe based
on the principle of the indivisibility of security. We
once again call on Russia and Ukraine to cease fire
and resume peace negotiations as soon as possible. In
the meantime, the EU, NATO and the United Nations
should engage and hold dialogue with Russia to achieve
common security on the European continent.
China will always stand on the side of peace and
dialogue. We will soon release a position paper on a
political settlement of the Ukraine crisis and remain
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

willing to continue playing an active and constructive
role in resolving the Ukraine crisis and achieving peace
at an early date.
One year since the outbreak of the Ukraine
crisis, all parties have continued to closely follow
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine. We appreciate
the efforts of individual countries, including EU
member States, to alleviate the humanitarian situation
in Ukraine, especially by providing assistance to
disadvantaged groups, such as refugees and displaced
persons. It is our hope that the EU will uphold that
humanitarian spirit and continue to extend assistance to
all affected populations to the greatest extent possible
in order mitigate the negative impact of the conflict and
the harsh winter on people’s lives and prevent a largerscale humanitarian crisis.
The situation in Kosovo has continued to escalate
in recent months and threatens to unhinge the stability
of the Balkans. It is our hope that the EU, as it
facilitates the dialogue between Serbia and the Kosovo
authorities, will respect the framework established by
resolution 1244 (1999) and avoid imposing internal
solutions. The EU should urge the authority in
Kosovo to observe previous agreements, expedite the
establishment of the community of Serb municipalities
and avoid any unilateral actions that may escalate
the situation.
No matter how the international situation evolves,
the international community should always prioritize
assisting Africa in achieving peace and development.
When he addressed the Council in June, Mr. Borrell
Fontelles expressed his hope that the EU would put into
practice the principle of African solutions to African
problems (see S/PV.9065), which China appreciates. It
is our hope that the EU will continue to support the
establishment of the African Union’s (AU) Collective
Security Mechanism and provide more predictable and
sustainable financial support to the AU and African
countries for their independent peacekeeping and
counter-terrorism operations in the Sahel and Somalia.
The EU should also assist African countries with postpandemic recovery and enhance Africa’s capacity to
address various risks and challenges.
China has always attached great importance to the
development of relations with the EU, it supports the
European integration process and is pleased to see the
sustained autonomy, unity, stability and prosperity of
Europe. China stands ready to work with the EU to

S/PV.9268

continuously strengthen dialogue, exchanges, tolerance
and mutual learning, to deepen cooperation with the
United Nations and other multilateral forums, to
uphold and practice genuine multilateralism and jointly
make new contributions to global peace, stability
and prosperity.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The previous occasion on which the Security
Council discussed the question of cooperation between
the United Nations and the European Union (EU) was
in June 2022, when we stated that, thanks to Brussels’
efforts, EU-Russia relations had plummeted to rock
bottom (see S/PV.9065). As it turns out, there is in fact
an abyss below that rock bottom, into which not only
our relations — which essentially no longer exist — but
a united Europe itself continue to plunge.
When historians write about the years 2022 and
2023, the most frequently used words in the chapter
dedicated to the European Union will probably be
“degradation”, “helplessness”, “short-sightedness”
and “Russophobia”. Much credit in that regard is due
not only to the efforts of individual European leaders,
but also European bureaucrats, including Mr. Borrell
Fontelles, who briefed us today.
Thanks to Mr. Borrell Fontelles, we have learned
a lot about Europe and the true essence of European
diplomacy over the past year. We have learned, for
instance, that Europe is a blooming garden surrounded
by jungle. We learned that, for European diplomats,
the struggle for peace is reduced to an increasing flow
of weapons into a conflict zone, despite the fact that,
in principle, such actions are explicitly prohibited by
EU legislation. Moreover, so as to dispel any doubts
about the peace-loving nature of the EU, some of those
supplies are being paid for by the European Peace
Facility. We have also learned that the freedom of
speech in the European Union is tantamount to a ban
on alternative views.
In addition, while we were of course aware of the
Russophobia lying dormant in the depths of Europe,
we had frankly no idea of its depth and scale, which
is not limited to a maniacal desire to defeat Russia
at the hands of Ukrainians on the battlefield. It goes
far deeper — in favour of the most primitive, boorish
Russophobes among the Poles and the Baltic States,
we are witnessing events being held in European
capitals and institutions on how best to dismember and
destroy our countr. Against a backdrop of measures

23-0569613/21

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

aimed at cancelling Russia, its culture and its artistic
and sporting achievements, we are getting a totally
unambiguous picture of our European neighbours that
makes us want to close the door entirely on them and,
indeed, deadbolt that door until such obscurantism and
Russophobia cease.
Russia has been labelled the principal and
essentially sole threat to European security. It has even
become somewhat taboo to discuss the possibility of
building a common security system with Russia — now
only collective security against Russia is acceptable
for discussion. The response to any related question in
Brussels is that Russia has only itself to blame. However,
those assertions are shattered by a simple fact: it was
Russia, on the eve of the Ukraine crisis, that consistently
proposed that the West sign an agreement on mutual
security assurances, while putting forward suggestions
on comprehensive and indivisible security in the EuroAtlantic space. All of those were arrogantly rebuffed.
Why indeed would the European Union need them
when, through its Eastern Partnership programme, it has
consistently promoted a completely different logic since
2009, insisting on the need to sever ties with Russia and
making them choose — Russia or the EU? The logic
was absolutely evident in the European Union-Ukraine
Association Agreement, which triggered the Maidan
coup d’état in 2014.
That triggered the acute Ukrainian crisis. We are
seeing the final phase today.
Today we understand perfectly well that all the
tales about good-neighbourliness, partnership and
common spaces were a mere smokescreen to orchestrate
a confrontaiton with Russia, executed by our shared
neighbours. The most pliant were Georgia and
Ukraine, who were chosen as pawns in the geopolitical
confrontation with our country. While Tbilisi was smart
enough to minimize the damage in time, the Maidandriven Kyiv Government, infiltrated with revived
Ukrainian nationalism and neo-Nazism, simply lost its
mind because of that new sycophantic role.
As a result, the world today is on the verge of a
suicidal conflict, which the EU, alongside the rest of
the West, advances by leaps and bounds, increasing
weapons deliveries to the Kyiv regime and becoming
more complicit. Incidentally and parenthetically, in
such cases we talk about the European Union as a single
Europe, our closest and natural neighbours, but of course
that is no longer true. From a military and political
14/21

23/02/2023

perspective, the European Union, before our eyes, is
losing its own legal standing and becoming a spineless
appendage of another military bloc, whose true goals,
intentions and masters have long been known to us.
The joint declaration of cooperation between the EU
and NATO, signed on 10 January, essentially reaffirms
the full subordination of the European Union to the goal
set by the North Atlantic bloc. The provisions of the
document about the secondary nature or, speaking in
the language of NATO strategists, the complementary
nature vis-à-vis the alliance of Europeans’ defence
policy effectively invalidates any European Union
claims to be independent in that area. For the European
Union, that “new level of partnership” means complete
support for the confrontational approaches of NATO
and being dragged into playing a supporting role in
geopolitical ambitions for a global domination.
The joint declaration is yet another attempt to assert
the philosophy of Western superiority. It bluntly claims
that NATO and the EU will use all political, economic
and military means to the benefit of their own 1 billion
citizens. They essentially view the rest of the world as
a hostile environment, which needs to be reformatted,
using those same instruments — put succinctly, those
same weed-infested jungles that Mr. Borrell sees us as.
Someone might object that the EU was initially devised
as an economic, not a political, bloc and the strength
and appeal of the European Union was economic in
nature. Perhaps one year ago that was true.
But the situation has changed fundamentally since
then. In the year that has elapsed — a year of completely
severing ties with our country — the growth rate of
“united” Europe’s gross domestic product is close to
zero, while record-breaking inflation rates are now in
double digits. Europe welcomes the fact that it has been
disconnected from the Russian gas pipeline.
Glad to be off the Russian gas needle, the European
Union is now addicted to the hard drug — expensive
American liquefied natural gas. To keep the economy
of the European Union functioning in just the energy
aspect alone, €710 billion was spent in 2022. In other
words, European liberal market economies are now
surviving on Government subsidies and grants. And yet
Europe’s prosperity and economic power were based
primarily on cheap Russian energy resources. Once
they were gone, Europe became an economic colossus
with clay feet, and energy-intensive industries were
drawn across the ocean to the delight of big brother.
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Evil tongues say that that was exactly what
Washington wanted from the very beginning of the
conflict — to destroy its European competitor. Let
us not stoop to conspiracy theories, but one thing is
clear — there has never been such impotence in the
economic sphere and such servility to the United States
in the history of Europe. It went so far that Brussels
tacitly accepted the sabotage of the gas pipeline,
paid for by European investors among others, by its
closest ally. Brussels is now attempting to sweep all
the inconvenient facts under the carpet so as not to
displease Washington. What independent role of the EU
and Europe, as a whole, can we talk about under such
circumstances? In any case, one thing is certain — after
such gross political and economic blunders, Europe’s
chances of becoming one of the poles of the nascent
multipolar world are close to zero.
Some might say that we should wait. But Europe
is above all a union of values — those of proverbial
freedom, equality, fraternity, democracy and human
rights. That has always been its appeal. Alas, the
European Union has also failed in that area. Having once
accepted the Baltic countries with their Russophobia
and apartheid attitude towards their own Russianspeaking population, instead of curing them of that
disease, the EU became infected with it.
Brussels has also long lost any measure of good
sense with regard to media freedom, reducing it to strict
censorship and a ban on dissent. In recent years, that
was compounded by rapidly progressing blindness to
neo-Nazism, which took practical expression not only
in ignoring Nazi manifestations in Ukraine but also in
voting against the annual resolution condemning the
glorification of Nazism. In the end, what is left of those
European values? What are the achievements? All
they have done is transform a woman into a man and
a man into a non-binary person, into something that is
neither male nor female and is completely indistinct,
and making traditional families something unseemly.
We recognize those so-called breakthroughs and do not
intend to compete on that front. We ask that they stay
away from us with their new values.
The last and only Security Council document in
recent years on cooperation with the European Union
was the presidential statement of 14 February 2014
(S/PRST/2014/4). At that time, the members of the
Security Council, including us, being in a completely
different paradigm of relations with the European
Union, welcomed its assistance in stabilizing the

S/PV.9268

Western Balkans, Mali, the Central African Republic,
Afghanistan and Syria. Now, nine years later, the text
of that document looks like someone’s cruel joke. After
all, Western involvement has brought only instability,
economic problems and suffering to those and many
other regions. It makes no sense to single out the
European Union from the pile of other structures that
have been completely taken over by the United States.
By a strange and almost mystical coincidence, the
date of that statement separated the old Europe from the
new one in many ways. Just a week after the adoption
of the document, European Union representatives
took a direct part in the anti-constitutional armed
coup in Kyiv, thereby setting, at the instigation of the
Americans, a tough confrontation with Russia. That
fateful decision was the starting point of the European
Union’s degradation, its devaluation into an obedient
tool of the Americans.
Given the blatant hostility of the European Union
in its present form towards Russia and its dwarfing
independent importance, we are forced to be sceptical
of all projects involving the European Union and
on the United Nations platform. I would like to
urge all developing nations to think seriously about
that reassessment.
Council members must accept that Washington
stands behind Brussels. For every dollar it invests,
for every non-governmental organization or political
fund it forms, they will then have to pay the price of
independence and sovereignty, or even face direct
interference in domestic affairs. It is important
to remember the West’s violation of Ukraine’s
independence and the unenviable fate of that State,
which was turned into a blind and unwilling pawn in
someone else’s game. I ask members to think of the
Middle East burning to this day and of Yugoslavia being
torn apart, and not to repeat these mistakes of others.
Mr.
Afonso
(Mozambique):
Mozambique
commends Malta for having convened this important
briefing. We thank the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy for his important and insightful briefing.
The Security Council is vested with the primary
responsibility for maintaining global, regional and
local peace and security. Articles 52 to 54, or simply
Chapter VIII, of the Charter of the United Nations
serve the purpose of guiding us with regard to regional
cooperation related to peace and security.

23-0569615/21

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The dialogue between the United Nations and
the European Union (EU) must be viewed in that
perspective. It is an important platform, which adds
value to our concerted efforts in the promotion of peace
and security internationally.
As a member of both the African Union and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC),
Mozambique welcomes its cooperation with the
European Union, especially with regard to support
for African-led programmes on the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.
In that connection, we note that since 2004, the
European Union has been a contributing partner to
the African Union conflict prevention efforts through
the African Peace Facility, which is a fund managed
in partnership with the African Union Commission.
That has allowed for the financing of African-led peace
support operations and capacity-building for African
Union institutions and African Union-led conflict
prevention initiatives.
As a matter of fact, peace, security and governance
have been a long-standing thematic pillar of the
European Union–Africa partnership. It is a partnership
that we value and that deepened with the conclusion
of the 1989 Lomé IV Convention. In our view, such
collaboration between the European Union and the
African Union is one of the most effective elements of
the broader EU–Africa relationship.
Since 2021, the European Peace Facility has been
enabling the European Union to channel assistance
directly to the regional economic communities,
such as SADC, towards regional peace and security
support operations. That has allowed for an enhanced
flexibility, a faster reaction time and better results for
the continent, thereby avoiding higher transaction costs
and unnecessary delays.
Peace and stability in Africa are a matter of the
utmost importance and of global concern. That justifies
the partnership between the European Union and the
African Union, which must be based on a shared interest
in tackling the root causes of conflicts, including
through the promotion of sustainable development.
We believe that such as approach must be anchored
in the African Union’s principle according to which
African problems require African solutions first. In our
understanding, that axiom does not mean the exclusion
of the international community from engaging in
16/21

23/02/2023

African problems. Quite the contrary, it calls for deeper
cooperation. We believe that it was in that spirit that it
was referred to at the sixth European Union–African
Union summit, held on 17 and 18 February 2022.
In that context, we welcome the European
Union’s support to the implementation of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, the African Peace and Security
Architecture, the African Governance Architecture
and Silencing the Guns — a programme that has now
been extended to the year 2030. The European Union’s
engagement with the African Union to address security
problems covers threats posed by terrorism and violent
extremism, the illicit circulation of small arms and light
weapons and organized crime, among others. It is a
programme that enjoys our full support. In the southern
Africa region, Mozambique recognizes the support of
the European Union under the implementation of the
SADC Indicative Strategic Plan for the Organ and its
invaluable contribution to the strengthening of the
SADC peace and security architecture.
The SADC region is in full convergence with the
European Union, particularly on programmes such as
the programme on support to peace and security in the
SADC region, designed to strengthen the capacity of the
SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation. We would like to see that support further increased.
With regard to counter-terrorism, we are also
encouraged by the EU’s support for SADC’s initiatives
to operationalize the SADC Regional CounterTerrorism Centre, launched in Tanzania in February
2022. The Centre is expected to play a pivotal role in
the prevention of radicalism, violent extremism and the
financing of terrorism in the region.
We highly praise the European Union for its efforts
towards supporting a training mission on counterterrorism to address the ongoing security challenges
in Cabo Delgado, a province of our own country,
Mozambique. Here again, we would like to see the
programme further strengthened and consolidated. We
believe that such partnerships further strengthen our
capabilities on matters pertaining to crisis management,
conflict prevention, counter-terrorism, peacebuilding,
maritime insecurity and peace operations, among other
current security challenges. That is the reason that we
welcome our cooperation with the European Union.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I commend
Malta on taking the initiative of convening this important
debate, which highlights the leading role that regional
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and subregional organizations play in the development
and implementation of United Nations programmes, in
accordance with the principles set forth in Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. I thank the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy for his informative briefing
on the commitment of the European Union at the
international level.
The United Nations and the European Union
maintain a constructive working dynamic that
continues to grow in response to the multifaceted
challenges to international peace and security. It is a
model partnership in line with the European Union’s
significant contribution to the United Nations funds and
programmes dedicated to conflict prevention, the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, the promotion and protection of human
rights and humanitarian aid, as well as its own work in
areas as varied as peace and security, the fight against
climate change, the protection of biodiversity and the
fight against pollution.
The European Union’s commitment is particularly
important in terms of strengthening multilateralism
through reaffirming and consolidating the central role of
the United Nations. In terms of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, the European Union’s commitment has
as its principal mechanism the European Peace Facility,
the goal of which is to contribute to international
peace through financing for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding operations, particularly in the Horn
of Africa, the Sahel region, Central and Southern
Africa, the Western Balkans and Ukraine. The many
crises exacerbated by interrelated challenges, such as
climate change, pandemics, terrorism, the plundering
of natural resources and the misuse of information
technologies, require cooperative work between the
United Nations and the European Union through the
use of suitable tools.
That partnership has been supported by a framework
agreement on peace operations and crisis management
since September 2020. The framework agreement
promotes the needed joint action and alignment of the
European Union’s priorities with those of the United
Nations. The increasingly regional nature of crises
undeniably led to the conclusions of the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) on United Nations peacekeeping
operations, which advocated for greater cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
The issue of global responsibility-sharing in crisis

S/PV.9268

management is particularly important and highlights
the need for a principle of subsidiarity and the use of
comparative advantages for greater efficiency.
On the African continent, the main area of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union involves responding to the constant
threats posed by extremist groups, such as Boko Haram,
the Allied Democratic Forces and Al-Shabaab, most of
which claim ties with Da’esh. The resulting security risk
seriously erodes the foundations of the shared values
of freedom, dignity and democracy on the African
continent by taking advantage of populations that are at
the mercy of socioeconomic factors.
Another priority area in which there is cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the European Union and the African Union,
involves the fight against maritime piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea. That poses a clear security and economic
threat to the countries of the region, such as Gabon,
which are exposed to attacks on ships, illicit marine
activities, kidnapping and other acts of sabotage. The
most recent report of the Secretary-General on the issue
(S/2022/818) underscores the joint efforts undertaken
in cooperation between the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union, which in particular
includes a strong presence on the ground with, of
course, marked and encouraging results.
The scope of those threats and challenges has led the
African Union to adopt its own peace and development
strategy, set forth in Agenda 2063, which is underpinned
by the African Peace and Security Architecture, the
African Governance Architecture and the Silencing the
Guns initiative. Those ambitious initiatives combine
robust funding and logistics and synergy that prioritizes
trilateral cooperation among the African Union, the
European Union and the United Nations, given the
convergence of their respective interests.
Therefore, we agree that there is a need to call not
only for strengthening bilateral cooperation between
the United Nations and the European Union, but also
for cooperation between the European Union and
the African Union and, more broadly, for trilateral
interaction among the United Nations, the European
Union and the African Union, with a view to increasing
their coordination on cross-cutting peace and security
concerns. Furthermore, we call for the strengthening

23-0569617/21

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of the dialogue between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the European Union Political and
Security Committee.
The partnership between the United Nations
and the European Union must be strengthened in
order to be even more effective. It must be based on
optimal coordination and communication. Indeed,
terrorism, transnational crime, humanitarian crises and
natural disasters are all complex and interdependent
challenges that require the involvement of multiple
stakeholders and, consequently, regular and timely
information-sharing. Establishing coherent crisis
management and resolution mechanisms with clearly
defined and necessary tasks and responsibilities among
the various actors would allow for agreed policies to
be established between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, with a view towards
dealing effectively with crisis situations.
I should like to stress the need to strengthen the
participation of youth and women in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding mechanisms. Their involvement
is crucial to the sustainability and effectiveness of
peace processes.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the
need to strengthen the partnership between the
United Nations and the European Union, including
through interregional partnerships. Such partnerships
serve as complementary tools in the work of the United
Nations in its primary mission of maintaining peace
and security in the world. That exemplary partnership
has, above all, the advantage of being flexible enough
to be deployed in many diverse fields of operation, in
synergy, to optimize the international community’s
responses to the various crises that present obstacles
to realizing the aspirations of the world’s peoples for
security and stability.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): We thank Malta for organizing this timely
meeting on cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union. We also thank High Representative
Borrell Fontelles for his informative briefing today.
On behalf of the United States, I want to express
my deep appreciation for the European Union’s (EU)
invaluable contributions to international peace and
security across the globe through its cooperation with
the United Nations. The United States and the European
Union have also built a strong partnership based on
shared values and a common vision. We are steadfast
18/21

23/02/2023

in our commitment to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations: the principles of territorial
integrity, the political independence of Member
States and the rights to individual and collective selfdefence. Those principles have been put to the test by
Russia’s unprovoked, full-scale invasion of Ukraine,
the biggest threat to European security in decades. But
as President Biden made clear during his visit to Kyiv
this week, Russia grossly underestimated the strength
of Ukraine. President Putin thought he could divide the
international community, but he was wrong, and the
international community will continue to stand with
Ukraine as long as it takes.
The dream of a Europe that is whole, free and
at peace must not just be an aspiration. It must not
be empty words. It must be realized for all of us to
enjoy a more secure, more just and more prosperous
world. Since Russia launched its war of aggression,
European countries have bolstered their ability to
defend themselves, and they have welcomed millions of
refugees seeking safety and peace. The United States,
our European allies and our EU partners are working
hand in hand with United Nations agencies, other
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations to mitigate the humanitarian impact of
this war, not only in Ukraine, but around the world.
As we all know, this war has exacerbated the global
food security crisis, and people thousands of miles
from Ukraine, especially in countries in the Middle
East and Africa that rely on Ukrainian grain, are in dire
need. That is why, last September, the United States,
the European Union, the African Union and Spain
organized the global food security summit right here at
the United Nations. Since then, more than 100 Member
States have agreed to act with urgency and at scale to
respond to the global food security crisis and avert
extreme hunger. That commitment must be backed
up with action — with humanitarian assistance. And
the United States and members of the European Union
are among the largest donors to humanitarian and
food security organizations, including the World Food
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations.
We heard from High Representative Borrell
that EU-United Nations cooperation is not limited to
one issue or one area of the world. That partnership
is ambitious and far-reaching. In Haiti, the EU has
joined the United Nations basket fund to help improve
security. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the EU’s
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

continued commitment to the European Union military
operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been vital
for maintaining peace and security. The EU-facilitated
dialogue remains the best path for normalization
between Serbia and Kosovo. In Afghanistan, the United
States and the EU have spoken out against the Taliban’s
dangerous and reckless decrees that seek to erase
Afghan women from society and threaten millions
of innocent lives. In Africa, the EU has been a key
contributor to security through its cooperation with the
United Nations.
Last November, the tripartite project between
the African Union (AU), EU and United Nations on
enhancing the AU compliance and accountability
framework for peace support operations was launched.
It will enhance the AU’s capacity to ensure that
peace support operations are planned and conducted
in compliance with international human rights and
humanitarian law. It will also build on the AU’s African
Peace and Security Architecture. We also welcome the
EU’s commitment, made with the African Union and the
United Nations, to promote stability in Somalia, Mali
and the Central African Republic, which will bolster
those countries’ ability to defend themselves without
relying on malign foreign actors. In the Indo-Pacific
region, the EU is helping to improve maritime security
and ensure shared domains are governed lawfully with
respect to the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea.
Finally, we welcome the EU’s invaluable financial
support to the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The
Investigative Team is vital to efforts to collect, analyse
and store evidence to prosecute atrocities committed
by Da’esh. Across every global challenge, the EU is a
critical partner to the United Nations and the Security
Council, and the world is more peaceful, prosperous and
secure because of that partnership — one that we must
continue to strengthen in the months and years ahead.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Ian Borg, Minister for
Foreign and European Affairs and Trade of Malta, for
convening today’s meeting. I join others in welcoming
the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell
Fontelles, and I thank him for his informative briefing.

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations goes beyond Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations on regional arrangements
and is indispensable to supporting our Organization’s
three fundamental pillars: the maintenance of
international peace and security, the promotion and
protection of human rights, and the implementation of
the sustainable development agenda.
The European Union and the United Nations
are natural partners, united by the common values,
principles and objectives reflected in the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, as well as in the Treaty of Lisbon and
the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union, among other key instruments.
My country recognizes the contribution the
European Union has made to multilateralism and
international cooperation by making them a central
focus of its foreign policy and highlights its members’
commitment to defending an international order based
on the rule of law and international law. We note the
important contributions made by the European Union
to peacekeeping missions, in particular through the
significant number of officers who help to promote
peace and security in the places where it is needed
most. Ecuador and the European Union share many
of the priorities of the peace and security agenda,
including the agendas on women and peace and
security, children and armed conflict, the protection
of civilians, combating transnational organized crime,
and confronting emerging threats, including those
related to cyberspace, the fight against climate change,
biodiversity loss and the protection of the oceans,
among others.
Like the European Union, Ecuador is committed to
upholding the principles and purposes of the Charter
and international law. In that connection, Ecuador
condemned the military aggression against Ukraine
and has reiterated its rejection of any attempt to annex
territories by force. I recognize in that regard the
support and facilitating role played by the delegation
of the European Union in New York in the process
of consultations and negotiations on the resolutions
adopted at the eleventh emergency special session
of the General Assembly. This very morning, a draft
resolution on the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in Ukraine (A/ES-11/L.7) is being considered for
adoption, with the sponsorship and support of Ecuador.

23-0569619/21

S/PV.9268

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We call on the European Union to intensify its efforts
to achieve the dialogue necessary to overcome the most
complex challenges posed by the conflict. Likewise,
we commend the efforts of the European Union in
addressing and managing other conflicts in Europe.
We highlight the Union’s commitment to the Western
Balkans. Furthermore, we appreciate the contribution
it is making to sustaining peace and stability to Bosnia
and Herzegovina within the framework of the European
Union military operation there.
As has been said today, cooperation between the
European Union and the United Nations goes beyond
Europe. We appreciate its support for the African
Union Mission in Somalia and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and its efforts in the Sahel.
We also note its role in the search for a negotiated
solution to the Palestinian question and its constructive
role in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran’s
nuclear programme. With regard to nuclear matters,
Ecuador would like to see the development of a broader
role within the Union and outside it to step up United
Nations efforts towards a world free of nuclear weapons.
In addition, we trust that cooperation between the
European Union and Latin America will continue to be
strengthened. The participation of High Representative
Borrell last October at the third meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States and of the EU marked the beginning
of a new stage of joint work on the empowerment
of women and girls, gender policies and the fight
against discrimination, as well as cooperation in the
fight against transnational crime, including money
laundering and illicit drug trafficking.
In the humanitarian field, we acknowledge the role
played by the European Union in its immediate response
to support the victims of the tragedy in Türkiye and
Syria, through its humanitarian aid programmes and the
mobilization of its search-and-rescue teams. The same
can be said in the case of Haiti, and we encourage the
European Union to deepen its support for that country’s
transition efforts, which is crucial to ensuring a safer
region and a safer world. Nor can we fail to recognize
the important role played by the European Union in the
peace process in Colombia.
We have noted that the United Nations and the
European Union have complementary capacities,
which, when properly coordinated, contribute to the
20/21

23/02/2023

strengthening of multilateralism. Ecuador therefore
reiterates its recognition of the role of the European
Union as a strategic partner of the United Nations, and
we hope that cooperation between the two organizations
will continue to deepen.
Mr. Parga Cintra (Brazil): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting.
I would like to congratulate Malta on its outstanding
presidency of the Security Council this month. I would
also like to thank Mr. Josep Borrell, High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, for his comprehensive briefing.
The complexity of the crises we face today places
enormous pressure on global governance structures. It
is high time for United Nations reform that would offer
more legitimate and effective responses to the multiple
challenges to peace and security and the demands of
the developing world. Brazil believes that cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, under the
terms of Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, is
one of the ways multilateralism can be strengthened.
We recognize the important role the European
Union (EU) plays in security issues, including through
its contributions to the peace operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its engagement in peace efforts in
other regions, as well as its support for the sustainability
of the Palestinian Authority.
Brazil encourages the EU to redouble its efforts
in the search for a negotiated solution to the conflict
in Ukraine. We believe that the EU can contribute to
adequately addressing the root causes of this conflict,
as it has done in the past, and to preventing violence
from becoming normalized.
We also believe there is a need for reflection on
the unforeseen consequences of unilateral sanctions.
Experience shows that in most cases sanctions have a
limited effect on actors whose behaviour they intend
to influence, while invariably harming civilian
populations, including in third countries.
Close and transparent cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU continues to be very
beneficial to the multilateral system, and it can be
further strengthened through dialogue with other States
Members of the United Nations.
23-05696

23/02/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9268

Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank the High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep
Borrell, for his briefing.

and girls. The European Union and its member States
are also actively promoting the full implementation of
the Security Council resolutions on women, peace and
security, and youth peace and security.

I would like to emphasize two aspects. The European
Union (EU) is working with the United Nations in
favour of the primacy of the rule of law over force. The
European Union is at the forefront of the defence of the
United Nations Charter. This is the case in the yearlong war of aggression waged by Russia on European
soil in defiance of the Charter, international law and the
principle of sovereign equality of States.

The European Union remains an essential partner
of the United Nations in meeting the challenges of the
multilateralism of tomorrow. It does so by assisting in
the reform of the United Nations. The Security Council
must now be enlarged to become more representative.
It must welcome new members in both the permanent
and non-permanent categories. It must also remain
capable of playing its full role, which is the underlying
meaning of the initiative to regulate the use of the veto
in the case of mass atrocities, which has already been
supported by 106 countries.

The EU and its member States are fully mobilized
in the response to crises to ensure international peace
and stability. The EU member States collectively deploy
more than 5,000 personnel in peacekeeping operations,
and their contributions finance almost a quarter of
the total peacekeeping budget. Let me cite just a few
examples. In Africa, I welcome the launch of a new
military partnership mission in the Niger. The EU has
also shown itself to be a reliable partner for Somalia and
the African Union. In Syria and Türkiye, the European
Union and its member countries, in synergy with the
United Nations, are actively providing emergency aid
to the populations affected by the earthquakes. These
efforts are in addition to the €27 billion in humanitarian
aid provided since 2011 by the European Union and its
member States to the most vulnerable Syrians in Syria
and the region.
The EU and its member States are mobilized
to defend the values that are at the heart of the
United Nations. We are therefore dedicated to the
defence of human rights and in particular the rights
of women. This is the case in Afghanistan, where
the European Union, one of the leading donors, has
maintained its assistance to the Afghan population,
while continuing to demand that the Taliban reverse
the repressive decisions they have taken against women

It also does so by ensuring the financing of the
United Nations. The EU member States are the leading
contributors to the regular budget, financing almost
a quarter of it. We also contribute to the priorities of
the Secretary-General to address the major challenges
of today and tomorrow. In his Common Agenda, the
Secretary-General has presented us with a road map for
building peace, creating the conditions for sustainable
and inclusive development, and combating the effects
of climate change. The EU and its member States
contribute to the international community’s efforts
in this area, in particular through initiatives aimed at
increasing the resilience of States in the face of climate
change. It also contributes to supporting the least
developed countries.
The Security Council can count on the firm
commitment of the EU and its member States, and of
course France, to work with the United Nations within
the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter in all
crisis areas and to contribute to the construction of an
effective and fair multilateralism.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

23-0569621/21
