UNITED NATIONS

”

th
MEETING:

16 APRIL

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/23.55) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . , . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14969) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..**.....*....

1

SiPV.2355

” a

NOTE
i’
1 z *
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
,,’

1

‘Z,

Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI.. .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2355th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 16 April 1982, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. KAMANDA
(Zaire).

Af the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. Msani Zentar (Morocco) took plcrws at the
Council table. Mr. Sobhan (Bangladesh), Mr. Coumbassa (Guinea), Mr. Djalal (Indonesia),
Mr. RajaieKhosassani (Iran), Mr. Moharntnad (Zruq), Mr. Zainal
Abidin (Malaysia), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. Naik
(Pakistan), Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Djigo
(Senegal),
Mr. Abdalln
(Sudun),
Mr. El-Frittnl
(Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Kirgn (Turkey) took
the places reserved fur them at the side of the Council
chamber; Mr. Abdei Rahman (Palestine Liberation
Urganization)
took the place reserved for hitn at the
side qf the Council chamber.

wa KAMANDA

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2355)

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretafion
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Somalia in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives
to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/14969)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.50 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Krishnan
(India), Mr. But-win (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
and
Mr. Adan (Somalia) took the places reserved for them
at the side qf the Council chamber.

The ngenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge d’affaires
a-i. of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14969)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interprcfation
from French):
Council
members
have before them document
S/14982, containing the text of a letter dated 15 April
from the representative of Jordan to the President of
the Council.
4. Mr. de PIN&S
(Spain) (interpretution
j?otn
Spanish): Only 15 days ago, my delegation stated in
the Council how concerned it was over the situation
existing in the Arab territories occupied by Israel
and over the developments
on the West Bank and
in Gaza resulting from the measures adopted by the
Israeli authorities [2348th meeting, para. 521.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
In accordance
with decisions taken at previous
meetings
on this item [2352nd to 2354th meeting],
I invite the representatives of Israel and Morocco
to take places at the Council table. I invite the representatives
of Bangladesh, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Malaysia,
the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Turkey
to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber. I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
to take the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber,

5. That serious concern has now been compounded
by the desecration of one of the sacred Islamic sites
in the Holy City, which has been the theatre of a
bloody, barbarous act resulting in the painful loss of
many innocent lives.
6. My delegation and Government share the Islamic
community’s
frustration and grief over this violation
1

.

r.

.,

,.

of one of the most venerated places of worship, just
as they did in August 1969, when the Al-Aqsa Mosque
was also seriously desecrated. The repetition of these
sacrilegious acts occurs, unfortunately, in the context
of a series of legislative and administrative
measures
adopted by Israel to alter the status and very character
of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in violation of Council
resolutions.

the world with a preview of this nightmare-a
nightmare which has been haunting us all. Allow me here
to think aloud: Who and what can guarantee the
safety of the Church of the Nativity, the Holy Sepulchre, the Mosque of Omar-or,
for that matter, any
of our other spiritual and cultural treasures?
1I. The second conclusion to be drawn is that the
real significance of the Judaization
of Jerusalem
should be clear to all. By attempting to empty Jerusalem of Muslims and Christian inhabitants alike,
the Israelis are turning our Holy Places into tourist
sites. For what is the value of a shrine without true
believers? What is an altar without a priest? A minaret
without a muezzin? What is an empty church in Jerusalem? A deserted mosque in Jerusalem? And this is
what Israel is seeking to achieve: cheap tourism for
naive tourists. The Holy City of Jerusalem is being
turned into a Hilton, a Sheraton, a Holiday Inn.

7. In denouncing these acts, my delegation deems
it necessary to stress that the root of all these problems
remains Israel’s continued occupation of Arab territories by force. Neither the passage of time nor the
unilateral measures which Israel attempts to impose
on those territories can consolidate a situation that is
contrary to the tenets of international
law, to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
to resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
8. The delegation of Spain has always spoken in
favour of a comprehensive
settlement of the Middle
East conflict which would put an end to the serious
problems that for more than 30 years have been the
tragic reality in that area. We have always advocated
a negotiated solution which, while recognizing the
legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people,
would permit all States of the area to enjoy not only
peaceful coexistence but also fruitful co-operation in
the future. But such a solution, which is desired by
Spain, and for the attainment
of which this organ
bears specific responsibility,
will not be achieved until
Israel totally and definitively
withdraws from the
Arab territories it has occupied since 1967. Perpetuation of this occupation only exacerbates existing tensions and leads to incidents such as the one being
considered by the Council today. Time is running out,
without any solution to this serious conflict in sight,
and the patience of those who suffer continuous
persecution is coming to an end. It is high time we
adopted real solutions, not purely rhetorical ones.

12. The third conclusion is that all those who have
spoken in the Council-except
for those representing
Governments which have neither understanding of
nor respect for history, tradition or culture-have
expressed the urgent need to check this process of
despoliation and to restore to Jerusalem its integrity
by all available means.
13. The fourth conclusion is that the Council must
not ignore the repercussions of this criminal act or
allow it to go without severe punishment. It is precisely because the Israelis know that Jerusalem belongs
to us that they see fit to delude the Council and evade
the real issue. Rather than bowing in shame, they spew
their venom at everybody. Chapter 8, verse 44, of
St. John says, “he was a murderer from the beginning,
and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth
in him.”
14. There is no truth in the Zionist spokesman. If
parts of the Arab world bleed today, it is because Of
the Israeli dagger, Yesterday [235&z meeting1 the
Israeli representative shed crocodile tears over the
churches and mosques of Hama and quoted from his
master’s voice in order to mislead the Council. Yet it
is common knowledge that the events of Hama and
other similar events in the Syrian Arab Republic and
other parts of the Arab world were plotted and executed by his own Government with the help and advice
of the United States of America and its allies. While
Tel Aviv and Washington possess the original plans,
we in Damascus have the irrefutable evidence.

9. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fiorn French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
10. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian
Arab Republic):
Whatever the consequences and the results of our
present debate may be, we have now reached the
stage when we have to draw some conclusions. The
first is that the storming of the Haram al-Sharif was
by no means an isolated act, but rather a premeditated
stratagem in the policy and practices of Israel. The
American-Israeli
assassin, with the ironic name of
“Goodman”,
acted in harmonious collusion with the
occupation authorities in order to pave the way for
future acts of aggression, Ever since the annexation
of Jerusalem, Muslims and Christians alike have had
well-founded reasons to live under the fear that some
additional evil may befall their holy shrines in Jerusalem. The Israeli performance last week presented

IS. I remember seeing a programme on American
television on Saturday at a quarter to ten in which it
was admitted that mercenaries are being recruited in
the United States to be sent to our region.
16. The fifth conclusion is that the Hama Conspiracy against Syria and other acts of sabotage, such
as the Azbakieh massacre of innocent civilians, were
not concocted in Tel Aviv in recent times, but were
2

planned as early as 1950. I should like to refer members of the Council to the memoirs of Mr. Blum’s
former boss, who, as early as 1954, was programming
a scheme to- destroy Syria and Lebanon from inside,
Moshe Sharett’s personal diaries reveal clearly that
Israel’s strategic purpose was to employ covert,
in-depth terrorist operations inside the Arab world
both for espionage and to create fear, tension and
instability. The former Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Israel confided, in his memoirs, that as early as
1954 there existed an Israeli blueprint to create a
puppet State in Lebanon and to perpetrate subversive activities in Syria.

murder perpetrated against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and
the DOme of the Rock have been presented to the
Council by His Majesty Hassan II, King of Morocco,
in his capacity as Chairman of the Al-Q&
Committee, in the message that was read out to the Council
by the representative of Morocco [23Xnd meeting,
pal’n. 151.
23. Further information
on the incident and its
consequences, in terms both of loss of lives of the
faithful and of damage to the holy mosque are contained in the statement issued by the Islamic Higher
Council in Jerusalem on 12 April [S/14982, annex]. The
representative of Saudi Arabia has articulated the
sentiments of shock and indignation of Muslims all
over the world [2353rd meeting, para. 601.

17. Today, in 1982, Israel has more than ever an interest in bleeding Syria from inside, for Syria remains
the garrison of resistance and of steadfastness and
fidelity to the Arab cause. We hold both Israel and the
United States responsible for all subversive acts,
under any banner or denomination,
that have takeri
place in Syria.

24. The news of this wanton act of violence and
cruelty against innocent human beings and sacrilege
of the holy place of worship held in the highest veneration by all Muslims has been received in India with
profound distress and a sense of outrage, The people
of India, in particular the millions of Muslims there,
share the grave concern and deep anguish of the entire
Islamic world over these recent deplorable developments in Jerusalem.

18. Our sixth and final conclusion is that the United
States is plotting to minimize the gravity of Israeli
lawlessness in the whole region in order to absolve
its territorial base, Israel, of its crimes, and to justify
its sinister designs against Palestinians, Lebanese and
Syrians. The designs of the United States are amply
dear to us, for no Arab is fooled by American wooing,
and no amount of acrobatics or diplomatic buffoonery
is likely to amuse us or to deflect our attention. No
amount of propaganda will place us on the defensive,
for our cause is universally recognized as being just;
we are on the offensive.

25. Acts of sacrilege against holy places and violence
and murder should be condemned wherever they may
occur. If they occur in the t,erritories of lawful Governments, the appropriate machinery of the Governments concerned should be able to deal with the
problem and to root out the underlying malady. But in
the case of Jerusalem, which Israel has occupied and
declared its “eternal capital” in total defiance of
numerous decisions and resolutions of the United
Nations, the rule of law does not apply equally to
all its inhabitants.
Jerusalem, which should have
remained the common heritage of the three faiths
which consider it holy, has become the scene of constant persecution and humiliation of the people of the
Islamic faith. The General Assembly, as well as the
Security Council, has declared time and again that
attempts made by Israel to alter the status of Jerusalem are illegal and null and void. The United Nations
has repeatedly urged Israel to withdraw from Palestine and other occupied territories, including Jerusalem, occupied since 1967. Until and unless such
withdrawal is secured, peace and harmony cannot
be established in that region, and the repetition Of
VioIent and impermissible acts such as the one that
occurred a week ago cannot be prevented.

19. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jimn French):
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
20, Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): Sir, my delegation has
already had an opportunity to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April. Your guidance of the Council in the
first half of April, at a time when a number of difficult issues came up before it, has shown that YOU
richly deserve the compliments paid to you by several
speakers here.
21. I am grateful to you and to the members of the
Council for the opportunity
you have given me to
present our views on the latest events in the occupied
Arab territories, which form the subject of the current
debate.

26, Against the background of Israel’s intransigence, the perpetration of the recent act in the AlAqsa Mosque assumes a sinister significance. It must
be seen in the context of the persistent violation by
Israel ofthe inalienable rights of the Palestinian People
and the denial of the fundamental rights of the Arab
inhabitants of the occupied territories. The recent
events cannot be divorced from the general atmosphere of hatred and anti-Arab fanaticism, which is
being deliberately encouraged.

22. The shooting and killing of innocent civilians,
particularly
women and children, anywhere is regrettable and is to be condemned. It is particularly reprehensible when it occurs in a place of worship. Regardless of faith or religious conviction, one cannot but
be overwhelmed by a feeling of shock and indignation.
The details regarding the criminal act of sacrilege and
3

ipal Council of Al-Bireh, the expulsion of the mayor,
Mr. Tbrahim Al-Tawil, and the installation of Israeli
officers in their place; and the encouragement of and
supplying of arms and ammunition to Zionist terrorist
organizations.

27. India, which has consistently
supported the
just cause of the Palestinians and the Arab world,
deplores the recent events in Jerusalem. We are particularly perturbed that yet another dangerous dimension has been added to the already explosive situation
in West Asia, which continues to threaten international peace and security. We consider these events
as symptomatic
of the underlying problems in West
Asia. It is a rude reminder to the international
community that the need to find a just and lasting solution
is more urgent than ever before.

34. Ever since its forcible acquisition of Palestine,
this entity has persistently
implemented
a racist
policy based on aggression, expansionism
and the
annexation of the occupied Arab territories to achieve
Zionist control over them through the confiscation
of Arab lands and possessions, the expulsion of Arab
inhabitants and the establishment of settlements in
the occupied Arab territories. The objective that the
Zionist movement seeks behind these barbaric and
criminal acts is the elimination of Islamic sanctuaries
and civilization
and the establishment
of a racist
community in which a Zionist who has been living
in any country in the world is granted the right of
citizenship in Palestine while it is the lot of the Palestinian Arab citizen to be deprived of his citizenship
and right to self-determination,

28. The Council has once again been asked to deal
with a situation that threatens peace and international
security. We do hope that the Council will generate
sufficient political will to deal with the current situation, as well as to take immediate action to resolve
the conflict in West Asia for which a number of proposals have already been presented to the Council over
the years.
29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion jkm French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.
I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

35. The recent Zionist transgression against the
Al-Aqsa Mosque was a premeditated act on the par!
of the occupation authorities. It was not the act of an
individual,
as claimed by the representative of the
Zionist entity in his statement before the Council.
Furthermore, it constituted a stark violation of Islamic
sanctity and a challenge to the sentiments of Muslims
all over the world. That crime also constituted a stark
violation of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.’

30. Mr. BURWIN
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya):
Sir,
first of all I should like to take this opportunity
to
congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I should like also to recall the
struggle of your country, and of African countries in
general, against colonialism
and racism-the
same
problems facing the Palestinian and Arab people.

36. The greed of the Zionist entity does not end
with the forcible acquisition of Palestine and the
annexation of the occupied Arab territories. What we
are witnessing and hearing today about the intensified
military mobilization
against southern Lebanon and
the threat of its being occupied on the pretext of maintaining the security of the Zionist entity clearly illustrates the expansionist intentions of that entity. Southern Lebanon is now expected to be the next victim
of the Israeli greed for land.

31. Israel and South Africa exercise the same policy
and are both racist entities.
32. Once again the CounciI convenes to consider
the deteriorating
situation in the occupied Arab territories resulting from the latest criminal acts, perpetrated last Sunday, by the Zionist occupation troops,
who invaded the Al-Aqsa Mosque and fired upon the
congregation
at prayer, causing loss of lives and
inflicting injuries on many.

37. However, the Zionist entity would never have
been able to persist in these terrorist acts had it not
been for the encouragement and the military, economic
and political support it receives from the Government
of the United States. This is the kind of support that
has made out of this entity a striking force in the Middle
East capable of directing its terrorist acts against
any Arab country, in addition to the fact that the
United States is attempting to control and contain the
Arab region through the threat of Israel.

33. We must not view this criminal act in isolation
from the other racist criminal acts committed by the
Zionist gangs against the Palestinian people in particular, and against Islamic sites and Muslims in general.
The record of the Zionist entity is full of such barbaric
criminal acts, of which we shall mention by way of
example only the following: the oppression of the
Palestinian people, its expulsion from its homeland
and the massacre of Deir Yassin; the burning of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque in 1969; the excavations conducted
beneath the Islamic Holy Places; the annexation of
AI-Quds and its designation as an “eternal capital”;
the shutting down of schools and universities:
the
expulsion of and premeditated assassination attempts
against Palestinian national leaders, such as Mr. Bassam Al-Shaka’a
and Mr. Karim Khalaf, the mayors
of Nablus and Ramallah; the dissolution of the Munic-

38. Resolutions of condemnation alone are no longer
sufficient to terminate the terrorist aggressive acts
prevailing in the occupied Arab territories. The Zionist
entity has consistently ridiculed the resolutions of
both the Security Council and the General AssemblYI
as it has disdained world public opinion. The Coun*
cil, furthermore,
has failed on many occasions t*
4

adopt deterrent resolutions against the Zionist entity as
a result of the misuse of the right of veto by the United
States. The Council is required to confront this Zionist
challenge and to shoulder the responsibilities entrusted
to it by the Charter of the United Nations by imposing
the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter
against the aggressive Zionist entity.

to recover the lost territories and restore their national
rights. In our view, the Council should strongly condemn Israel for its criminal acts of violating the Charter
of the United Nations and human rights in the occupied territories and should take effective measures
to ensure the implementation
of the relevant Council
resolutions and an end to the atrocities committed
by Israel in the occupied territories.

39. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation
fiorn
Chinese): The recent attack on the Al-Aqsa Mosque
in Jerusalem was a grave incident which caused many
casualties among the Arab people. While expressing
regret at the incident, the Israeli authorities continue
to suppress the Palestinian and Arab inhabitants by
dispatching even more troops and police. This atrocity
by Israel has aroused indignation and condemnation
from the international community. It was correct and
timely for the Islamic nations to demand the urgent
convening of the Security Council to consider the
grave events now taking place in the occupied Palestinian territory, and particularly in Jerusalem. The
Chinese delegation fully supports their just action.

43. Mr, NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I simply wish to
inform the Council that today Israel moved its judicial
machinery
and started implementing
its laws and
decisions of its courts in the occupied Golan Heights.
I need hardly state, because the Council already knows
it, that serious disturbances are still going on in the
occupied territories,
with the accompanying
Israeli
brutality;
people are suffering injury and there is
grievous loss of life. I am regularly receiving cables
about the events. I shall not enter into details. I shall,
however, give some examples and examine what they
mean: that is, are they lone incidents or are they a
part of a pattern and an objective?

40. For a long time, the Israeli authorities have been
carrying out a policy of suppression and taking a series
of hostile actions against the Palestinian and Arab
peoples in the occupied Arab territories. These include
arbitrary arrests, expulsions and the murder of Pales-’
tinians under various pretexts, interference in the
religious faith of the Arab people by different means,
desecration of Islamic cultural sites in Jerusalem and
the illegal and unilateral annexation of Jerusalem.
These outrageous acts on the part of the Israeli authorities have been an insult to Muslims and have provoked
massive protests by the Palestinian people. We fully
understand
the feelings of the Islamic nations and
peoples
towards Jerusalem and sympathize
with
them. We support their just position of opposing
Israel’s atrocities.

44. For something must come out of this debate
which is meaningful to the problems posed by Israel’s
15 years of occupation of our people in the occupied
territories.
45. The Council has during the week listened to
speakers representing a wide spectrum of humanity,
representing countries which have expressed their
shock and abhorrence in regard to the Zionist entity,
which has manifestly
gone berserk-and
I mean
berserk-not
only in its sacrilegious acts perpetrated
against one of humanity’s
holy places and legacies,
but also in its abominable acts of oppression, coldblooded murder and relentless striving to commit the
genocidal act of eradicating the very survival of the
Palestinian people through terror and intimidation
of
them in their own ancestral homeland.

4 1. The sanguinary act of violence that took place
on 11 April in Jerusalem has further revealed the
designs of the Israeli authorities deliberately to alter
the legal status, physical features and demographic
composition
of the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem,
in disregard of the norms of international
law and the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. Israel’s
latest act of escalation is by no means isolated. In
recent days, Israel has been massing troops along
its border with Lebanon and threatening major military action against the Palestinian guerrillas. At the
same time, Israel is making excuses to delay its withdrawal from Sinai. Those serious and co-ordinated
steps taken by the Begin Government in pursuance of
its persistent
policy of aggression and expansion
endanger peace and security in the Middle East. The
development
of the present situation requires serious
attention
from the international
community.
The
Chinese Government
strongly condemns Israel for
the acts I have just mentioned.
42.

The

46. What we have witnessed, and are witnessing
every day, is the final phase in this fiendish and ultimate plan of unbridled conquest, oppression and eradication, with hardly any parallels in the annals of the
United Nations,
47, An Ambassador from Europe made a pointed
and very appropriate
remark to me a month ago.
He said, “If by some miracle the Palestinian question
found a just and lasting solution, we would be hard
put to it to fill our agendas in the various forums of
the United Nations.”
I replied that it was far-fetched
to expect such a miracle, in the foreseeable future at
least, but that we should, if it did take place, use our
imagination
and concentrate more on issues such as
outer space in addition to intractable
problems such
as the New International
Economic Order, genuine
disarmament-armaments
being the greatest menace to
the world-and
many other extremely pivotal issues.
But in the meantime we find ourselves compelled to
deal with the unending catalogue of blatant aggres-

Chinese Government
resolutely
supports
and Arab peoples in their just struggle

the Palestinian

5

sions which the imposition
of Zionism and its racist
ideology has inflicted
not only on the Palestinian
people but also throughout
the entire Middle East
region and beyond.

61. The PRESIDENT
I am sorry to interrupt

62. I should like to remind members that it is appropriate to call States by their proper names. I think that
that is a tradition of the Council and of the United
Nations. I would request the representative of Jordan
to bear that comment in mind and to continue his
statement.

48. And yet the representative of the Israeli entity
has the temerity to complain, with his acknowledged49. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Frmrh):
I call on the representative of Israel on a point of order.
50. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): Mr. President, I would
request you to instruct the representative of Jordan
to refer to a Member State of the United Nations by
the name under which it was admitted to the Organization.

63. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): As I have said, I have
deliberately referred to the representative of “the
Israeli entity” for reasons that I am about to explain,
He is totally in the wrong when he claims that Israel
was admitted to the United Nations under that name,
as I shall explain in a minute,

51. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fiorn French):
I would ask the representative of Jordan to continue
his statement.

64. We do not initiate complaints because we have
nothing better to do. In fact, it is eating up the time
we should be giving to our other important duties,
as it is eating up the energies of the members of the
Council and the energies, resources and tranquillity of
life throughout the entire region and beyond it.

52. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I think that the answer
to what the Israeli representative
has just said will
become clear as I continue my statement.
53. I repeat: In the meantime we find ourselves
compelled to deal with the unending catalogue of
blatant aggressions which the imposition
of Zionism
and its racist ideology has inflicted upon the Palestinian people and by corollary throughout the entire
Middle East region and beyond.

65. Let me tell Mr. Blum that under international
law and United Nations resolutions, and because of its
present expanded and bloated size, the entity he
represents is illegitimate.
It seized by conquest far
larger areas than were allotted to it under the only
resolutions which decided the fate of the Mandate
for Palestine, namely, General Assembly resolutions 181 (II), on the boundaries, and 194 (III), on the
Palestinian people’s right to return to their country.
It is therefore illegitimate.
Indeed, Israel’s admission
to membership of the United Nations was specifically
made conditional upon Israel’s implementation
of those
resolutions, and in 1949 before the General Assembly
the Israeli representative made a pledge that Israel,
having achieved admission, would implement them.
Not only did they renege and defy the United Nations,
but they continued their course of expansion, conquest, colonization, annexation and barbaric oppression against the Palestinian and other Arab peoples,

54. And yet the representative of the Israeli entity
has the temerity to complain, with his acknowledged
and bellicose theatrics, that Israel is singled out for
complaint at the United Nations. We do not initiate55.

Mr. BLUM

(Israel):

Point of order.

56. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fiorn French):
I would ask the representative of Israel not to interrupt
the statement of the representative of Jordan. He will
soon have an opportunity
to speak, I would ask the
representative of Jordan to continue his statement,
57. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): Point of order. I should
again like to request that the representative of Jordan
be instructed to refer to my country by its proper name,
under which it was admitted to the United Nations,

66. Until the mid-1960s the United Nations was
seized of not only the question of Palestine but also
that of the fate of the Palestinian people who had remained in their territory. They were put under military
control. A Palestinian citizen of Nazareth was barred
from going to Haifa without getting a military permit
-even though Haifa is possibly half-an-hour’s ride
away. They were placed under military rule between
1948 and 1965. Furthermore, 90 per cent of their lands
have been arbitrarily
confiscated, with the result
that the Palestinians of those territories have been
left with only 10 per cent of the land to survive on and
have started a protest, called “Land Day”, against
the continuing confiscation of whatever little has
remained in their hands.

58. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I continue: And yet
the representative of the Israeli entity has the temerity
to complain,
with his acknowledged
and bellicose
theatrics, that Israel is singled out for complaint at the
United Nations. We do not initiate complaints because
we have nothing better to do. In fact, it is eating up59.

Mr. BLUM

(Israel):

(interpretation
jkm French):
the representative of Jordan.

Point of order,

60. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Mr. President, I think
that you have instructed the representative
of the
Israeli entity to stop interrupting,
I hope that he will
heed your order6

67. And yet the representative of an illegitimate
entity-and
I am talking now in terms of law; I am not
attributing
any adjectives--who
should not have
been seated here in the first place under international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the Organization’s resolutions, gives himself licence to abuse in
his vulgar and monotonous tirades at the end of every
meeting each and every Member State for expressing
revulsion at the savagery of the entity he represents.

three weeks, and I shall not even talk about earlier
casualties, However, I should like to refer to some
of the comments that have been made about those facts
by Israeli sources.
74. The widely respected Tel Aviv newspaper
Hcr’aretz said the following in a recent editorial:
“The Government,
which thought it ought to
allow the Minister of Defence an opportunity
to
break the Arab resistance, would do well to call a
halt to this path. ‘Greater Israel’ is not worth the
brutalization which will spread within us as a result
of pursuing methods of repression required to attain
it.”

68. It has become a familiar pattern, which should not
be dignified by a rebuttal. He never deals with any
specific issue which is the subject of a complaint or
debate. Indeed, how can he explain the daily misdeeds
of his Fascist rCgime-stealing
peoples’ lands, properties, water and other resources, annexing occupied territories, acts of oppression, crime, abducting
and killing women and children? He talks about the
internal affairs of other sovereign, independent States
which find themselves under a moral obligation to
condemn the practices of his illegitimate authorities.

75. Amnon Rubenstein,
who is Dean of the Law
School at Tel Aviv University and the Parliamentary
Leader of the tiny Shinui Party, complained during a
parliamentary debate that Begin was sacrificing Israel’s
morality in an effort to control the Eituation in the
occupied territories, and added:

69. When he talks about the abominable attempt on
the life of His Holiness the Pope, he deliberately overlooks the fact that every single Arab and Islamic country and citizen and individual has condemned that foul
deed. His Holiness, I would inform him-and
I know
this very well-sympathizes
fully with the plight of the
Palestinian people and has constantly prayed for their
redemption,
as did his predecessors. And while he tries
to implicate
Turkey he forgets that that would-be
assassin had been sentenced to death for a previous
crime committed in Turkey.

“There is a legitimate
discussion concerning
territory, There is no doubt that we must have
defendable borders. But what will happen to the
Jews here-what kind of society will there be here?
And what will happen to the Arabs? Does anyone
believe that they will [peacefully agree to] be a
people without a political voice, without being
allowed to have a say in their destiny?”
76, The harshest judgement came from Yeshayahu
Leibowitz, a 79-year-old professor at Hebrew University, who was quoted by the Jervstrlem Post as
are
having said that “all occupation Governments
proto-Nazi”.

70. How often does the representative of the Israeli
entity have to be reminded that when the Council
meets it does so to consider specifically the subject
of the complaint which is the item on the agenda
before it? The Israeli representative deliberately tries
to divert the Council’s attention from the issue under
consideration
and engages in abusive language, on a
global basis, against any and every State, which
expresses its condemnation of Israel’s heinous acts.

77. If the occupation lasts long enough, it invites the
dehumanization
that makes collective punishment of
entire villages or even an entire race seem less abhorrent. Israel is sliding down that slippery slope.

7 1. It is illegal for any State to interfere in the internal
affairs of another State, all the more so when the
offender, as in this case, is not in its present form a
legal entity, properly so called, and will not be until
it complies
scrupulously with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

“The most worrisome problem,
which should
concern all thinking Israelis, is the moral deterioration bound up in forcing Israeli rule on a hostile
population.”

78, DOVCII', the voice of the Labour Party, said in an
editorial that:

79. I shall go no further. I shall merely state that what
we are debating today is only a symptom of a much
more lethal disease which has afflicted the Israelis
themselves as well as brutalized and dehumanized the
Palestinian people and the entire region, with serious
-indeed,
dire-consequences
for the peace and
tranquillity of the world. What we are discussing is not
an isolated incident. What chief Rabbi Goren has said
to some very senior people, both in Europe and in the
United States, is that the time has come to demolish
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock and
to build in their place the Temple Mount.

72. I believe that the time has come for the international community to cease tolerating any longer a
racist rCgime which vies and co-ordinates with the
abominable
behaviour of racist South Africa.
73. I shall not burden the Council by reciting the daily
acts of abuse against little children, women and other
villagers who are made to spend all night outdoors.
I need hardly recall how many are being wounded
every day by the trigger-happy Israeli soldiers. There
have been numerous casualties over the past two to
7

80. The PRESIDENT
(inlerpretcrtion
~%orn French):
The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed
to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I call
on him.

I am not sure that the answer the representative of
Jordan gave to that question was a bad one, because
I believe that outer space is as remote from earth as
are the deliberations on the Arab-Israeli conflict in
the Organization from reality. What is more, the flights
of hallucination of the Jordanian representative are as
remote from the realities on the ground in the Middle
East as is outer space from earth.

81. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The representative of the
Palestinian Arab State of Jordan-he
seems to be
getting excited. That is my characterization
of his
country,
82. The PRESIDENT
I would ask members

(interpretcrtion

from

90. Let us first take his basic thesis, his reliance on
General Assembly resolution 181 (II). Here we have
this protector, this defender, of resolution 181 (II).
Why? Because 34 years after the adoption of that resolution, many memories are apparently short, and quite
a number of those seated in this chamber have perhaps
forgotten what happened in 1947 and in 1948.

French):

of the Council to keep calm.

83. In accordance with rule 30 of the provisional rules
of procedure, I reminded the Council that it is the
practice to refer to States by their offtcial names.
I therefore ask members of the Council and others who
participate in this debate to abide by that practice.
84.

I call on the representative

91. Well, just to refresh memories, let me point out
that Transjordan-that
was the name at that time of the
country which Mr. Nuseibeh now represents-together with all other Arab States, rejected General Assembly resolution 181 (II) and resorted to the force of
arms to destroy that resolution. The documentation of
the United Nations on this point is unequivocal. Let
me briefly quote from it.

of Israel.

85. Mr, BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, with all due
respect I would say that on several occasions you
permitted the Jordanian representative to refer to my
country by a designation other than its official one.
I see no reason why I should not apply my characterization-which
truly reflects the situation on the
ground-and
use the designation
“the Palestinian
Arab State of Jordan”;
or, if the representative
of
Jordan so prefers, “the Jordanian entity”; or, again if
he so prefers, “the Jordanian non-entity”.
He can have
his choice. But I think that we should not apply a
double standard in this regard too. We apply a double
standard in the Organization in so many respects. At
least when it comes to the names of States, Mr. President, either you permit the representative of Jordan to
deviate from the rule, in regard to Israel, or you do not
permit it. But if he is permitted to do so, with all due
respect, I think that I am entitled to the same treatment.

92. For instance, the United Nations Palestine Commission, in its first special report to the Security
Council, dated 16 February 1948, reported to the
Council-please
listen, Mr, Nuseibeh:
“Powerful Arab interests, both inside and outside
Palestine, are defying the resolution of the General
Assembly and are engaged in a deliberate effort to
alter by force the settlement envisaged therein.“*
93. Two months later, the Commission
reported
again that Arab use of force had reached such proportions that the implementation
of the resolution had
become impossible.

86. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fiorn French):
I did remind the representative of Jordan that Member
States of the United Nations should be addressed by
their official names. I wish to say the same thing to
the representative of Israel. If this presidential ruling
is challenged by anyone I shall have to invoke rule 30
and call for a vote by the Council.

94. Then, on 14 May 1948, the State of Israel was
proclaimed, and instantly all Arab countries-among
them, the country represented by Mr. Nuseibeh,
who now relies on General Assembly resolution 181
(II)-invaded
the former Palestine Mandate, with a
view to destroying the fledgling State of Israel.

87. Having said that, I take it that this question is
now closed, and I call on the representative of Israel
to continue his statement.

95, Jordan-Transjordan
in those days-openly
admitted that it entered Palestine in order to destroy
that resolution. And the Transjordanian
answer came
up before the Security Council in May 1948-m he
precise, on 22 May. Let me quote from the statement
made by the representative of the United States of
America, Senator Warren Austin, in this regard:

88. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The representative of Jordan
did not challenge your ruling, Mr. President: he just
ignored it. So from now on I shall refer to him as the
representative of Jordan, it being understood
that
I regard his country as the Palestinian Arab State.

“Probably the most important and the best evidence we have on that subject”-that
is, the subject
of Arab aggression-“is
contained in the admissions of the countries whose five armies have
invaded Palestine that they are carrying on a war,

89. The representative of Jordan quoted one of our
European colleagues who asked what would happen
to the agenda of the Organization if the Arab-Israeli
conflict were resolved. I think it is a good question.
8

“Their statements are the best evidence we have
of the international
character of this aggression.
There is nothing in the resolution about aggression;
it is a word which is not included in the text but
which has been mentioned in the statements of these
aggressors” -including
Transjordan. “They tell us
quite frankly that their business in Palestine is political and that they are there to establish a unitary
State. Of course, the statement that they are there to
make peace is rather remarkable in view of the fact
that they are waging war. We find that this is characterized, on the part of King Abdullah”-King
Abdullah of Transjordan-“by
a certain contumacy
towards the United Nations and the Security Council. He has sent us an answer to our questions.,
These were questions addressed to him, as a ruler
who is occupying land outside his domain, by the
Security Council, a body which is organized in the
world to ask these questions of him. As will be.seen
from page 2 of document S/760-the tirst page of
which contains the actual questions-in
a reply
addressed to the President of the Security Council
he answers the questions addressed to him by that
body. , .

“The USSR delegation cannot but express surprise at the position adopted by the Arab States in
the Palestine question, and particularly at the fact
that those States-or
some of them, at least-have
resorted to such action as sending their troops into
Palestine and carrying out military operations aimed
at the suppression of the national liberation movement in Palestine.”
[See 299fh mwting, p. 71
For those who may ask themselves what liberation
movement Mr. Gromyko was referring to, I might point
out that it was Zionism, the national liberation movement of the Jewish people. I am sure that Mr. Troyanovsky will bear me out on this.
98. Mr.
Ukrainian

Tarassenko,
the representative
of the
Soviet Socialist Republic, stated on 20 May

1948:

“We are concerned with the plain fact that a
number of Palestine’s neighbour States have sent
their troops into Palestine. Our knowledge of that
fact is not based on rumours, or on newspaper
reports, but on official documents signed by the
Governments of those States informing the Security
Council that their troops have entered Palestine.
I refer, in particular, to the documents signed and
sent by the Governments of Egypt [docwnent S/743]
and Transjordan [documerzt S/748].

,L . . .
“The contumacy of that’ reply to the Security
Council is the very best evidence of the illegal
purpose of this Government in invading Palestine
with armed forces and conducting the war which
it is waging there. It is against the peace; it is not
on behalf of the peace. It is an invasion with a definite purpose.

“Nor can there be any doubt of the purpose for
which those forces have entered Palestine. We may
be sure they have not gone there for a summer camp
vacation or for exercises. Those forces have a definite military and political purpose.
LL
I

“Therefore,
here we have the highest type of
evidence of the international violation of the law:
the admission by those who are committing
this
violation.”
[See 30lst meeting, pp. 41 to 431

.

.

“In these circumstances it is difficult to deny that
we are faced with a situation involving a breach of
the peace.” [See 297th meeting, pp. 4 md 51

Parodi,

99. I could go on. Those are only some of the statements that were made in the Security Council at the
time.

“the moment the regular forces of several countries
crossed their frontiers and entered a territory which,
whatever its status, was not their own, the moment
fighting continued in these conditions and became
more serious, we clearly had to deal with the question of international peace within the meaning of the
Charter.”
[See 297th meeting, p. 171

100. Mr. Nuseibeh is banking on the short memory
of certain members, Your country, Mr. Nuseibeh,
committed aggression in 1948 together with other countries, invaded a territory that was not its own, purported to annex it, illegally, in violation of international law, and you come here before the Council to
speak on behalf of General Assembly resolution 181
(II), which your country sought to destroy?

So much for the statement

of the United States.

96. The representative
stated on 20 May 1948:

of France,

Mr.

101. It is an affront to history that the representative
of the Jordanian entity should complain to this body
about Jerusalem. For Jordan stands condemned as the
first country in modern history to bombard the Holy
City. It was Jordan-or
Transjordan as it was called
in those days-which,
intent on destroying the fledgling
State of Israel and on unlawfully grabbing territory

Of course, among the countries that crossed the
borders that were not their own and entered territory
that was not their own was the Kingdom of Transjordan.
97.
The representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Mr. Gromyko, stated on 21 May 1948:
9

for itself, attacked Jerusalem in 1948 in clear defiance
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Transjordan placed Jerusalem under siege and opened
fire on its inhabitants and on its historical and religious
sites. Jordanian forces attacked and destroyed the
densely populated Jewish quarter of Jerusalem’s
Old City with mortar shells and seized the eastern Part
of Jerusalem, including the historic walled section,
which contains religious shrines holy to Jews, Christians and Muslims.

106. During the Jordanian occupation Of the eastern
between 1948 and 1967, stagnation
set in in East Jerusalem and there was considerable
emigration from it, since the Jordanian entity discouraged economic development
in Jerusalem with a view
to ensuring the primacy of Amman. Particularly hardhit were the Christian
residents under Jordanian
occupation, and their numbers decreased significantly
during that period-from
19,000 in 1948 to 11,000 in
1967.

102. In flagrant violation of the 1949 Israel-Jordan
Genera] Armistice Agreement,” Jordan then barred
access by Jews to their Holy Places and cultural institutions. Further, Mr. Nuseibeh’s Government began
to eliminate systematically every trace of Jerusalem’s
Jewish past. Fifty-eight synagogues-58 synagogues,
Mr. Nuseibeh-some
of them of great antiquity, like
the 700-year-old Churva synagogue, were wantonly
destroyed and desecrated. And please do not come
again with the story about two and possibly four
synagogues: I have the full list of all the 58 synagogues
here with me. I have read them out before. You left
the Council chamber on that occasion. I would not
want you to repeat that performance.

107. When Jordan, in 1952, declared Islam to be the
official religion of the realm, that declaration was
made applicable also to the Jordanian-occupied
part
of Jerusalem. As a result, Christian holidays were no
longer recognized as official holidays of the Christian
citizens. Christian civil servants were required to
take their weekly holiday on Friday. They were permitted to absent themselves from theirjobs on Sundays
only until 11 a.m. and Christian schools were required
to remain closed on Fridays.

part of Jerusalem

103. Those synagogues that were not razed to the
ground were converted into toilets, stables and henhouses, filled with dung-heaps, garbage and carcasses.
In the Process, hundreds of holy Torah scrolls and
books, reverently preserved for generations, were
plundered and burnt to ashes. On the Mount of Olives,
a hallowed spot for Jews for centuries, 38,000 out of the
50,000 tombstones in the ancient Jewish burial ground
were torn up, profaned, broken into pieces and used
as flagstones, steps and building materials for public
latrines and Jordanian army barracks,

108. In 1953 a Jordanian law imposed severe restrictions on the purchase of land by religious institutions
religious
organizations”,
affiliated with “foreign
In 1965 Jordan completely prohibited the acquisition
of ownership or possession of land within the walled
city of Jerusalem without prior special authorization
by the Government. This resulted in preventing the
construction of any Christian church or place of
worship within the Old City.
109. In October 1966 the Jordanian Government
took further measures with a view to discriminating
against Christian ecclesiastical institutions and clergy,
such as the abolition of exemption from customs duties
previously granted to those institutions
and clergy.
A Jordanian law passed in 196.5 was from then on
strictly enforced also against Christian educational
institutions.
It required them to abandon foreign
languages of instruction and to substitute Arabic for
them. The teaching of the Koran was also introduced
on that occasion.

104. Large areas of the cemetery were leveled and
converted into parking areas and gas stations. Through
the devastated remains of the graves, the Jordanian
Government cut an asphalt road to provide a short
cut to a new hotel built irreverently on the top of the
Mount of Olives, the Inter-Continental
Hotel.
105. Nor were the discriminatory policies of Jordan
directed only against Jews, who, as is well known,
were not permitted to live in the Jordanian-occupied
section of Jerusalem, although they constituted in
Jerusalem, as they have uninterruptedly for the past
150 years, the vast majority of the city’s population.
I mention this because a number of speakers have
resorted in this debate to the Nazi term of “Judaization”: Jerusalem is about to be “Judaized”.
Now,
Jerusalem, as you know, Sir, has been the heart and
soul of the Jewish people for the past 3,000 years,
and no people except for the Jewish people has made
Jerusalem its capital. The majority of Jerusalem’s
Population for the past 150 years, uninterruptedly,
has been Jewish. But I think it is proper that the bigots
in this debate should use the term “Judaization”;
I think it is illustrative of the mentality which prompts
them to make those statements,

110. When Jerusalem was reunited in 1967, the
number of its non-Jewish residents-Muslim
and Christians-was about 70,000, roughly one quarter of the
Population. The non-Jewish population
of the City
has since risen to more than 112,000. This incidentally,
is my response to the strange allegation contained in
the strange statement of the representative of Syria.
Jerusalem is not being emptied of its Muslim and
Christian residents; quite to the contrary, their number
has risen by about 60 per cent since 1967.
111. Between 1948 and 1967, during the Jordanian
illegal occupation of Judea and Samaria and of the
eastern part of Jerusalem,
Jordan also barred the
Muslim citizens of Israel from visiting and praying in
mosques of the Old City of Jerusalem. They gained
access to them only in 1967, when the city was reunited.
10

112. That, then, was the lamentable record of the
Jordanian occupation of the eastern part of Jerusalem
between 1948 and 1967. The Jordanian representative
would do well to remember this before embarking on
false charges against other countries.

tory than had been allocated to them by the partition
resolution [Gcned
Assembly resolution 181 (ZZ)]. In
fact they had occupied Jaffa and many other parts of
Palestine. So the territory over which the State of
Israel was “proclaimed”
exceeded what had been
allocated to the Jewish communities
in Palestine in
accordance with the partition resolution.

113. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtionfiom
French):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to make a statement in reply. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

118. We must remember that sovereignty resides in
the people. Had the Palestinian people-who
were then
threatened with extermination
by the Jewish Zionist
gangs-not
called on the other Arab peoples to come
to assist them, Israel would have occupied all of
Palestine in 1948. The Palestinian people were the
people who had been granted the right to establish
their own independent
State in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 181 (II). When they were
threatened by the superior power of the Zionist gangs
in Palestine, they exercised their sovereign right and
called on the Arab countries to come to their assistance.
Therefore, when the Arabs entered the land of Palestine they were not violating the sovereignty of the
State of Israel illegally established in 1948. They
came to assist the Palestinian people at the request of
the Palestinian people, who are already being driven
out of their homes and property by Zionist Jewish
gangs.

114. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization):
It is customary for the Zionists to be
selective about recalling history. In fact it seems to me
that for them history starts and ends either with their
presence or with their absence from Palestine. For
example, whenever they come with the Bible in their
hand and speak about the right of the Jews in Palestine,
they say: Well, 3,000 years ago there was a Moses who
came to Palestine, and since then Palestine is for the
Jews since it was given to them by God.
115. Now, before Moses came to Palestine, everyone
knows-at
least, everyone who believes the Biblethat there were people already there in Palestine. And
after the end of Jewish control over Palestine, other
people lived there-namely,
the Palestinian people.
But the Zionists teach the history of Palestine selectively, starting from their presence there and continuing until their absence. For example, the representative of the Government of Menachem Begin does
not remember that until 1917 Palestine was inhabited
by Palestinian
Arabs, 95 per cent of whom were
Christians or Muslims and 5 per cent Palestinian
Jews; and that over 7.5 per cent of the inhabitants of
Israel today were not present then. In fact, he himself
-even
in 1948, when the State of Israel was proclaimed-was
perhaps in Czechoslovakia. By the date
of the proclamation of the State of Israel there were
only 750,000 Jews in Palestine while there were over
1.5 million Palestinians. Therefore, two thirds of the
population
of Palestine, which was one unit, were
Palestinians Arabs and one third were colonial setttlers,
most of whom-and
the representative of the United
Kingdom can correct me if I am mistaken-came
as
illegal aliens to Palestine without the permission of
the authority in control of Palestine or any consultation of the population of Palestine.

119. In the period between 1947-after the adoption
of the partition resolution-and
1948-the
date of
the establishment of the State of Israel-300,000
Palestinians became refugees. And following the establishment of the State of Israel, more than 650,000 others
became refugees.
120. It is sufficient for the representative of Israel
to look at the memoirs of Mr. Yitzak Rabin, where he
says himself that under instructions from the late
Mr. Ben-Gurion,
he was ordered to expel the citizens
of Lod and Ramla and, together with his troops, to
escort them out of Lod to the city of Ramallah, 15 miles
away, under gunpoint.
121. So, when the Israeli Zionists speak about the
Arab countries’ invasion of Israel, they like to forget
what they did to the Palestinians which forced the
Palestinians to ask their brothers, the Arabs, to come
to their assistance.
122. It is also ironic that the representative of Israel
speaks about international
law. Now, I want to ask
whether international
law allows Israel to annex the
Golan Heights or to annex Jerusalem. Because if someone wants to abide by international
law and invoke
international
law, he must have full and total respect
for international
law.

I Id. Let us review briefly how the State of Israel
came to be “proclaimed”
in 1948. We know that there
were five or six Jewish terrorist gangs in Palestine.
One of them was led by none other than the present
Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Menachem Begin, who
was himself responsible for the massacre at the King
David Hotel on 22 July 1946 and for the massacre at
Deir Yassin on 9 April 1948-which was a month and
five days before the proclamation
of the State of
Israel.

123. Secondly, international
law and all international conventions consider the right to self-determination an inalienable right of people. If, as he claims,
they represent international
law, why do they not
respect the international
law that is pertinent to the

1 17. By the date that the State of Israel was “proclaimed”,
the Zionist gangs had occupied more terri11

the dastardly act against the Holy Sanctuary. The
leaders of that demonstration,
which Israel prevented
and turned back, arresting many of the participants,
were none other than the highest leaders of the Christian churches, as well as Muslim dignitaries. Because
we are one people. The Palestinian
people do not
engage in divisiveness as between Muslim and Christian. And the same applies, of course, to Jordan.

right of the Palestinian people to self-determination?
Or is this right of self-determination for the Palestinian
people in contradiction
to their international
law?
I want to know: if one invokes one aspect of international law, does not international law have to be
applied in all cases? International law does not allow
the occupation of other peoples’ territories by the use
of force. International
law does not allow Israel to
expel the citizens of Palestine to other countries.
International
law does not give Israel permission to
kill small children in the streets. International
law
does not give Israel any legitimacy over occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories.

130., The lsraeli representative
has read out an
elaborate statement, which I can refute word for word.
I di,d not even have to take notes in order to be able
to .prove to the Council the falsehood contained in that
statement.

124. So if someone invokes international law, he
must respect international law as such. But I know,
and everyone in this chamber knows, that Israel has
no respect for international law. It has never respected
international
law and it is willing to accept international law only in so far as such law serves Israel’s
own interests and expansionism.

131, To begin with, Palestine was a Palestinian Arab
country, and the last word on it, just before it was.
thrown to the United Nations, was that there should be
established a unified State in which Arab and Jew
would live in peace, tranquillity,
normalcy and cooperation, without discrimination
or distinction,
and
which would be an example to the rest of the world.

12.5. I challenge the representative of Israel to produce a map of the 1947 partition of Palestine and the
map on which the State of Israel was established in
1948. Then we shall see how Israel violated the partition resolution when it declared itself a State.

132. The entire question was brought to the United
Nations. There was a United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, which presented two reports, one
of them suggesting the partition of Palestine and the
minority report suggesting a federal State. Naturally,
the Palestinian people as well as the Arab world were
opposed to the dismemberment
of their country-and
I am sure that no country around this table would
accept such a thing. They therefore objected here at
the United Nations to the dismembering
of a country
which had always been one integral territory.

126. Enough is enough. We have listened so often to
the distortions and the manceuvres of the Israeli representative and his predecessors here in this chamber
and everywhere else. They like to accuse everyone of
having short memories. It seems to me that they feel
that the Palestinian presence in Palestine is an accident; that is what they say now. But it is an accident
that lasted 3,000 years-a long accident,

133. But who brought about the events that the representative of Israel has talked about? The Palestinian
people were never asked, either by plebiscite or
through elections, or through anybody, to express then
views as to whether they agreed or disagreed with the
United Nations resolution [Gerzc~~rl Assembly wsolution 181 {II)].

127. Israelis always want people to believe what
they have to say, and other people’s rights are totally
ignored and regarded as having no relevance whatsoever. I posed a question yesterday, and I pose that
same question today: it is a moral and a legal question, and I think it should be answered. How can
Mr. Alan Goodman, the person who has been called
a criminal by everyone, including the Government
of Israel, take a plane out of Kennedy Airport and land
in Tel Aviv and in two weeks time become a citizen of
Israel and in three weeks’ time become a soldier carrying a machine-gun and terrorizing and killing people
in my country, in my city, in my Jerusalem, while
I, a Palestinian, do not have the right to attend the
funeral of my father?

134. As a matter of fact, they were not given a chance
to exercise that elemental right, which today we all
regard as sacrosanct.

128. The PRESIDENT
(inteprctationfiom
French):
The representative of Jordan has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. I now call on him.

135. Three or four days after the adoption of the
partition resolution, the Israeli war machine was
unleashed against the entire unarmed Palestinian
people. I am sure that the United Kingdom delegation would bear me out on this. No one was supposed
to carry any arms and yet the Israelis had an organized
army in addition to many terrorist and notorious organizations, foremost among which was the Irgun Zvai
Leumi of Menachem Begin.

129. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I happen to be one of
those who lived through the period we are discussing
right from the start-in fact, starting in 1930. I have
today’s newspapers, which show pictures of the
demonstrations which occurred immediately fo]]owing

136. Now, during the British Mandate-even
during
the British Mandate-those
people seized by force far
more territory than was allocated to them under the
Partition plan. But that was not the end of the story.
They waited until the British administration
had
12

weakened sufficiently to enable them to intensify their
seizure of more and more land. And this climaxed on
14-15 May 1947, as I was leaving the New City of
Jerusalem,
which incidentally
is two-thirds Palestinian Arab and has been usurped by force by the
Israeli forces. It belongs to us. I am not talking about
what is called Arab Jerusalem; I am talking about
West Jerusalem, where we own 70 per cent. As I was
Ieaving Jerusalem because they had cut off the electric current, the Israelis started marching on the whole
city, starting with the compound, which comprises
the law courts and other Government offices, and
taking over all the Palestinian Arab quarters, until
they managed to seize all those quarters with the
exception of two or three.

all, or two thirds, of West Jerusalem were regarded
as Palestinian Arab zones within the over-all c*o,‘pus
scrpctwtutn
that was devised by the United Nations.
What right did the Israeli forces, including the Palmach,
their striking force, have to attack the 90,000 or 100,000
citizens who were huddled in the Old City, most of
whom had been expelled from the western parts of the
city? If Jordan wanted to occupy or to take over
Palestine, it was there fotthe taking. But in fact they
withdrew on 14 May and re-entered only at the dawn
of 18 May. There were 600 soldiers in all. They took
prisoner the 1,000 Israeli soldiers who had been
implanted
there against the wishes of the Jewish
inhabitants. It was during that fighting that Muslim
shrines as well as Israeli synagogues were damaged. ‘.
It took us years to repair them.
,.

137, Thereafter they launched an unprovoked
allout attack against the Old City of Jerusalem. Prior
to that, a month or two earlier, they had implanted
1,000 of their regular and irregular terrorist groups in
the Jewish quarter of the Old City, against the express
wishes of the Jewish inhabitants, who had begged them
not to place any forces there, saying that they were
safe and had nothing to fear. But the Israelis implanted
those forces, and on the 15th they launched an allout attack against the Old City of Jerusalem, in which
there were huddled at least 90,000 to 100,000 Jerusalemites from the New City, West Jerusalem and what
is now referred to as Arab Jerusalem,

141. It was, then, not the Palestinian people who
aborted the implementation
of the General Assembly
resolution. In fact, the Security Council was entrusted
with the implementation
of that resolution. The Palestinians were left in limbo. The mandatory Power was
disintegrating
and had withdrawn without ensuring
any safeguards for the inhabitants, who were unarmed
and were only beginning to buy arms in the western
deserts of the Libyan Jamahiriya,
where world-war
battles had taken place, and who tried heroically and
to the best of their ability to defend themselves until
they had spent all their ammunition.
142. The Israeli representative
said that the Arab
armies entered to destroy Israel, to nip it in the bud.
I know for sure-and perhaps this expIains why some
of the documents in the British Foreign Office have
not yet been released-that
the Arab leaders, in their
talks with the late Mr. Ernest Bevin, the then Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, had agreed that the Arab
armies would come in to save the Palestinians from
massacre and would stop at the partition and demarcation lines which had been delineated by the United
Nations. The records are there; they are available.
They did not enter to destroy Tel Aviv. All the Arab
armies entered to save the Palestinians
who were
being massacred at the point of bayonets, in every
town and in every village.

138. It was on 18 May, at dawn, that a small contingent of the Jordan army arrived, at the pleading and
urging of the citizens of Jerusalem, who were being
subjected to the kind of massacre that the Israelis had
carried out throughout Palestine. They asked Jordan
to send some assistance. They had expended whatever little ammunition they had bought in the marketplace-at
exorbitant prices that no country in the world
could afford.
139. The Israeli representative says that Jordan’s is
an occupation force. The truth-and
we have it in the
records of the United Nations-is
that, the Jordan
army, then known as the Arab Legion, was present
throughout
Palestine, and in the most strategic areas
thereof, as a part of the allied war effort. The broadcasting station, only a few hundred yards away from
the heart of the Jewish quarter in West Jerusalem,
namely,
Zion Square, was guarded by the Jordan
army. It had been in Palestine for four or five years,
for the duration of the war. Out of respect for the resolutions of the United Nations it withdrew promptly,
by 14 May 1948, remaining outside Palestine until it
had to respond to the appeal of the 90,000 or 100,000
citizens of Jerusalem who had been expelled from the
western section of Jerusalem and those who had lived
in the Old City in the first place. In co-operation with
the local inhabitants, it managed to repel the massive
attacks that were launched against the Old City.

143. What is Jaffa? One hundred per cent Palestinian. What is Lydda? One hundred per cent Palestinian. What is Ramla? One hundred per cent Palestinian. What is Acre? One hundred per cent Palestinian. What is Jerusalem? Three quarters Palestinian, if
we include Arab Jerusalem and two thirds of western
Jerusalem.
144. We did not prevent the Israelis from going to
the Wailing Wall. In fact the four Arab Governments
concerned then, namely, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and
Syria, made a solemn pledge, in response to a request
by the Palestine Conciliation
Commission,
to allow
pilgrims, visitors and people belonging to all races
and religions to visit their Holy Places. The Concilia-

140. Now I should like to ask a question. According
to the Fitzgerald reports, that entire area and almost
13

,

concerned, the Palestinian national movement
prises as many Christians as Muslims.

tion Commission made the same request of the Israeli
Government,
and Mr Eytan, on behalf of Israel,
replied that that needed further deliberations
in the
General Assembly-because
the Israelis were reluctant to face the responsibility of allowing a Palestinian
to return to his home a mere few hundred yards from
the demarcation line.

148. Everybody was allowed to build. Of course, in
those days, 30 years ago, we were falling on bad times
and we did not expand enough. If we had had the
opportunity
that was offered a decade later, today
Jerusalem would be one of the finest cities in the world
-without
the desecration and the deformities that
the Israelis have inflicted upon it. It is an old city and
any repairs or additions made necessary by natural
deterioration have always been measured in terms of
centuries, not years or decades.

145. The Armistice
Commission
dealt with this
problem. I was there, There were certain conditions.
One was that the Israelis would restore Jerusalem’s
centuries-old
water supply. The electric company
happened to have its engines in the western part,
so they cut off the electricity and the water: and they
closed the Jerusalem-Bethlehem
road for a few miles
and thus compelled Jordan to open a road across the
hills so as to permit the people of Jerusalem to return
to their homes. That is the most natural thing in the
world. Yet the Israelis refused to do that, because they
were far more interested in taking over our houses and
properties and in looting all the savings of the Palestinian people rather than in saying their prayers at the
:
Wailing Wall. That is a fact of life.

149. Finally, I should like to say the following. I did
not need to make any notes. I can answer what the
representative of Israel said point by point in a volume,
because I have been through it and I know what happened. I want to make this point in relation to the
Israeli representative’s claim that whereas the population of Jerusalem until 1976 was a mere 70,000, now
it is 110,000. It may well be 110,000, but what is the
reason? When they occupied all the territory extending
from Bethlehem in the south to Ramallah in the north,
the district of Jerusalem, according to the census con.
ducted during the elections, comprised 300,000 to
400,000 persons; after the annexation of those areas
one will observe a decrease of some 300,000 to 400,000
persons, not an increase. Usually, the Palestinian population doubles about every 18 to 20 years. It is the
take-over of those cities and territories and their
annexation to Jerusalem that results in the figure of
110,000 Jerusalemites and not 70,000.

146. Let me add that during the period of unity between the West and East Banks, Israeli convoys were
allowed to go to the Mount Scopus compound, where
Hebrew University
and Hadassah Hospital
were
located, under Jordanian
guardianship.
But then
there was that notorious incident in 1954, when the
army discovered that the Israelis were actually smuggling explosives in those convoys that were intended
to keep intact Hebrew University
and Hadassah
Hospital.
147. The Israeli representative
talked about discouraging Christian building and so on in Jerusalem.
I challenge anyone to go and conduct a plebiscite in
all the churches in Jerusalem and see how they feel
about the Arabs’ presence compared to that of the
Israeli racists. The demonstrations
that have taken
place since Easter Sunday give a clear, unmistakable
indication.
We venerate all the monotheistic
religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. We make no
distinction whatsoever. As far as the Palestinians are

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

com-

NOTES

I United Nations, Twrty Series vol. 75, Na. 973, p. 287.
? Officirrl

Records

of the Secrwity

Sflpp/~~mo~f No. 2, document
chap. I, para. 3 (c).

00300

14

Council,

Third

S/676; document

88-60989-June

Yew,

Spcck~l

A/AC.21/9,

19B9-2,050
