148

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Drug Abuse Control by giving due consideration to the
economic and social development provided in drug
control programmes financed by the Fund;
3. Urges all international or multilateral organizations and institutions concerned with providing economic and social development aid to co-operate with
the United Nations by supporting financially the implementation of such drug control programmes which
include sectors dealing with the economic and social
development of the areas covered by those programmes;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the
present resolution to the attention of all Governments
and of international or multilateral organizations and
institutions concerned with providing economic and
social development aid and to invite them to co-operate
in its best possible implementation.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/126.

lntensified and co-ordinated efforts to
fight the illicit traffic in and illicit demand for narcotic drugs and psychotropic suhstances

The General Assembly,
Recalling relevant articles of the Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as amended by the 1972
Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, 60 as well as of the 1971 Convention on
Psychotropic Substances, 61
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolutions 1932 (LVIII) and 1934 (LVIII) of 6 May
1975, 2002 (LX) of 12 May 1976, 2064 (LXII),
2067 (LXII) and 2081 (LXII) of 13 May 1977, as
well as the relevant recommendations of the Fifth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders, 62
Recognizing the serious health, social and economic
problems caused by drug abuse,
Noting with satisfaction the considerable results
achieved by national law enforcement agencies, by increasing regional and interregional collaboration and
in co-operation with the competent international organizations and bodies, in intercepting more and more
the actual movement of drug contraband,
Noting with great concern that the continuing international illicit traffic in both narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances causes the death of many human
beings or severely infringes upan their health and thus
is detrimental to many societies,
Convinced that measures to reduce illicit demand for
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including
prevention, treatment and rehabilitation, must be taken
concurrently with measures to reduce illicit supply of,
and illicit traffic in, drugs,
Convinced also that intensified and co-ordinated
efforts by all competent agencies and organizations concerned with the fight against illicit drug traffic, at the
60 /bid.

61 See

Official Records of the United Nations Conference
far the adoption of a Protocol on Psychotropic Substances,
vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.XI.3),
part four.
62 See A/CONF.56/10 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.76.IV.2 and corrigendum).

national, regional and international levels, could bring
about better results in the interception of such traffic,
l. Urges every Government to intensify its efforts in
that respect by strengthening and co-ordinating its law
enforcement agencies responsible for intercepting the
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, by providing them with the best and most
expeditious ways and means of exchange of relevant
operational information with the respective authorities
of other countries and by co-operating to the fullest
extent possiblc with the international organizations
working in this field, in arder to achieve the best possible results and to avoid waste of time and manpower;
2. Calls upon those international organizations and
bodies, such as INTERPOL, the International Criminal
Police Organization, and the Customs Co-operation
Council, to assist, in all possible ways and in the most
co-ordinated manner avoiding duplication, the respective law enforcement agencies of all Governments, in
particular by providing them with ali available operational information related to the illicit traffic in narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances;
3. Invites Governments to take all appropriate
measures against drug abuse, including in particular
the early prevention of drug addiction and health education programmes, as well as to provide facilities for
treatment and rehabilitation of persons addicted to
drugs;
4. Invites Governments to carry out evaluation of
their drug prevention programmes in order to assess
their efficiency as well as to expand and intensify research in the fields of epidemiology and knowledge of
causes and motives of drug abuse with regard to both
pharmacological and sociological aspects;
. 5. Calls far more extensive and effective co-operat10n of Governments and competent bodies of the
United Nations and specialized agencies in order to
facilitate appropriate designing and implementation of
programmes aimed at reducing illicit demand for drugs
and at furthering exchange of expericnce and information among scientists and experts from various nations
who are actively engaged in this field;
6. Reiterates its appea/ to ali States not yet parties
to the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances
to take steps to accede to it and requests the SecretaryGeneral to transmit this appeal to ali Governments
concerned;
7. Urges Governments to provide, in addition to
thc data already furnished in their annual reports to
the Secretary-General, other relevant information on
the extent, patterns and any new trends in the abuse
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances as well
as information on programmes undertaken t~ reduce
illicit dcmand far drugs;
8. Requests thc Secretary-General to strengthen and
expand to the cxtent possible, in co-operation with the
specialized agencies, the facilities available to provide
Governments which request it assistance in their work
to reduce illicit demand far drugs.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/127.

Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Mindful of thc suggestions made for the establishment, in regions wherc it <loes not alrcady cxist, of
