104

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

submit to their respective governing bodies or legislative organs, as a ma_tter of priority and with the active
co-operation of the Organization of African Unity,
concrete proposals for the full implementation of the
relevant United Nations decisions, in particular specific
programmes of all possible assistance to the peoples in
colonial Territories and their national liberation movements, together with a comprehensive analysis of the
problems, if any, confronted by these agencies and
organizations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
concerned with related aspects of the present item, with
the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system, a report on the action taken since the circulation of his
previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including the present
resolution;
( b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
11. Draws the attention of the Economic and Social
Council to the present resolution as well as to the related discussions in the Special Committee and the
relevant documentation on the item, particularly ihe
reports submitted by the Working Group on the Implementation by the Specialized Agencies and the International Institutions Associated with the United Nations
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and Other Relevant
R~so_lutions of_ the United Nations and by the Special
M1ss1on estabhshed by the Special Committee at its
912th meeting, on 14 May 1973;
12. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
contin~e to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.

2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
3119 (XXVIII). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular resolution 2981 (XXVII) of 14 December
1972 in which it expressed its firm conviction that the
provision of assistance for the education and training of
persons from the Territories concerned is as essential
as ever and should not only continue but also be
expanded,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for 1972/73,48
46 A/9240.

Taking note with satisfaction of the further increase
in contributions to the Programme and the corresponding increase in assistance, in the form of individual awards, to persons from the Territories concerned to further their education,
Recognizing. however, that additional funds are required if the Programme is to continue in operation
and be expanded,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Once again urgently appeals to all States, organizations and individuals to make generous contributions
to the Programme;
3. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa, established in pursuance of paragraph 2 of General Assembly
resolution 2431 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968, for
the work they have accomplished during the period
under review in connexion with the Programme;
4. Takes note with approval of the further efforts
made to strengthen co-operation between the Programme and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Ref~gees, the specialized agencies, the Organization of
Afncan Unity and other agencies assisting persons
from southern Africa, and hopes that those efforts will
be continued with a view to the co-ordination of their
activities in the field of education and training for persons from the Territories concerned;
5. Decides that, as a further transitional measure
provision shall be made, under the regular budget of
the United Nations for .the financial year 1974. for
an amount of $100,000 to ensure continuity of the
Programme pending the receipt of adequate voluntary
contributions;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Ge~~ral Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
activity and progress of •the Programme.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
3120 (XXVIII). Offers hy l\lember States of study
antl trainin~ facilities for inhabitant!! of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2982 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facili~ies _for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territones,4' prepared under General Assembly resolution
845 (]X) of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the need to provide increased educational and training facilities at all levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
41 A/9241

and Add.l.
