S/PV.8820

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8820

th meeting
Thursday, 15 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Drian/Mr. De Rivière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Shringla
Mr. Flynn
Ms. Omamo
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Jerandi
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-19159 (E)
*2119159*

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
warmly welcome the distinguished Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Germany and Libya to participate in
this meeting.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Abdul Hamid Dbeibah, Prime Minister
of the Government of National Unity of the State of
Libya, to the Council table.
Mr. Abdul Hamid Dbeibah, Prime Minister of the
Government of National Unity of the State of Libya,
was escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Council, I welcome His Excellency Prime Minister
Abdul Hamid Dbeibah.
I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas,
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

the

I give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: Let me begin by thanking Minister
Le Drian and the French presidency for convening
this timely in-person meeting. I would also like
to welcome here among us His Excellency Prime
Minister Abdul Hamid Dbeibah and other Excellencies,
2/24

15/07/2021

Ministers and high-level representatives of States
Members of the United Nations, notably members of
the Security Council but also other ministers. I thank
them for joining this meeting. It is important both
for understanding the situation in the country and for
mobilizing the international community in support of
the processes in the country that should strengthen its
unity, stability and security, with a positive impact on
the overall region.
I come from my most recent visit to Libya, where
I held consultations with a wide range of actors to
convince them to safeguard and advance the course
to national inclusive, free and fair parliamentary and
presidential elections in December. While all my
interlocutors reiterated their commitment to holding
the elections on 24 December, I am afraid that many of
them are not ready to walk the talk. I reminded them
of the overwhelming demand and expectations of the
Libyan people and the international community for
the elections to be held on time, which is necessary to
complete Libya’s democratic transition and prevent a
return to conflict, violence and chaos.
The constitutional basis for the elections should
have been clarified by now. Regrettably, the House
of Representatives, the body mandated to do so in
consultation with the High Council of State, has not yet
delivered. Last week, a new committee of the House
of Representatives was established to prepare electoral
laws for holding the elections on 24 December, and
it requested United Nations support. I advised the
Speaker of the House of Representatives to consult
with the High Council of State, in line with Libyan
Political Agreement, and to ensure that the legal and
constitutional basis are in place for holding the elections
on 24 December, as per resolution 2570 (2021), the
conclusions of the second Berlin Conference on Libya
and the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum (LPDF)
road map.
I also convened a virtual meeting of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum at the end of May to consider
a draft constitutional basis recommended by the
Forum’s legal committee and address key issues that
the Committee had left unresolved. The outstanding
issues raised by LPDF members themselves included
whether the presidential elections should take place
through a direct vote by the people or indirectly
through the Parliament; whether a referendum on the
draft permanent constitution should be held first, even
as a precondition for direct presidential elections; what
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

the criteria for the eligibility of candidates, especially
for President, should be; whether military personnel
and dual-citizenship holders should be eligible and on
what conditions; and questions about the representation
of cultural components.
The May session of the LPDF was unable to resolve
those issues and insisted that an in-person meeting was
necessary to negotiate a compromise. That meeting took
place in Geneva, with the kind support of Switzerland,
from 28 June to 2 July. At the request of some LPDF
members, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) convened the LPDF’s Advisory Committee
in Tunis from 24 to 26 June to prepare for the meeting in
Geneva by developing options to bridge the differences
over the unresolved issues. The Advisory Committee
reached a broad consensus on a compromise proposal,
which sought to address the concerns of the various
constituencies and interest groups within the LPDF.
The proposal was tabled during the Geneva meeting of
the LPDF.
However, it became clear in Geneva that LPDF
members were fragmented into various blocs and
interest groups with different affiliations. The various
blocs maintained their entrenched positions, also
reflected in their proposals, and the LPDF was unable
and unwilling to reach an agreement on a final proposal
for a constitutional basis for the elections.
Because of that failure of both the constitutional
bodies and the LPDF, the situation in Libya is becoming
more difficult, confrontational and tense. Institutional,
political and individual interests stand in the way of
agreeing on the necessary legal framework for holding
the elections on 24 December, as agreed in the LPDF
road map, endorsed by the Security Council. Old and
new status-quo forces are using diverse tactics and often
legitimate arguments with only one result — obstructing
the holding of the elections. My predecessor, who had
his own experience with similar approaches, called
them spoilers — a correct description given the impact
of their approach and manoeuvering.
UNSMIL continues to facilitate efforts to find
common ground, including through the work of a
consensus-building committee established by the LPDF
meeting in Geneva, which we will convene tomorrow,
and through my own engagement with the political and
other leaders in Libya.
Together with High National Elections Commission,
UNSMIL is requested to advise the committee

S/PV. 8820

convened by the House of Representatives, to which I
referred earlier. We are ready to do so with the aim of
facilitating the holding of the elections on 24 December,
taking as our point of reference the LPDF road map and
the legal committee proposal. The committee intends
to meet next week in Italy.
To increase our engagement with civil society,
including the women and young people of the country,
the UNSMIL leadership intends to engage them in a
digital dialogue, used by UNSMIL in the past.
I am deeply concerned about the wider ramifications
of the stalemate in the political/electoral track and
related cleavages that are the result of the standoff
between key Libyan State institutions, in particular
between the Government of National Unity and the
House of Representatives, the Government of National
Unity and the Libyan National Army, led by Field
Marshal Haftar, the House of Representatives and the
High Council of State and those who want to respect the
24 December timeline for the elections and those who
would see the elections delayed.
On a positive note, despite the lack of a legislative
electoral framework, the High National Electoral
Commission initiated the voter registration update
on 4 July, with a special provision for the inclusion
of internally displaced persons. The Electoral
Commission decided to move forward and start the
implementation of the part of the process that does not
fully require having the legislation in place. Yet there
are limitations to what can be done in the absence of
electoral legislation.
If the impasse over the constitutional basis and
the ongoing standoff between State institutions are not
quickly resolved and if the key leaders of the country
will not show the political will to reach a solution and a
compromise and implement it, all that could reverse the
positive momentum seen just a few months past, which
started with the enactment of the interim executive
authority and other positive developments.
The ramifications of the political impasse and
the risk that it poses to other key national priorities,
particularly the security and economic tracks, are
already beginning to manifest themselves. The
House of Representatives has not adopted the budget
presented by the Government of National Unity despite
several rounds of consultations between the House of
Representatives and the Government on finalizing the
budget proposal. The last effort failed only this week,

21-191593/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

and that means that the country is moving towards the
Eid holidays without a budget and without the necessary
support that could be provided to the people.
Up until now, the House of Representatives and the
High Council of State have not agreed how to proceed on
the appointments to sovereign positions despite several
meetings facilitated by Morocco. The Libyan National
Army has not allowed the Government of National
Unity to extend its authority to the areas that it controls.
The Presidency Council and the Government have not
been able to agree on the appointment of the Minister
of Defence, a position crucial to the implementation of
the ceasefire agreement, progress on the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups,
security-sector reform and the reunification of
the military.
Recently the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
postponed the reopening of the coastal road to connect
the eastern and western parts of the country to protest the
failure to take decisions that would facilitate the holding
of elections on time and to protest the stalemate on the
withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign
forces. They have also complained about the failure by
the Government of National Unity to pay the salaries of
the opposing forces and fighters. If not addressed, all
that could cause the suspension of participation of any
of the two parties in the Joint Military Commission,
which otherwise keeps demonstrating exemplary unity,
patriotism and leadership in taking steps to implement
the ceasefire agreement.
I am concerned that although the ceasefire
agreement continues to hold notwithstanding minor
clashes between armed groups and criminal gangs,
the unity of the Joint Military Commission and the
implementation of the agreement could unravel if the
political process remains stalled. The Commission
has a vital role in the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement, and its achievements have previously
paved the way for political progress. Every effort must
therefore be made to preserve its unity and to insulate
its work from the detrimental effects of the political
stalemate and the standoff between Libya’s main
political actors.
The United Nations will continue to support the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement in Libya. In
line with resolution 2570 (2021), preparations are ongoing
for the deployment of an UNSMIL ceasefire-monitoring
4/24

15/07/2021

component in support of the Libyan-led, Libyan-owned
ceasefire monitoring mechanism.
The Secretariat is currently preparing for the
first phase of the deployment of ceasefire monitors,
including through the recruitment of personnel and
the procurement of enabling elements. The Secretariat
will then reach out to Member States regarding support
for the full deployment of the UNSMIL ceasefire
monitoring component once the necessary financial
resources have been secured.
However, there is no clarity yet on when the Libyan
component of the mechanism will be in place. The
Government and the 5+5 Commission have also at
times indicated that the main task of the United Nations
component should be to monitor the withdrawal of
mercenaries and foreign fighters rather than patrolling
to verify compliance with the ceasefire agreement.
The reopening of the coastal road is an essential
step for ceasefire implementation. On 8 June, the
Presidency Council issued an order to the Commander
of the Sirte-Jufrah operations room to relocate its
armed groups, a necessary step prior to the reopening
of the road. That provided impetus for a Joint Military
Commission meeting in Sirte from 19 to 22 June to
discuss preparations for a safe opening, and a further
meeting was to follow on 5 July to discuss final
arrangements. However, the meeting was postponed by
the eastern delegation to the Commission in reaction
to the LPDF meeting and what they saw as attempts
by certain blocs to postpone the elections. I stressed
to the Commission the importance of moving ahead
with opening the coastal road, as not doing so would
serve the interests of spoilers. I also stress the need for
all authorities and institutions active in the security
field to consult and coordinate their moves with the
5+5 Commission.
The continued presence of foreign forces,
mercenaries and foreign fighters also threatens the
ceasefire. It is imperative that Libyan and international
actors agree on a plan to commence and complete the
withdrawal of mercenaries and foreign forces. Initial
signals to that end are encouraging, but concrete steps
and agreements are needed.
The security situation is further complicated by
recent attacks and a renewed terrorist threat by Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb and the Islamic State/Da’esh,
particularly in the south. The delayed reunification
of Libya’s security and military apparatus along with
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

the lack of a centralized and coordinated approach is
allowing space for violent extremist organizations
to recruit, operate and increase their asymmetric
activities. I urge Libya’s security actors to jointly
address that threat in consultation and cooperation
with the 5+5 Commission and local actors, notably
tribal leaders, guided by a broader interest to reinforce
stability and security.
On 8 July, I delivered the report of the international
financial audit to the Presidency Council in the presence
of Prime Minister Dbeibah and the heads of the two
branches of the Central Bank of Libya. The audit
was requested by the former head of the Presidency
Council, Mr. Serraj, in a letter dated 10 July 2018 and
was subsequently mandated by the Security Council,
which requested that UNSMIL facilitate the process.
The main finding of the audit is that the unification
of the Central Bank of Libya is no longer simply
recommended but required. While Libya’s foreign
currency reserves were largely protected during the
past five years, the division in the Central Bank of
Libya has eroded the integrity of the banking system
and impeded monetary reform. Owing to the lack of
a unified budget and successive oil blockades, both
branches of the Central Bank extended credit to their
respective former Governments, thereby accumulating
large debts. Managing that debt is possible only if the
Central Bank unifies. In plain terms, Libya’s banking
system will likely collapse absent unification.
The transmission of the audit report marks the end
of the financial audit review and the beginning of the
process to unify the two branches of the Central Bank
of Libya. It is my hope that the international community
can support that process as it moves forward, within the
framework of the Berlin process.
On 31 May, the Presidency Council launched a
series of workshops to develop a legal framework and
structure for the Libyan High National Reconciliation
Commission, with participation from the African
Union, UNSMIL and the Minister of Justice, as well
as legal experts and representatives of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). The United Nations and the
African Union are supporting initiatives planned by the
Presidency Council, including meetings with tribal and
local community leaders, women and youth. Advancing
those initiatives is essential for laying the groundwork
for a longer-term national reconciliation process based

S/PV. 8820

on clear accountability, as well as to promote unity and
social cohesion ahead of the December elections.
The situation of migrants and refugees in Libya
remains dire, as the number of people attempting to
cross the Mediterranean continued to increase in the
first five months of 2021. By 26 June, the Libyan Coast
Guard had intercepted and returned to Libya 14,751
migrants and refugees, exceeding the total number of
all returnees that was reached in 2020.
As a result, there has been a dramatic increase
in the number of migrants and refugees arbitrarily
detained in official detention centres, without judicial
review and frequently in inhumane conditions. As of
21 June, an estimated 6,377 migrants and refugees
were being arbitrarily held at official detention centres
across the country, a 550 per cent increase since January
2021. Those developments have significantly increased
human rights, humanitarian and protection concerns.
United Nations and other agencies continue to face
restrictions from Libyan authorities on humanitarian
access and access for human rights monitoring to
detention centres. We again urge the Government
to swiftly approve the resumption of Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees- and
International Organization for Migration-facilitated
humanitarian evacuation and voluntary resettlement
and return flights and departures of migrant and
refugees from Libya. Some 6,000 people have so far
registered for such departures, which have been blocked
for several months.
In June, UNSMIL received yet more shocking
reports of sexual violence against girls and boys in
official detention centres for migrants. Such acts
may constitute crimes under both international and
national law.
I reiterate that Libya is not a safe port of
disembarkation for migrants and refugees. Member
States that support operations to return individuals
to Libya should revisit their policies, bearing in mind
that migrants and refugees continue to face a very
real risk of torture and sexual violence if returned to
Libyan shores.
Member States with influence must do more to
prevent such crimes. I encourage those who provide
support for Libyan security agencies alleged to
be involved in those violations to shoulder their
responsibility and take all feasible measures to prevent
such egregious conduct.

21-191595/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

The overall humanitarian situation has seen some
improvement since the ceasefire agreement of October
2020, with more displaced people returning to their areas
of origin. The number of internally displaced persons
decreased to an estimated 224,000 persons, marking
a 19 per cent reduction since February. But serious
challenges remain in ensuring that returnee populations
have adequate and sustained access to basic services,
such as health-care and education facilities, with
primary infrastructure urgently continuing to require
rehabilitation. All of that is happening in a situation
gravely affected by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Planned and often forced evictions targeting
IDP communities by Libyan authorities is a growing
concern. In May, some 500 Tawerghan families living
in an IDP settlement at the Naval Military Academy in
Tripoli were evicted. Two other sites in Tripoli where
internally displaced persons, migrants and refugees
live are facing forced eviction, with migrants and
refugees subjected to harassment and attacks. I note
that forced evictions without due process are human
rights violations.
UNSMIL, in cooperation with UN-Women and the
United Nations Population Fund, hosted an in-person
meeting in Tunis from 16 to 18 June for the Committee
of Libyan Experts on Combating Violence Against
Women. I would once again thank Tunisia and other
partners that are hosting different meetings for their
continued support. The meeting concluded by adopting
the first comprehensive draft legislation in the Middle
East and North Africa region on combating violence
against women. The Libyan Ministry of State for Women
Affairs sponsored the meeting, and the Minister for
Women’s Affairs, Ms. Houria Eltermal, attended and
announced that the Ministry would transmit the draft
to the House of Representatives for adoption.
I welcome the conclusions of the second Berlin
Conference on Libya and the collective efforts
of Member States and regional and international
organizations to assist the Libyan people in their quest
for unity, peace, stability and prosperity. As compared
to the first Berlin Conference, Libya was an active
participant and partner in finalizing the conclusions of
second Berlin Conference. Now it is important to see
their implementation.
As evidenced since the fall of 2020, the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement and progress
on the political track and the necessary economic reform
6/24

15/07/2021

agenda are interdependent. Positive steps are now
needed to avoid backsliding on all tracks. We count on
the sustained support of the Security Council and the
Berlin process partners in that. I would like to thank a
number of Libya’s international partners for supporting
the work of UNSMIL and efforts of Libyan partners
to further advance the different tracks by graciously
hosting their meetings.
It is incumbent on Libyan political actors to exert
every effort to hold parliamentary and presidential
elections on 24 December in accordance with the road
map of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and as
called for by the Security Council and the international
community. I also urge the members of the LPDF, who
are to meet by the end of the week, to put their differences
aside and come to an agreement on a proposal for the
constitutional basis for immediate consideration and
adoption by the House of Representatives so that the
elections can be held on 24 December. The relevance
and effectiveness of those bodies rest on their ability to
fulfil their responsibilities and meet the aspirations of
the Libyan people.
Interest groups, spoilers and armed actors must
not be allowed to derail the process, which is aimed
at restoring the legitimacy, unity and sovereignty of
the Libyan State and its institutions. In that regard, the
international community might have a special role in
line with resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021) to
hold the spoilers to account.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
After a decade of instability, the Libyan people
aspire to live in a safe, united and sovereign country,
and that aspiration is legitimate. It is incumbent
upon us to support it by acting before the window of
opportunity that opened at the end of last year closes.
The signing of the ceasefire agreement by the Libyan
parties on 23 October 2020, the meeting of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum and the swearing in of the
Government of National Unity by Parliament are all
signs that progress is possible.
Many Libyans of goodwill — regardless of their
affiliation — have demonstrated their determination to
write a new chapter in the history of their country by
prioritizing their commitment to Libyan sovereignty. I
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

thank the United Nations, which has supported them on
the path paved by dialogue, in particular the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy Ján Kubiš, with whom
we are working closely. I would also like to commend
the spirit of responsibility that has guided the work of
the Security Council since the beginning of the year.
The unanimous adoption of resolutions 2570 (2021),
2571 (2021) and 2578 (2021) is a powerful message
of support for the political transition and the return
to security.
We know, however, that the same momentum faces
serious threats, which the briefing of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General illustrated for us. We must
work to diffuse those threats.
First, it is imperative that the electoral calendar be
upheld. The legislative and presidential elections must
take place on 24 December in line with the expectations
of the Libyan people. It was set by the Political
Dialogue Forum. It was endorsed on 16 April by the
Council through resolution 2570 (2021) and on 23 June
by the second Berlin Conference. It was nevertheless
contested by some of the participants at the Forum’s
most recent meeting in Geneva. That timetable is key
to ensuring the transition process. Under absolutely no
circumstances, therefore, can we compromise on the
date of 24 December.
I recall that the mandate conferred by the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and the House of
Representatives upon the Libyan interim executive
authority is to ensure the holding of elections by the end
of the year, that the mandate runs until 24 December and
that the Council was clear in its adoption of resolution
2571 (2021) that all those who try to thwart the political
process may be subject to sanctions.
Another imperative is the withdrawal of foreign
forces and mercenaries, whose presence constitutes a
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and a serious attack against Libya’s sovereignty. It is
time to implement a progressive, balanced and phased
timetable for the departure of foreign elements from
both sides. We have made specific proposals to that
effect that have been extensively discussed with the
participants in the Berlin process. Such a withdrawal
could initially involve Syrian mercenaries from both
sides to begin in the coming weeks. That first step
would enable initiating a process aimed at the eventual
departure of all foreign forces and mercenaries from
Libyan territory.

S/PV. 8820

In that regard, the situation of Libya’s neighbouring
countries must obviously be taken into account. I am
thinking in particular of the Sahel countries, which
have already paid all too dearly for the instability in
Libya. Recent events in Chad compel us to ensure
that mercenaries from Libya’s neighbours be returned
to their countries of origin through a credible
demobilization process.
In the area of security, the highest level of vigilance
must be maintained. The end of foreign interference
in Libya must be accompanied by progress on the
reunification of the army and the dismantling of the
militias so that the civilian authorities can assume their
security responsibilities. That process must enjoy the
support of all.
Monitoring the ceasefire must remain a priority,
with the deployment of a monitoring mechanism under
the auspices of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and in support of Libyan decisions. The fight
against terrorism must also continue, in particular in
southern Libya, in close cooperation with the countries
of the region.
We must also support an effective reopening
of the coastal road, above and beyond the repeated
announcements. It would be a strong measure, on which
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission has conducted
excellent work. I commend those efforts.
Lastly, we must work with the Libyan authorities,
with full respect for Libya’s sovereignty, to strengthen
their control over their land and maritime borders.
With regard to maritime issues, the European Union,
Italy and France are willing to make greater efforts to
support the training of the Libyan Coast Guard and to
ensure that it is well equipped. Training, through the
European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI, might be a key contribution, beyond its primary
function, which is the implementation of the arms
embargo imposed by the Council.
For the first time in a long time, peace is within reach
in Libya. I would like to reiterate to the Prime Minister
of Libya and, through him, to the Libyan people that the
Security Council and the international community are
determined to stand with them in the implementation
of the political and security road map I just mentioned.
That explains the unanimous adoption of resolution
2571 (2021) I mentioned earlier. It is the idea behind the
Berlin process, to which Heiko Maas, who chaired the
crucial second Berlin Conference of Libya, will return.

21-191597/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

15/07/2021

We were able to measure progress made since the first
Berlin conference a year and a half ago. It also explains
the commitment of a European Union that is united in
its position on the situation in Libya, as we, together
with my Italian and German colleagues, demonstrated
during our joint visit to Tripoli in March. It explains
presidential statement S/PRST/2021/12, which we
agreed and which I welcome. It sets a clear course and
holds accountable all those who continue to hinder the
process of returning to stability — be they Libyan or
non-Libyan stakeholders.

The upcoming presidential and legislative elections,
to be held in December this year, will without a doubt
be decisive in the Libyan political process and a start on
the path to lasting democracy and lay the foundation for
the rule of law and State institutions in Libya. Tunisia
welcomes the announcement of the commitment of its
Libyan brothers to holding the elections as scheduled.
We also welcome the recent second Berlin Conference
on Libya and the international support to the Libyan
parties to create an environment conducive to the
successful holding of the elections.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I reiterate Tunisia’s readiness to offer its
constitutional, legislative and electoral experience to
its brothers in Libya. We also urge all political parties
to continue constructive and responsible dialogue,
with the aim of reaching a consensual formula for
constitutional rule that would empower the Libyan
people through their right to holding the elections.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration
and Tunisians Abroad of the Republic of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, my friend Mr. Le
Drian, for convening today’s high-level meeting, which
provides a new opportunity for the international
community to underscore its commitment to supporting
sisterly Libya in its political process, under the auspices
of the United Nations.
I must also commend the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, and his Special Envoy
to Libya, Mr. Ján Kubiš. I also welcome Mr. Abdul
Hamid Dbeibah, Prime Minister of Libya.
For a decade, sisterly Libya has endured a conflict
that has drained its human and institutional capabilities
and targeted its sovereignty and territorial integrity. It
is a conflict that has resulted in security and economic
repercussions on the entire region, and on neighbouring
countries in particular. Over the past 10 years, Tunisia
has continued to underscore that the only way to resolve
the crisis in Libya is through intra-Libyan dialogue. His
Excellency President Kaïs Saïed called for Libyans to
unite in support of a national project to restore Libya’s
security and stability and balance to the region so as to
spare it any further tensions and security threats.
The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, hosted by
Tunisia in November 2020, and its clear road map and
objectives, was the beginning of a genuine breakthrough
on the political path and represented a turning point
supported by the international community, which
expressed its full commitment to supporting this
historic stage of transition.
8/24

The faltering of the most recent negotiations in
Geneva should not be a reason to delay the electoral
process. It should be a new opportunity to identify
challenges and obstacles and work to overcome them,
under the auspices of the United Nations and with the
support of regional and international partners. We are
confident that our Libyan brothers can overcome all
their differences, unite and prioritize Libyan interests
and those of the Libyan people, thereby allowing them
to exercise their right to vote.
We reiterate the importance of continuing to
adhere to the ceasefire agreement, signed in October
2020, and of implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2570 (2021),
on monitoring the ceasefire, as a key pillar for building
peace in Libya and trust among all the parties. It is
therefore important to expedite the establishment of
a Libyan ceasefire monitoring mechanism, with the
support of the United Nations.
We believe that the recent initiative proposed by the
Libyan Government to support stability in Libya is the
basis for strengthening the Libyan vision for managing
the next phase of the transition. It should be achieved
within an international working group that supports
Libya in implementing political, security, economic
and financial programmes by creating the necessary
implementation mechanisms. The withdrawal of
foreign fighters and mercenaries is a prerequisite for
supporting stability, given that they pose a serious
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

threat not only to Libya and its transition process but to
the entire region, in particular neighbouring countries.
We also stress the importance of developing a
clear time frame and of the support of regional and
international partners, including the United Nations,
during this delicate process. We must prevent any
adverse effects on the security and stability of
neighbouring States and the Sahel region, in particular
due to organized crime and terrorism. We reiterate
the need to redoubling our efforts within the various
international and regional mechanisms to achieve
security cooperation and counter terrorism, such
as the Community of Sahel-Saharan States and the
Trans-Saharan Counterterrorism Partnership, with
the aim of strengthening regional capabilities and
enhancing cooperation among the Sahel and North
African countries in the fight against terrorism, which
threatens the region and beyond.
I must also underscore the need to strengthen
coordination and monitoring mechanisms to reduce the
increasing incidence of illegal migration by sea. There
has recently been an increase in the flow of illegal
migrants of various nationalities towards Tunisian
territorial waters, which poses security, economic,
social and humanitarian challenges at the national level
as well as the entire Mediterranean.
The stages of democratic transition are among
the most important and delicate stages in a country’s
history, given the complexities and problems that must
be addressed. They lead to establishing the foundations
for building democracy and a future political system
that guarantees pluralism, freedom and human rights.
We in Tunisia have experienced the subtleties and
complexities of such a stage. Therefore, we realize that
the democratic transition in Libya must take place, and
institution building must be completed notwithstanding
the challenges faced. We trust that our Libyan brothers
are capable of achieving this transition with the support
of the international community. Tunisia, as always, will
continue to support its brothers in their transition, so
that they establish a strong and unified Libyan State that
serves the interests of the Libyan people and enhances
stability and security in the region as a whole

S/PV. 8820

to address the Security Council in person for the first
time. I thank you, Your Excellency, our dear friend
Mr. Le Drian, for the opportunity. I congratulate you,
Sir, for successfully steering the work of the Security
Council since France’s assumption of the presidency
for the month of July. I acknowledge and welcome the
participation of His Excellency the Prime Minister of
Libya, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Germany
and Tunisia and the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States. I also appreciate and thank Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Envoy for Libya and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, for his briefing.
Throughout the past one and a half years the people
of Libya have steadily achieved key milestones within
the peace process and continued to work towards a
peaceful, secure and stable Libya. We laud them for
that and urge them to continue steadfastly in national
dialogue and engagement towards the peaceful, secure
and stable Libya they envision.
We also applaud the Special Envoy and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for the
support they are offering Libya. Every gain, however
small it may be, should be protected and applauded,
with the understanding that peace processes should
not be forced, and indeed people should be allowed the
space to pool together in dialogue for the purposes of
acceptance and ownership.
We encourage continued national dialogue towards
the delivery of the 24 December elections in line with
the Libya Political Dialogue Forum road map.
My delegation acknowledges the steps being taken
by the Government of National Unity to galvanize
progress and togetherness, through the establishment
of the Libya stabilization initiative. Such initiatives
should be designed and implemented in a manner that
all Libyans feel reached and represented. We encourage
continued efforts towards the reunification of national
institutions to fulfil the Government’s commitments to
the people.

The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Kenya.

The importance of national reconciliation cannot
be overstated. Therefore, Kenya welcomes the
establishment of the High National Reconciliation
Commission as a critical step to that end. We urge the
Government’s continued commitment to the process,
with the full support of the African Union.

Ms. Omamo (Kenya): Allow me, at the outset, to
express how delighted and honoured I am to be able

We note and encourage the continued efforts of
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and to ensuring the

21-191599/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

15/07/2021

completion of the requirements for the deployment of
the United Nations ceasefire monitoring component in
support of the Libya ceasefire monitoring mechanism.

independence. I reassure the Council of Kenya’s
support and continued commitment in that regard.
Libya’s peace is Africa’s peace.

Kenya further welcomes the conclusions of
the second Berlin Conference, held on 23 June,
especially with regard to the requirement for the full
implementation of the ceasefire agreement, including
the immediate withdrawal of foreign fighters and
mercenaries from Libya, as well as compliance with
the arms embargo. Those conclusions dovetail with the
calls by the Security Council that all foreign fighters and
mercenaries must leave Libya in line with resolutions
2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021). That is critical considering
that the continued presence of those fighters and their
accumulated arms constitute a grave threat to the peace
process and any gains achieved.

The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America and member of President Biden’s Cabinet.

In addition, the continued presence of foreign
fighters and mercenaries creates a conducive
environment for terrorism and violent extremism. We
continue to call for the planning and implementation
of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programme in Libya, alongside security sector
reforms, that takes into account the surveillance of the
southern border.

A political solution in Libya is possible. It is
necessary and urgent. But it requires elections on
24 December, as planned. Parties must come together
to ensure that happens by putting needed legal and
constitutional frameworks in place. National elections
will advance both democratic progress and Libyan
unity, by allowing the 7 million Libyans throughout the
country to have a voice in shaping Libya’s future. The
elections must not be delayed. The electoral process
must be Libyan-owned, Libyan-led and free from
foreign interference or malign influence.

In response to the threat to neighbouring States and
the Sahel region, it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to not only play a preventive role but also to
address the threat. Kenya continues to call on the need
for corresponding DDR programmes in neighbouring
States in the region where some of the fighters come
from or are bound to pass through as they depart
Libya. To achieve that, we highly recommend that the
mandate of UNSMIL be adjusted to include a regional
dimension in DDR. We hope that can also be factored
into the ongoing independent strategic review. In view
of the regional dimension of the situation in Libya, it
is important that UNSMIL work in close coordination
and consultation with neighbouring States, regional
organizations and other interested partners in
that regard.
We continue calling for the humane treatment of
refugees in Libya. In particular, all involved should
desist from interception at sea and from returning
migrants to Libyan ports.
Finally, Kenya calls on all Member States and
regional organizations to support a truly Libyan-led
and -owned peace process, in a manner that upholds
Libya’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
10/24

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over
today’s meeting. I also thank Special Envoy Kubiš for
his very useful briefing. I would like to join others in
welcoming the presence of the Cabinet Minister from
Kenya, the Minister for Foreign Affairs from Tunisia,
the Libyan Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister from
Germany and the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States.

Many of us here participated at the second Berlin
Conference a few weeks ago. We were pleased to see
such a robust turnout, including the participation of the
interim Libyan Government. Berlin was successful in
demonstrating a resounding commitment to supporting
national elections on 24 December, echoing resolution
2570 (2021), adopted unanimously in April.
It is clear that the international community expects
national elections to take place, as agreed in the road
map adopted by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
(LPDF). To go from road map to reality, constitutional
and legislative arrangements must be adopted — I
cannot say that more clearly. We have seen the LPDF
continue discussions in recent weeks on the path forward
to elections facilitated by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and Special Envoy Kubiš.
Today he described to us those efforts and called on all
parties to do what is necessary to achieve the elections.
It is essentials that the members of the LPDF rededicate
themselves to those discussions.
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

The Security Council must also continue to support
efforts to resolve the issues surrounding military
de-escalation and call for the immediate departure
of foreign forces and mercenaries. We must again
stress the importance of the full implementation of
the ceasefire agreement; anything less, as Mr. Kubiš
stated, would threaten the ceasefire. A Libyan-led and
-owned ceasefire monitoring mission will have an
important role in verifying the departure of mercenaries
and, eventually, other foreign forces. To that end, we
are encouraged that the Joint Military Commission
is developing its plans for the ceasefire monitoring
mechanism in consultation with UNSMIL, including
the small number of observers already deployed.
The international community clearly and fully
supports the Libyan people on their road to national
elections. We must now do everything we can to
help ensure that potential spoilers, both internal and
external, do not derail months of hard-fought progress.
In this final stretch, it is important, and it is incumbent
upon all of the parties, to support the Libyan people.
Mr. Shringla (India) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian,
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France, for
presiding over this high-level ministerial meeting on
Libya. I also thank Special Envoy Mr. Ján Kubiš for his
informative briefing.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to welcome Mr. Abdul Hamid
Mohammed Dbeibah, Prime Minister of Libya, as well
as the other ministers present and Mr. Aboul Gheit,
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, for
today’s briefing. I would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Germany for hosting the second Berlin
Conference on Libya last month. We fully support
its conclusions.
There has been a sense of cautious optimism
with regard to the situation in Libya over the past few
months, especially since the signing of the ceasefire
agreement on 23 October 2020. The Council witnessed
and welcomed the political progress achieved,
including the establishment of the Government of
National Unity charged with the conduct of elections
on 24 December 2021.
However, as we heard from the Special Envoy,
despite the progress, there is still cause for concern. The
security situation remains fragile despite a reduction

S/PV. 8820

in violence. The adverse impact of the conflict on the
economy has been exacerbated by the pandemic and
disintegrating financial institutions. The involvement
of external forces in the internal affairs of Libya has
negatively impacted the progress on the political track.
The next six months will be critical for Libya as
it embarks on a journey towards peace and stability.
It is incumbent upon the international community
and, the Security Council in particular, to continue to
provide support to Libya in this critical phase. Today’s
meeting will therefore help in conveying a message to
all stakeholders in Libya. In that regard, I would like to
make several suggestions.
First, elections need to be held as planned on
24 December 2021 in a free and fair manner. In
order to achieve that, it is vital that the constitutional
basis for conducting elections be agreed upon early.
Regrettably, consensus in that regard is still elusive.
The Libyan parties, in particular the members of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, need to continue
consultations among themselves in order to arrive at a
workable solution as soon as possible. We would also
urge the House of Representatives and the High Council
of State to frame the required legislation for the conduct
of elections. At the same time, we encourage the High
National Elections Commission to fully prepare for the
upcoming elections.
Secondly, the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Libya needs to be safeguarded.
The peace process must be fully Libyan-led and
-owned, with no impositions or external interference.
We also encourage all Libyan parties to continue to
make concerted efforts towards the unification of all
national institutions. In that regard, we welcome the
independent audit of the Central Bank.
Thirdly, the provisions of the ceasefire agreement
and successive Security Council resolutions need
to be respected. Unfortunately, those provisions, in
particular those related to the withdrawal of foreign
forces and mercenaries, continue to be violated. It is
equally alarming that the arms embargo continues
to be blatantly violated, as repeatedly reported by
the Panel of Experts on Libya. There needs to be a
serious discussion within the Council on what further
measures could be taken to ensure that the decisions
of the Council on the withdrawal of foreign forces are
implemented so that sustainable peace and stability can
prevail in Libya.

21-1915911/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

Fourthly, we must ensure that terrorist groups and
affiliated entities are not allowed to operate unchallenged
in Libya. The continued presence and activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Libya,
as illustrated by the latest report (see S/2021/68) of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, is of
serious concern. The report indicates the spread of
terrorist activities into the Sahel region as well. Libya
has become a logistics platform for Al-Qaida affiliates
in Mali. This is a matter of grave concern due to the
potential cascading effect it could have throughout
the Sahel region. It is unfortunate that the issue is not
receiving the attention it deserves. The international
community must speak in one voice against terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.
Fifthly, we need to plan for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups and
non-State armed actors. We appreciate the fact that the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya is prepared to
render assistance to Libya in that process.
Finally, an inclusive and comprehensive national
reconciliation process is the need of the hour. We hope
that all the parties concerned will engage sincerely
in that endeavour. We also urge the international
community to support such a process.
India has traditionally enjoyed close and mutually
beneficial ties with Libya. The contributions made by
Indian enterprises and professionals in critical sectors
like energy, manufacturing, education and health care
continue to support the Libyan economy and society to
this day. India remains committed to supporting Libya
and the Libyan people in their endeavour to bring about
lasting peace in their country. To that end, we look
forward to working with the Government of National
Unity in providing capacity-building and training
assistance in mutually identified areas.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
discussion. I would also like to thank Special Envoy
Kubiš for his briefing. I am pleased that we are joined
by Prime Minister Dbeibah, Foreign Minister Maas and
Mr. Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States.
12/24

15/07/2021

The United Kingdom welcomes the progress made
in Libya over the past year, supported by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the
Berlin process. However, as we have heard, there is still
work to be done to complete Libya’s political transition.
I would like to highlight three urgent steps today.
First, it is time to deliver on the commitment
to free, fair and inclusive national elections on the
24 December 2021, with the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women. I therefore urge all relevant
Libyan authorities to work together with the support
of UNSMIL to agree on a legal basis for elections and
ensure that they go ahead on 24 December as agreed.
Members of the House of Representatives and the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum have a particular
responsibility in this regard, and the United Kingdom
will not hesitate to act against those who deliberately
undermine holding elections.
Secondly, we urge the full implementation of
the October ceasefire agreement. This includes the
withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries
without delay. We support efforts by the United
Nations and Libyans to operationalize this withdrawal
immediately. We also encourage the Libyan parties
to press ahead with their commitment to opening the
coastal road and building confidence in the transition
away from conflict.
Finally, we must not lose sight of the essential
services that ordinary Libyans rely on, including
electricity, water, education and health care. Delivering
these things means agreeing on a balanced national
budget and ensuring that resources are used for
the benefit of people across Libya. It also means
reunification of Libya’s institutions and the rebuilding
of citizens’ trust in government.
Thanks to the efforts and the will of Libyans, the
country has made important progress in the last year,
but that momentum must be sustained. The next steps
in the transition are critical. Libya and all Libyans will
continue to have the United Kingdom’s full support in
the process.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Minister Le Drian, to the
President’s seat at today’s Security Council meeting.
We would also like to welcome Prime Minister Dbeibah
of Libya, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia
and Germany and the Secretary-General of the League
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

of Arab States, Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, and other
high-level representatives
We would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for his
detailed and informative briefing on the situation in
Libya. We are cautiously optimistic about perspectives
for development in the situation. The main achievement,
of course, was the signing by Libyan parties of the
ceasefire agreement in October 2020. Warring sides
have gradually begun to overcome the mutual distrust
caused by many years of conflict provoked by external
interference in 2011.
Significant progress has also been achieved by
Libyans on the political track. New authorities have
been appointed to the Presidency Council and the
Government of National Unity for an interim period .
Ongoing efforts are under way to ensure the functioning
of unified State structures and financial and economic
institutions. This progress was reflected in the outcome
communiqué issued following the second International
conference on Libya, which was held in Berlin in June.
We understand that achieving all the provisions
of the road map will not be easy. This is also clear
from Mr. Kubiš’ briefing. The main challenge before
the current transitional authorities in Libya is holding
universal elections within the established time frame,
that is, on 24 December 2021. To achieve that objective,
we need to ensure the adoption of the relevant
constitutional foundations. This in turn requires
compromises to be reached between the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum and the House of Representatives. We
strongly believe the success of this process will depend
on the level of inclusiveness and transparency of the
political process as a whole, including of the elections.
This implies the involvement of all leading political
forces in the country, representatives of all regions, as
well as representatives of former authorities.
We support the work of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission (JMC), which has an important role to
play in unifying the armed forces of the country and
ensuring general security. We hope that the JMC will
be able to agree as soon as possible on the opening of
the strategic transport route between the west and east
of the country.
Another vitally important question today is the
foreign military presence. We would advocate a gradual
and coordinated withdrawal of all foreign forces and
divisions from Libya. At the same time, it is vital to
ensure that the existing balance of forces on the ground,

S/PV. 8820

which is currently preserving calm in the country, is
not broken. We need to ensure that there is no threat of
a new military escalation. We also need to bear in mind
the security interests of Libya’s neighbours and refer to
their experience on this issue.
In our work, we will continue to consistently support
close contacts with leading political forces from various
regions in Libya and urge them towards compromise
on key issues of the political process. We are ready for
constructive cooperation with international partners.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like to present the apology of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Niger, who was unable to attend today’s
meeting owing to a last-minute impediment.
I would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Libya, for his excellent
briefing, which allowed us to assess the situation in the
country in terms of progress made and challenges that
remain to be overcome. The constant engagement of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya alongside
the Libyans has undeniably contributed to the positive
momentum that currently prevails in Libya.
My delegation also welcomes the participation of
Prime Minister Abdel Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah, the
German Foreign Minister, the Tunisian and Kenyan
Foreign Ministers, as well as the Secretary General of
the Arab League, in our work, which shows, if that were
necessary, the appropriateness of the French presidency
choosing to organize this debate today.
After 10 years of fratricidal conflict, the recent
encouraging progress in Libya has been driven by the
Libyans themselves, who are determined to reconcile
with each other and move forward with the constructive
support of neighbouring countries and the international
community. I would like to commend Germany for
holding the two international conferences in Berlin,
whose important conclusions paved the way for peace
in Libya.
We also welcome the unstinting talks that have
enabled all the actors involved in the crisis in Libya to
speak to each other and make commitments to ending
all forms of foreign interference which, as we know,
have been a real brake on the progress of the various
components of the reconciliation process among
the Libyan factions. We also salute Tunisia, whose
hospitality has enabled direct consultations among the
Libyan political actors.

21-1915913/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

The initiatives I have just mentioned — and many
others — have greatly contributed to the current positive
momentum in Libya, which we all welcome today. We
are pleased to note that the 23 October ceasefire, which
was called for by the parties to the conflict, is still
holding. We call on the new transitional Government of
National Unity to ensure the scrupulous implementation
of the political road map agreed upon by the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis in November 2020.
The establishment by the Presidency Council of the
High Commission on National Reconciliation is a
highly positive step, which should be welcomed.
As Libyans are committed to organizing national
elections by 24 December, technical, logistical and
financial support will be needed. It is also essential
that the Council maintain a united voice to send
the right message in order to dissuade all potential
troublemakers whose actions could jeopardize
Libya’s historic date. The elections must fulfil
the tremendous aspiration of the Libyan people to
strengthen and consolidate the country’s independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national identity.
On the security front, it is essential that measures
be taken to prevent the neighbouring Sahel from
suffering a second wave of direct consequences of the
conflict. The tragic events that Chad has experienced
are a challenge to us and remind us how urgent it is
to take into consideration the imperatives of the peace,
stability and security of Libya’s neighbouring countries.
In that regard, my delegation believes that the
withdrawal of foreign fighters, rightly desired
by the Libyans and the international community,
should be carried out in a coordinated and orderly
manner, in collaboration with the countries of origin
and under the supervision of the United Nations.
In that once stable and prosperous country,
approximately 1.3 million people are now dependent
on humanitarian aid, which is an increase of 400,000
since last year. Added to that are the effects of
the coronavirus disease pandemic, which further
exacerbate the humanitarian situation. In the Niger,
our firm hope is to see Libya rebuilt — a Libya where
the daughters and sons of that rich country will finally
be able to benefit from their vast resources in peace.
I cannot end my statement without mentioning the
tragic situation in which African migrants and refugees
find themselves in Libya due to the poor treatment to
which they are subjected by the various factions. It
is therefore necessary, as the Secretary-General said,
that the policy of disembarking migrants intercepted
14/24

15/07/2021

on the high seas on Libyan soil be reviewed so as to
prevent the unspeakable suffering that many women
and children undergo in detention centres, which are
quite often beyond the control of the Libyan authorities.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy Ján
Kubiš for his briefing and express Estonia’s full support
for the work of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya. We welcome today’s high-level discussion and
look forward to hearing from all the speakers.
While the political and security developments
since the signing of the Libyan ceasefire agreement last
October have been very encouraging, it is of the utmost
importance to continue taking concrete measures to
achieve lasting peace in Libya. It is critical to make
all the necessary preparations for holding free, fair,
inclusive and credible elections on 24 December, as set
out in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map
and in resolution 2570 (2021). We call on all the relevant
authorities to take immediate steps in coming to an
agreement on the legal basis for the elections so that the
preparation process can continue in a timely manner.
It is extremely important to ensure the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women and the
inclusion of young people at all stages and all levels of
the political process. The only viable way to a lasting
peace is to create a safe space for women and young
people to express their views without fear of retaliation.
The support of the international community for
Libyan peace efforts remains vital. We welcome the
convening of the second Berlin Conference on Libya
on 23 June, which reaffirmed the commitment of the
participants to the United Nations-facilitated, Libyanled and Libyan-owned political process. We call
on all parties to fully honour and implement those
commitments, including ending all foreign interference
in Libya.
The 23 October ceasefire agreement must be fully
implemented. An essential element of its implementation
is the removal of all foreign fighters and mercenaries
without any further delay. All actions that violate the
Libyan arms embargo need to stop immediately. We
welcome the efforts of the European Union Naval
Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI in supporting
the implementation of the Security Council arms
embargo. Furthermore, it is important to take concrete
steps in implementing the Libyan-led and Libyanowned ceasefire monitoring mechanism, including
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

through the swift deployment of its international
support component.
The humanitarian situation in Libya remains
concerning. Migrants and asylum seekers continue to
be exposed to violence, including sexual and genderbased violence. It is important that the authorities take
action to alleviate the suffering of civilians and ensure
access for humanitarian aid and workers.
For there to be lasting peace, trust needs to be
restored in the society. It is crucial to ensure that all
alleged human rights violations, mass killings, torture
and enforced disappearances be thoroughly investigated
and that justice be ensured for the victims. Fighting
against impunity, ensuring accountability and focusing
on reconciliation are essential to healing the society.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
At the outset, permit me to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdul Hamid Dbeibah, Prime Minister of the
Government of National Unity of Libya, as well as
the Foreign Ministers and Cabinet officials and the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States here
with us today. I also thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his briefing.
Over the past few months, Libyans have experienced
significant advances through shared objectives,
responsibilities and strong commitment in their pursuit
to restore peace and stability. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines hails those developments and encourages
the Government of National Unity to stay the course.
Consolidating the existing momentum is critical
to Libya’s rebirth. We welcome the instrumental
role of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and reaffirm our support for the United
Nations multitrack Libyan-led and Libyan-own process.
We also look forward to the renewal of the UNSMIL
mandate in September, and we call for the strengthening
of UNSMIL’s capacity to carry out disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration activities aimed at
assisting the countries of origin of returned fighters
and mercenaries, along with addressing the influx of
illegal weapons.
We further express appreciation for the very
important work and initiatives of the African Union,
the League of Arab States, the European Union and
other international partners. Last month’s second
Berlin Conference on Libya embodies the international
community’s commitment in supporting Libya. Saint

S/PV. 8820

Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the Conference
and endorses its outcome document (S/2021/595,
annex).
As Libya continues its quest for lasting peace,
stability and development, some critical tasks must be
finalized. Those include, inter alia, the fulfilment of
arrangements for the holding of inclusive, free, fair,
transparent and credible elections on 24 December;
the reunification of Libya’s institutions; the full
implementation of the 23 October ceasefire agreement,
including the complete and properly supervised
withdrawal of all foreign fighters and mercenaries
to avoid grave ramifications for the Sahel region and
the wider continent; and the initiation of a national
reconciliation process, supported by the African Union.
Libya’s historical circumstances and existing
conditions require all stakeholders in the political
process to honour their obligations. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines repeats its urgent call for full
adherence to international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
respect for Libya’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity and full compliance with the arms
embargo and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2570 (2021), 2571 (2021) and 2578
(2021). We urge all Libyan stakeholders and influential
external actors to assist in that regard.
The human rights and humanitarian situation facing
the groups made vulnerable, in particular refugees,
migrants, internally displaced persons and women and
girls, is concerning. We note the Secretary-General’s
repeated calls for urgent attention to migrants and
refugees in detention centres and emphasize the utmost
importance of ensuring the protection and safety of
those groups in vulnerable situations. We also reiterate
that Libya is not a safe port for the disembarkation of
migrants and refugees.
Peace, security and development must go hand in
hand, and the Council ought to fulfil its obligations
and ensure that the necessary conditions prevail to give
effect to Libya’s full stability.
After 10 years of uncertainty and extreme
difficulties, Libyans are on the verge of mending a
fractured country. The upcoming elections represent
movement in the right direction. However, we note
the difficulties in reaching consensus on the legal
framework to hold elections and remain hopeful that

21-1915915/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

15/07/2021

the parties can exhibit compromise to reach consensus
on that vital issue.

and encourage the LPDF to continue to seek a workable
compromise on the constitutional basis.

Of equal importance is the need to unite critical
institutions, including the central banks, to address
financial
shortcomings,
treat
socioeconomic
deficiencies and tackle the pandemic, which continues
to take its toll.

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) should now redouble its efforts to safeguard
the political process against risks to progress. The
holding of free, fair and inclusive elections is the
foundation of any democratic society. Any delays to
the December timeline risk jeopardizing both Libya’s
political transition and the prospects for security and
economic reform. The Council will have the opportunity
to take stock of progress in September.

We further encourage the parties to settle their
differences on the 2021 budget.
In closing, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
commends all Libyans, who have toiled, compromised
and exhibited their resolve to change their country’s
path and who continue to strive to do better in pursuit
of lasting peace and stability. We remain in solidarity
with them.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank the Special Envoy
for his comprehensive briefing. I also want to thank
France for having convened today’s meeting at a high
level, reflecting the importance that we all attach to
Libya’s future.
I want to welcome in particular the presence
here today of Prime Minister Dbeibah and also the
participation of ministers and the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, Aboul Gheit.
At this critical moment for Libya, I would be remiss
not to highlight the significant progress that has been
achieved to date. The October ceasefire agreement and
the endorsement of the Government of National Unity in
March are very important and hard-won achievements.
But, as others have outlined, more remains to
be done. That includes the holding of elections in
December as scheduled; the immediate withdrawal
of all foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya;
and the unification of Libya’s political, security and
economic institutions. With that in mind, Ireland
welcomes and endorses the conclusions of the Second
Berlin conference, held on 23 June.
It is deeply regrettable that the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum (LPDF) was unable to agree on the
constitutional basis for December elections by the 1 July
deadline. We reiterate our firm support for the holding
of national presidential and parliamentary elections on
24 December, as set out in the LPDF’s agreed political
road map and in accordance with resolution 2570
(2021). We call on the Libyan authorities and the House
of Representatives to make all necessary preparations
16/24

We regard inclusive voter education, as well as
measures to ensure the safety of all participants in the
political process, as essential components of election
preparation. Ireland underlines the necessity — and the
right — of women to participate and engage fully in
all areas related to the democratic transition, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. Youth must also be
supported and involved in such processes.
We encourage UNSMIL to proceed with its
deployment of ceasefire monitors to Libya as soon as
possible. The importance of fully integrating a gender
perspective into ceasefire monitoring, in line with
resolution 2570 (2021), cannot be overstated.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2578 (2021) last month and commend European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI for its
ongoing efforts to support the implementation of the
arms embargo.
We also encourage further international support
and regional cooperation between Libya and its
neighbours to enable the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of armed groups and a coordinated
return to their countries of origin.
In addition to the political and security challenges,
we should not neglect the importance of addressing vital
humanitarian and development issues. Economic and
financial reform, as well as the strengthening of Libyan
institutions, is critical for long-term recovery. We
welcome the conclusion of the international financial
audit review of the Central Bank of Libya, which paves
the way for unification, as the Special Envoy outlined
earlier. We also call on the House of Representatives
to approve a budget permitting essential humanitarian
and infrastructure interventions to progress.
We stress that all parties in Libya must comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

and human rights law and note with concern the
serious violations outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2021/451). We underscore the need to ensure
accountability for such violations. Countering impunity
is essential to preventing future violations, and we
fully support the work of the independent Fact-Finding
Mission to Libya in that regard.
We welcome the Government of National
Unity’s efforts, working with the African Union
in particular, to create a national reconciliation
process, and we encourage the Libyan authorities to
strengthen transitional justice institutions. The work
of the International Criminal Court must be seen as
complementary to those important domestic initiatives.
We continue to call on States to cooperate with the Court
as it investigates allegations of serious international
crimes in Libya.
We are extremely concerned about grave violations
against children in Libya and echo the concerns
noted by the Special Envoy earlier. It is essential that
child-protection provisions be included in ceasefire
monitoring and the transitional processes. We call for
an end to the practice of the arbitrary and indefinite
detention of migrants, especially the detention
of children.
I will conclude by recalling our collective
responsibility, as members of the Council, to deliver
on the commitments of the Berlin Conference and the
relevant Council resolutions to enable the Libyan people
to build a unified, democratic and peaceful country.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the French presidency
for having convened this important meeting, and I
thank the Minister of Europe and Foreign Affairs of
France for presiding over it. I welcome the presence of
His Excellency the Prime Minister of the Government
of National Unity of Libya and of the ministers and
representatives at this meeting. I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ján Kubiš, for his
comprehensive briefing.
After nearly a decade, Libya is on the cusp of
achieving long-term peace and stability. We therefore
warmly welcome the positive developments on the
political and security tracks in the country since
the beginning of the year. That momentum must be
maintained, and the current challenges need to be
addressed in a comprehensive manner.
In that regard, I wish to highlight three points.

S/PV. 8820

First, on the political track, we call on the relevant
parties in Libya to resolve their outstanding differences
and expedite all necessary legal and logistical
arrangements in order to ensure that national elections
are conducted in line with the agreed road map. We also
underline the importance of ensuring the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in that process We
commend Germany for convening the second Berlin
Conference on Libya. We also commend all participants
on their commitment to the peace process in Libya.
Further cooperation among the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), regional organizations,
neighbouring countries and other international partners
will remain vital to supporting the peace process
in Libya at this critical juncture. The international
community should also foster and support dialogue,
confidence-building measures and reconciliation
efforts among the relevant parties.
Secondly, with regard to the security track, it
is imperative for all the relevant parties to fully
implement the provisions of the October 2020 ceasefire
agreement. That must also be in line with upholding the
arms embargo in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions on Libya. The improvement of
the security situation in the country will provide an
environment conducive to the upcoming elections
and the path beyond towards a sustainable peace. We
look forward to hearing about the further work of
UNSMIL in supporting the Libyan-led and Libyanowned ceasefire monitoring mechanism, as outlined in
resolution 2570 (2021).
We reiterate our support for the withdrawal of
all foreign forces and mercenaries from the territory
of Libya, in line with the ceasefire agreement and
resolution 2570 (2021). That process must be carried
out in a timely, orderly and comprehensive manner and
should not translate into instability for neighbouring
States and the region. We also wish to see further
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of armed combatants related to Libya.
Thirdly, with regard to the economic and
humanitarian track, we commend the current efforts
to facilitate the unification of Libya’s economic and
financial institutions and wish to see further progress in
that regard. While the fighting has stopped, humanitarian
challenges remain. We call on international partners to
continue to provide support, especially for vulnerable
groups, such as women, children and migrants in Libya,

21-1915917/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

in addressing their needs and challenges. We welcome
the efforts of the United Nations and other partners in
supporting the coronavirus disease vaccination process
in Libya and wish to see further assistance to the
country in that connection.
In addition, Viet Nam commends the efforts to
clear the coastal roads in Libya of mines and explosive
remnants of war, with the support of the United Nations
Mine Action Service. We call for further efforts in
the area of risk mitigation to protect civilians from
explosive remnants of war.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its consistent
support for the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace
process. It is our sincere hope that the people of Libya
will soon achieve both sustainable peace and sustainable
development for all Libyans.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Mr. Kubiš, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his very useful
briefing. We also welcome the high-level participation
of the parties concerned. I would like to highlight four
issues today.
The first is the importance of holding presidential
and parliamentary elections on 24 December this
year. While we welcome the progress made, we are
nevertheless concerned about the deadlock over the
constitutional basis for elections, which threatens to
undermine everything that has been achieved in the
past year. We urge the High State Council and the
House of Representatives, as well as other relevant State
institutions, to do their part to clarify the constitutional
basis and enact the necessary legislation by 1 August.
We expect the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum,
with the active support and facilitation of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), to take
steps as necessary, in accordance with the road map
agreed by its members to facilitate the holding of
elections on time. Free, fair and inclusive elections are
vital for Libya to move forward. That means that the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women,
both as voters and candidates, must be ensured.
Secondly, the October 2020 ceasefire agreement
must be fully implemented. As Libyans themselves
have called for, it is critical that all foreign forces and
mercenaries leave the country and that the mandate of
resolution 2570 (2021) for the deployment of ceasefire
monitors be implemented as soon as possible to
safeguard the existing ceasefire. We also recognize
18/24

15/07/2021

the concerns of countries in the region regarding the
possible destabilizing effects of returning foreign
fighters and/or mercenaries. It is therefore necessary to
ensure a comprehensive disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process. Both UNSMIL and regional
organizations can play important roles in facilitating the
process and cooperation among the relevant countries.
My third point concerns the arms embargo. As
the Panel of Experts on Libya has stated, the embargo
remains ineffective. The illicit flow of arms and military
equipment into Libya is a clear obstacle to peace and
progress in the country. We once again urge all actors to
abide by the arms embargo and avoid further fuelling the
conflict. Norway supports the European Union Naval
Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI in implementing
the United Nations arms embargo on Libya.
My fourth and final point is to express Norway’s
continued concern about the tragic drowning of migrants
and refugees trying to cross the Mediterranean. We
urge the Libyan authorities to respect international law
relating to search and rescue operations. We are also
concerned about the reports of the arbitrary detention
of migrants and refugees, including children, in
official and unofficial detention centres. Safeguarding
those most vulnerable and ensuring that their rights
are protected is a priority for long-lasting peace and
cohesion, and international humanitarian law and
international human rights law must be respected.
Humanitarian access also continues to pose a challenge.
We urge the facilitation of safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian workers in Libya to protect and assist
people in need.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Norway’s support
for UNSMIL and Special Envoy Kubiš, as well as
UNSMIL’s continued and active facilitation of the
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process. Their
support for the holding of elections on 24 December
is essential.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Kubiš, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing and welcome the presence of the Prime
Minister of the Government of National Unity of Libya,
the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany
and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
at this meeting.
With the support of the international community
and the joint efforts of all Libyan parties, the ceasefire
as a whole has been maintained and the parties are
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

committed to ending the war and moving Libya forward
on the path towards peace and reconstruction through
the holding of general elections in December. At the
same time, many challenges remain for all parties to
reach a comprehensive and inclusive consensus on the
future of their country.
The promotion of the political process in Libya
is at a critical stage that requires all parties to
strengthen dialogue and consultations and build on
and expand consensus in the interests of the country
and the people of Libya. The future of Libya is in
the hands of the Libyan people. It is our hope that all
Libyan parties will seize this historic opportunity to
jointly promote the country’s long-term stability and
sustainable development. I would like to mention the
following points.
First, with regard to firmly advancing the process of
political transition, the Libyan Government of National
Unity is currently actively preparing for general
elections and holding reconciliation conferences. Many
efforts have been made to unify the Central Bank and
other State institutions. That represents progress, and
it should be recognized as such. At the second Berlin
Conference on Libya held last month, the international
community reaffirmed its support for a Libyanowned and Libyan-led political process, as well as the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Libya.
China hopes that all parties will live up to
the expectations of the international community;
strengthen dialogue and consultations; properly resolve
outstanding issues, such as the constitutional basis
of the elections; and hold the elections in accordance
with the road map. China supports the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in following the
mandate of the Security Council to actively coordinate
further practical steps to determine the legal framework
and overall arrangements for the elections and help
the Libyan Government advance its preparations for
holding them.
Secondly, by resolutely maintaining peace and
stability, all Libyan partners need to make every effort
to consolidate the ceasefire. China welcomes the new
Government’s announcement to reopen the Sirte coastal
highway. It is an important measure for implementing
the ceasefire monitoring mechanism. China looks
forward to a swift deployment of the UNSMIL
ceasefire monitoring team, which should ensure

S/PV. 8820

objective and impartial performance. An organized and
orderly withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries
will have a consequential effect on the maintenance of
Libyan and regional security.
The Council’s Arria Formula meeting last month
also expressed similar concerns. China calls on all
parties concerned to strengthen consultations on
arrangements for the withdrawal of foreign fighters
and mercenaries; take into full account the concerns
of neighbouring countries; strengthen regional and
coordinated action; and, through disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
security sector reform, effectively address the issues of
arms proliferation and the infiltration of armed groups
into neighbouring countries so as to avoid increasing
risks to regional security.
Thirdly, support for post-conflict reconstruction
must be increased. Since the establishment of the
Government of National Unity under the leadership
of Prime Minister Dbeibah, a great deal of work has
been conducted to promote financial reform, stabilize
oil production, improve public services and foster
foreign cooperation. Libya now faces many difficulties
and challenges in the area of national reconstruction.
Some 1.3 million people are in dire need of
humanitarian assistance.
China calls on the Libyan Parliament to accelerate
the review and approval of the unified national
budget and provide financial guarantees for public
services, health care and education. It is hoped that
international partners will actively participate in the
Libyan reconstruction, support economic recovery and
development and increase humanitarian assistance.
Recently, there has been a resurgence of
the coronavirus disease pandemic in Libya. The
international community will continue to support the
Libyan Government in fighting the pandemic and
provide vaccine assistance. In addition, the frozen
assets of the Libyan Government are the common
wealth of the Libyan people and should be used for
the country’s reconstruction and development. China
again calls on the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya to respond
to the concerns of the Libyan people, accelerate the
assessment of loss of Libyan frozen assets and put
forward practical solutions.
It is crucial that the Council remain united in its
response to the situation in Libya. China supports the

21-1915919/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

United Nations in continuing to play a leading role in
working towards a political solution to the situation in
Libya. We would like to work with the international
community to help the Libyan people embark on a
path to peaceful development and contribute to lasting
stability and prosperity.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes you, Mr. President, to the
Security Council.
I also thank Special Envoy Kubiš for his briefing.
He reminded us of the complex challenges that the
Libyan people continue to face in bringing about a
successful political transition.
We also welcome high-level participants, in
particular the Prime Minister of Libya, to whom I
convey Mexico’s solidarity on the path to peace and
reconciliation in his country.
First of all, I would like to highlight the progress
that the formation of the Government of National
Unity has brought to the political process. Because of
the responsibility shouldered by the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum, it was possible to overcome divisions,
take a decisive step towards the unification of institutions
and maintain the validity of the ceasefire agreement.
The Security Council has reiterated time and
again the importance of Libyan stakeholders taking
control of their own destiny. In that spirit, we welcome
the fact that during the second Berlin Conference,
Libyan authorities joined the International Monitoring
Committee for Libya, which without a doubt underscores
the legitimacy of that process.
We agree with other delegations that it is essential
for Libyan political stakeholders to reach an agreement
on the legal framework for holding presidential
and legislative elections on 24 December. Mexico
stresses the need for the requisite measures to be
taken to guarantee the full participation of women
and young people. The December elections are a
unique opportunity for reconciliation after a decade of
protracted civil conflict.
The Security Council should therefore make every
effort, through the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), to provide the necessary support to
prevent the electoral process from deepening internal
divisions and jeopardizing progress achieved. However,
the urgency of pending electoral tasks, as well as those
related to the unification of Libyan institutions, in
20/24

15/07/2021

particular security institutions, should not make us
forget the victims of the Libyan conflict.
As we heard earlier, more than 1 million civilians are
in need of humanitarian assistance, more than 400,000
people have fled their homes because of the conflict and
thousands of migrants remain in clandestine detention
centres. We call for the human rights of all migrants to
be respected and for the adoption of a legal framework
that provides the necessary guarantees.
Mexico also calls on Libyan authorities to facilitate
the work of humanitarian personnel operating in the
country. The work of humanitarian organizations is
essential to meet the basic needs of the vulnerable
population during the transition period, as Libyan State
services are being reorganized. We also urge UNSMIL
to exercise its good offices to support humanitarian
work in Libya, in accordance with its mandate.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all
international actors to respect the arms embargo and
to coordinate properly with Libyan authorities and the
countries of the region to ensure the withdrawal of
mercenaries and foreign fighters. The fragile security
situation in the country and throughout the region
makes that imperative.
My country welcomes greater involvement of
regional organizations, such as the African Union
and the League of Arab States, in the implementation
of a programme to repatriate and reintegrate foreign
fighters in Libya. Every effort must be made to ensure
that a peaceful and prosperous Libya helps to stabilize
the entire region.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Prime Minister of the Government of National Unity of
the State of Libya.
Mr. Dbeibah (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council this month and on convening today’s high-level
meeting to address the situation in my country, Libya.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his personal efforts and followup in seeking a peaceful solution to the Libyan crisis.
I also thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his briefing
on the latest developments in my country. We wish the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya every success
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

in its efforts to assist Libyans and to provide support
and counsel in order to resolve the Libyan crisis.
The Security Council is holding its meeting on
Libya today in circumstances unlike those of previous
years, which were marked by divisions, differences
and wars. Today we are seeing light at the end of the
dark tunnel that we have endured for years. By the
grace of God and Libyan efforts, and with the support
of the United Nations and sisterly and friendly nations,
we have been able to achieve a more stable and more
positive situation in Libya. This has occurred under
the Government of National Unity. We are seeking
to achieve stability through the Libyan stabilization
initiative and by working with international partners
on both the security and the economic tracks.
Our Government represents everyone and excludes
no one. It is free of the conflicts over legitimacy that
Libya had suffered for many years. By the grace of
God, we have been able in a short time to unite most
executive institutions in the country, despite all the
challenges, and we look forward to continuing to fulfil
all entitlements of the sovereign institutions, which is
the purview of the House of Representatives and the
High State Council. We urge them to accelerate their
efforts to unite those institutions so that the Government
can work as efficiently and effectively as required.
On this occasion, we would like to thank UNSMIL
and the Libyan Audit Bureau, which audited the accounts
of the Central Bank, leading to the recommendation of
uniting the bank in Tripoli, which would improve the
State’s economic situation and reflect positively on the
life of our citizens.
We stress that the decision to hold the parliamentary
and presidential elections on 24 December is a national
choice and a historic entitlement. It requires solidarity
and close cooperation among each and every person,
in accordance with their roles and responsibilities. At
the forefront of the task ahead is the finalization of
the constitutional basis for elections and the necessary
electoral legislation as soon as possible. We, the
executive authority, are doing our part to support that
historic entitlement. We have formed a ministerial
committee to support the elections and have allocated
the funds available to support the High National
Elections Commission, despite the fact that the general
budget has not been adopted by the House of the
Representatives, although we presented it more than
three months ago, immediately after the Government

S/PV. 8820

adopted it. This hampers our efforts to improve citizens
lives and fulfil their immediate and urgent needs,
particularly their humanitarian needs, and to provide
an environment conducive to holding the elections.
With regard to ensuring the security of the
elections, we have instructed the Ministry of the
Interior to train 30,000 personnel to be responsible
for securing ballot centres throughout the Libyan
territories. We are following up on this important
issue to secure the safety of electors, candidates and
the entire election process. In that regard, I call on my
sisters and brothers in the House of Representatives,
the High State Council and the members of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum to put their differences aside,
fulfil their historic responsibilities to the Libyan people
and reach consensus so that we can hold the general
elections at the scheduled time.
The issue of mercenaries and foreign fighters
on Libyan territories remains one of the greatest
impediments to stability in Libya. We underscore here
today the need for the Council to assist us in resolutely
addressing that matter. All parties must abide by relevant
Security Council resolutions and the conclusions
reached at the first and second Berlin conferences. All
participating States have expressed their commitment
to fulfilling the Security Council’s resolutions and to
respecting Libya’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We also emphasize that this continued presence poses a
real threat to the current political process and to efforts
to preserve the ceasefire and to continue uniting the
Libyan army. As Council members know, the speedy
withdrawal of mercenaries and foreign fighters was
among the provisions of the ceasefire agreement that
was signed by the 5 + 5 Joint Military Commission in
October 2020. On this occasion, I would like to pay
tribute to the members of the Commission for their
efforts and their patriotism, despite all the challenges.
In that regard, we reiterate our continued efforts to fulfil
the confidence-building measures through practical
steps, foremost among which is reopening the east-west
coastal road and releasing all detainees from both sides.
In that connection, allow me to summarize the
position of our Government, which is reflected in its
efforts to achieve stability in both the economic and the
security spheres.
First, the Government of National Unity emphasizes
that the continued presence of mercenaries and
foreign fighters on Libyan territories is unacceptable.

21-1915921/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

We emphasize that they must immediately and
simultaneously be withdrawn. We remind the relevant
States of their responsibilities with regard to the actions
of their citizens outside their territories and the need to
immediately withdraw them.
Secondly, we call on the international community to
support Libya in uniting the Libyan army and security
forces within a comprehensive security strategy
that includes the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
security sector reform and securing the borders to
consolidate stability and prevent threats against
our national security, especially from neighbouring
countries and those of the Sahel region. These measures
will allow the State to control its territories and borders
and allow us to face the real enemy of Libya and the
region, which is terrorism and extremism in all its
forms, transborder crime and human trafficking.
Our Government is also working to address illegal
migration. We highly appreciate all approaches that
acknowledge that migration must be addressed not only
through measures taken on the Mediterranean or along
the Libyan coast, but at the source of its causes. It is a
global human issue and cannot be the responsibility of
any single State.
Thirdly, the Government of National Unity would
like to remind the Security Council of its commitments
and promises to preserve the Libyan people’s resources,
represented in the assets frozen by the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We emphasize once again that the
measures taken by some States through their exploitation
of resolution 1970 (2011) are a source of great concern.
We find that those actions contradict the purposes of
that resolution. Accordingly, we insist that continuing
those actions will greatly affect Libyan money that the
Security Council has promised to preserve.
We once again stress our previous demands that the
sanctions regime be amended in a manner that allows
the relevant Libyan institutions to manage Libyan
funds, despite their being frozen. That would allow
the institutions to carry out their work perfectly and
without impediment and end further depreciation of
those assets.
We also call on the Council to cooperate by
implementing some amendments to its resolution on
exemptions in order for us to use those exemptions for
humanitarian purposes, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
22/24

15/07/2021

The Government of National Unity emphasizes
that it will carry out the necessary economic reforms
to improve the services offered to citizens and to grant
them a decent living. We call on the relevant States
involved in the situation in Libya to work to create an
environment conducive to productive and collective
work and to end their systematic internal attempts to
weaken our Government efforts to address economic
challenges which, regrettably, only harms Libyan
citizens and the interests of States that have invested
in Libya.
We wish to stress that the success of the political
process in Libya in ending the crisis will require the
ability to achieve comprehensive national reconciliation.
We therefore once again call on the international
community, particularly the African Union, to
coordinate with the United Nations to support the
efforts of the Presidency Council and the Government
of National Unity towards national reconciliation and
transitional justice. Such efforts will restore confidence
and promote stability in the country.
We also call on the Council to implement its
resolutions on addressing the obstructers, local and
international, who continue to threaten to wage war and
rely on military solutions while working with all their
might to prevent the Libyan people from expressing
their will.
In conclusion, we take this opportunity to reiterate
to the Libyan people and the world the resolve of the
Government of National Unity to make involvement
in new wars a thing of the past. The Government will
work with all its might, in cooperation with all Libyans,
to avoid differences and wars and to begin to build a
united, stable and modern Libya. I thank the Council
for its concern for my country and its people.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Federal Minister for Foreign affairs of Germany.
Mr. Maas (Germany): In the past year, Libya has
come a long way towards peace and unity — an interim
executive authority has been selected and approved
by the Libyan House of Representatives, military
representatives from both sides have agreed to a
ceasefire and the oil shutdown has been lifted, providing
an economic lifeline for the Libyan people.
We owe this progress to the Libyan people, who
want to take their country’s future into their own
hands. We owe it to the United Nations, which has
21-19159

15/07/2021

The situation in Libya

shown outstanding support for Libya. And we owe
it to Libya’s international supporters, who have been
working together, including through the Berlin process.
At the second Berlin Conference, held on 23 June,
we were able to advance our joint agenda in several ways.
First and foremost, the representatives of Libya
were invited to the conference table. The interim
executive authority, with Prime Minister Dbeibah
at the helm, played a key role in all the preparations
and negotiations — a crucial step towards full
Libyan ownership.
Secondly, all participants recommitted to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
national unity of Libya. There was broad agreement,
in line with the Libyan ceasefire agreement and all
relevant resolutions, that all foreign fighters, forces and
mercenaries have to leave the country. We now need to
find a way to make that happen without delay.
Thirdly, all conference participants reaffirmed the
need to hold free, fair and inclusive elections, set for
24 December, because Libyans must finally be able to
make their voices heard.
We now have a chance to build on that work. That
is why I am asking the Council today to support the
implementation of the conclusions of the second Berlin
Conference. Moving forward, we are also counting on
the continued leadership of Special Envoy Ján Kubiš
and his team to push for elections on the agreed date
in December.
We regret that the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
has, thus far, failed to agree on a legal basis for national
elections. We must take a strong stance against those
who favour postponing the elections for selfish political
motives. Here, the Security Council must reaffirm that
it will not tolerate any obstruction. With the support of
the United Nations and the Council, Libya has made
great progress towards peace and unity. Now, we must
stay the course to make that progress irreversible. That
is what we agreed upon in Berlin three weeks ago
and I am counting on the Council to help us honour
that commitment.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Aboul Gheit.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank the French presidency for
convening this timely meeting. As the Security Council

S/PV. 8820

is aware, many of the parties to the Berlin process are
concerned, if not demoralized, by the major delays that
are hindering the political process and undermining the
significant achievements made thus far.
We are here today to reaffirm that the positive
momentum that the political process has enjoyed
since the first Berlin Conference must continue, as
must ceasefire agreed in Geneva in October and the
formation of the Government of National Unity and the
Presidency Council, in addition to the agreement on the
date for elections and the unanimous support expressed
by the international community for the process at the
second Berlin Conference last month. Indeed, slowing
down or stopping the process would be a real source
of disappointment and deep frustration for the Libyan
people, who have placed great hope in the political
process and its potential to bring the country out of the
abyss into which it has been plunged for over a decade.
We all followed the deliberations in the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum in Geneva at the beginning
of this month and saw the outcome — the inability to
agree on a constitutional foundation for elections to be
held on 24 December. This inability to reach consensus
and unanimity reflects the primacy of narrow interests
and reminds us of the divisions that we thought we had
overcome in order to build a future for all the Libyan
people, both in the east and in the west.
The League of Arab States is working tirelessly
to encourage brotherly Libyans, regardless of their
political or geographic affiliation, to move on from the
mindset of competition to that of consensus — at least
during the next few months — so as not to squander
this opportunity and to work tirelessly to remove all the
obstacles, be they legal, constitutional or logistical in
nature, that are hindering the convening of elections on
the agreed date.
Indeed, the holding of presidential and legislative
elections on 24 December will be a milestone in the
process to save Libya and preserve it as a unified State
that enjoys full sovereignty over all of its national
territory. I am saying explicitly that reopening
discussion about the date of the elections would trigger
a return to competition and conflict and would not
serve the interests of Libya or Libyans.
All participants in the second Berlin Conference in
June unanimously agreed on the need for mercenaries,
foreign fighters and foreign forces to leave Libyan
territories. The Arab League believes that this is critical

21-1915923/24

S/PV.8820

The situation in Libya

if the transition from chaos to stability, and from
fighting foreign forces on Libyan soil to maintaining
the independence and sovereignty of Libya and ending
foreign interference in its internal affairs, is to succeed.
The withdrawal of foreign forces without further
delay is a fundamental principle of the political process;
it was agreed at the first Berlin Conference and reiterated
at the second. Regrettably, it remains far from being
achieved. There is no doubt that the delays — indeed,
the procrastination — of some in withdrawing foreign
forces and mercenaries from Libya will have serious
negative repercussions for the entire political process.
Issues pertaining to the transition period in Libya
are numerous and intimately linked. I would like to
stress the need for all of these issues to be dealt with
at the same time so as to ensure that the next stage is
completed peacefully. Nevertheless, I would like to
specifically dwell on two of them.
First is the unification of State institutions,
including military and security institutions. What has
been accomplished to date in this domain is far less
than expected. Neither the Governor of the Central
Bank nor the President of the Supreme Court has been
appointed. Some of the positive momentum made in the
5+5 Joint Military Commission has slowed or reversed.
The unification of institutions is a critical aspect of
the transition process in Libya that must be given due
consideration. Completing the political transition in
the country will depend on applying the principle of
unifying institutions.
Secondly, the Arab League has noted the trend
whereby some parties are seeking to make Libyan
territory into a transit zone for irregular migrants
and asylum-seekers — numbering in the hundreds of
thousands — who have illegally entered Libya in the

24/24

15/07/2021

hopes of transiting to third countries. Some parties,
deliberately or otherwise, seek to turn Libya from a
transit zone into a permanent zone of settlement for
these migrants. We would underscore the danger of
such a trend and its negative effects on Libyan stability.
While we are totally convinced of the humanitarian
needs in this regard, the demographic situation in
Libya is sensitive, and anything affecting the current
demographic balance in the country by settling
hundreds of thousands of foreign nationals on Libyan
territory would undoubtedly add a new element to the
crisis and exacerbate its complexity.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the position of the
Arab League in favour of implementing the political
road map and its agreed details, which enjoy the
unanimous approval of the international community,
including the holding of elections on time as agreed
upon by all parties. Changing this would risk plunging
the country once again into further darkness of
political division and disagreement. No one wants that.
All Libyans aspire to get past this difficult and delicate
period safely so that they can move towards achieving
stability at the end of this year, God willing.
The President (spoke in French): The Council has
before it the text of a statement by the President on behalf
of the Council on the subject of today’s meeting. I thank
the Council members for their valuable contributions to
the statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2021/12.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

21-19159
