Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Second Committee
ALGERIA, BRAZIL, BURUNDI, BYELORUSSIAN SovIET SocIALIST
REPUBLIC 24 CAMEROON CAN ADA, (EYLON, COLOMBIA, COSTA
RICA, FE~ERAL REPUBLI~ OF GERMANY, lRAN, hALY, LEBANON,
MAURITIUS, NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, PANAMA, PHILIPPINES,
PoLANo,25 RoMANIA, SPAIN, SwEDEN, SwnzERLAND, THAILAND,
TUNISIA, UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC and VENEZUELA.

2412 (XXIII). lnternational Education Year
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2306 (XXII) of 13 December 1967, by which it decided to_ <;Jbserve an_ lnternational Education Y ear and prov1s10nally des1gnated
the year 1970 for this purpose,
N oting with satisfaction Economic and Social ~ouncil
resolution 1355 (XLV) of 2 Augu_st 1968, p~rhcula'.ly
the invitation to ali the United Nations agencies, bod1es
and organs to participate in the preparation of programmes of concerted action within the context of an
over-all strategy for developm~nt d1;1ring the 1:ext
decade and in clase co-operat10n w1th the Umted
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Noting with appreciation that consultations between
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the interested specialized agencies
have taken place and that th~ International ~~ucati_on
Year was reviewed at a meetmg of the Admm1strahve
Committee on Co-or<lination in October 1968,
NótÍng with appreciation the reso!utiort on the International Education Year adopted on 19 November 1968
by the General Coníerence of the United _Na~ions Ed?cational, Scientific and Cultural Orga111zat1on at 1ts
fifteenth session and in particular the fact that the
organization wo;ld assume_ primary :espons\bility for
the preparation and executton of an mternahonal concerted programme,
Recognizing that education in a broad sense is an indispensable factor in the development of h~man resources which is essential to ensure the attamment of
the goals of the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
1. Decides to designate 1970 as International Education Year;
2. Endorses the programme of action for the International Education Year set out in the resolution
adopted by the General Conference of the United
N ations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and described in the reports submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council 26
and the General Assembly ;27
3. Renmimends States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized ag~ncies and of
the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency to take stock
of the situation with respect to education and training
in their countries and to p1an and initiate or stimulate
action and studies linked to the objectives and themes
of the lnternational Education Y ear in the context
of their preparation for the Second United Nations
Development Decade ;
4. Requests the United N ations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgat,ization and the organizations of
the ünited Nations systern concerned to provide within
24 !bid., document A/7492.
25 [bid., document A/7493.
2e E/4518.
27 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twe11ty-tltird
Session, An11e.res, agenda item 38, documents A/7239 and Add.1.

29

available resources ali possible assistance to Governments, especially those of the developing countries, in
their efforts to pursue the objectives formulated by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization for the International Education Y ear;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General, with the
assistance of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its forty-seventh session, on the progress achieved by the organizations of
the United N ations family in the preparations for the
International Education Year.
1745th plenary meeting,
17 Dccember 1968.

2413 (XXIII). Exploitation and conservation of
living marine resources
Thc General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2172 (XXI) of 6 December
1966 requesting the Secretary-General to prepare proposals for ensuring the most effective arrangements
for an expanded programme of international co-operation to assist in a better understanding of the marine
environment through science, and for the development
of marine resources, with due regard for the conservation of fish stocks,
Havin.(J considered the report entitled "Resources of
the sea beyond the continental shelf" 28 prepared by the
Secretary-General under Economic and Social Council
resolution 1112 (XL) of 7 March 1966 and the report
entitled "Marine science and technology: survey and
proposals" 29 prepared by the Secretary-General under
General Assembly resolution 2172 (XXI),
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1381 (XLV) of2August 1968,
Taking into account the valuable and extensive work
accomplished and being carried out in this field by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and its Committee on Fisheries, and by other
specialized agencies and intergovernm~ntal or&:anizations concerned, striving towards an mcrease m the
worl<l's food pro<luction,
Deeply concerned that a large proportion of the
world's population continues to suffer from malnutrition
and notably from lack of protein,
Mindjul of the importance of the living resources of
the sea as one of mankind's most important food resources,
ReaJizing the increasing importance of maximizing
the sustainable yield of living marine resources through
conservation and rational development,
Aware of the grave danger of the over-exploitation
and depletion of these resources, to which the rapid
progress in fisheries technology is contributing,
l. Invites Governments of Member States to increase international co-operation in the field of <levelopment ancl exploitation of living marine resources outside the limits of national jurisdiction. having regard
to the special needs ami interests of the developing
countries and with particular emphasis on the need for
rational exploitation ancl con,ervation of fish stocks.
taking into account the valuable work of the Food and
.\griculture Organization of tlw United Nations and
2s E/4449 and Add.l and 2.
:l8 E/4487 and Corr.1-6 and Add.1.

30

General Assembly-Twenty-third Session

its Committee on Fisheries and also of regional and
other specialized fishery bodies;
2. Urges the United Nations specialized agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations concerned to take
measures for the further improvement of international
collaboration, in relation to fisheries development and
conservation, and of technical assistance, where requested by developing countries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Direct9r-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and in consultation with Governments of States Memhers of the
United Nations ancl with other international organizations concerned, to report to the Economic and Social
Council at its forty-ninth session on the specific measures which have been taken bv Governments of Member
States and by the internation;l organizations concernecl
in the implementation of the present resolution, and
requests the Economic and Social Council to report
thereon to the General Assernbly at its twenty-fifth
sess1011.
1745th ¡,lenary merting.
17 Decrmber 1968.

2414 (XXIII). lnternational co-operation on questions related to the oceans
The General Assembly,
Reafjir111i11g the considerations set forth in its resolution 2172 (XXI) of 6 December 1966,
Considering the growing interest of the world community in problems related to the oceans, as they hold
promise of providing a rapidly developing world with
increasingly needed resources,
Being aware that the present knowledge of the ocean
and its resources and of the marine environrnent is
limited and incomplete,
Recognizing the need for extensive exploration and
research in order to develop the wealth of the sea for
the benefit of ali mankind, irrespective of the geographical location of States, taking into accpunt the special
needs and interests of developing countries,
Having given preliminary consicleration to the report
entitled "Marine science and technology : survey ancl
proposals" 3º prepared by the Secretary-General under
General Assembly resolution 2172 (XXI),
Talling into account the comments of the Advisory
Committee 011 the Application of Science and Technology to Development, 31
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1380 (XLV), 1381 (XLV) and 1382 (XLV) of
2 August 1968,
Recalling the report of the Ad Hoc Comrnittee to
Study the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor beyond the Limits of X ational Jurisdiction, 32
Ta!?ing into account the activities in this field at
present being carried out by the United Nations. the
Unitecl Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and its Intergovernmental Occanographic
Commission, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the Unitecl Nations and its Committee on Fisheries,
the Worid Meteorological Organization and its Panel
,on Met~orological Aspects of Ocean Affairs, the Inter-

Governme11tal Maritime Consultative Orga11ization, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and other specialized agencies, and also intergovernmental organizations, various Governments, universities, scientific a11d
technical institutes and other 11011-governmental organizations,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General entitled "Marine science and technology : survey and proposals";
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to review further this report at its forty-seventh session, taking into account such views as may he expressed by
GoYernments of Member States, by the Advisory Committee 011 the Application of Scie11ce a11d Technology to
Development and by the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the
Limits of N ational Jurisdiction ;33
3. Endorses the concept of a co-ordinated long-term
programme of oceanographic research designed to assist
in a hetter understanding of the marine environment
thr0ugh science a11d to increase, in the interests of world
eco110111ic development, the resources availahle to all the
people of the world;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
Economic ancl Social Council at its forty-seventh session
a cornprehensive outline of the scope of this long-term
programme, taking into account such scientific recommenclations as may be formulated by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the United
N ations Educatio11al, Scientific and Cultural Organization within its terms of reference and in co-operation
with other interested international organizations;
S. Recommcnds that the United Nations Eclucational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ancl its Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission shoulcl
consider strengthening the existíng marine educational
ancl training programmes a11d initiating new programmes in connexion with the implementation of the
long-term programme of oceanographic research;
6. Reconime¡¡ds further improvement of international
co-operation in relation to fisheries clevelopment and
conservation, taking into account the important role
playecl hy the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the Unitecl Nations and its Committee 011 Fisheries as
well as the ·work of regional and other specialized
fishery bodies;
7. Invites Member States and organizations dealing
with marine pollution, especially the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization ancl the International Atomic Energy Agency, to promote the adoption of effective international agreements on the
prevention a11d control of marine pollution as may be
necessary;
8. Recognizes the importance of the meteorological
aspects of ocean science and calls upan the VI' orld
:'.\1eteorological Organization to continue its activities
in this fielcl in clase co-operation ,vith other interestecl
organizations;
9. Invites the Secretary-General. in consultation with
the United Nations Development Programme, to consicler the possibility oí exte11ding technical assistance
sen·ices to the Governments of Member States which
may request them in relation to the development of
mineral resources of their continental shelf areas;

ao !bid.
31 Ojficial Records of tite General AsJembly, Tu·enty-third
Sessio11 . .411nrxcs, agen¡l;i item 41. d"c11ment .-\/7204.
32 !bid., Twent:)'-lhird Srssion, agenda item 26, doc11ment

A/7'?;30.

33 Established by the General Assembly on 21 December 1968
1111der its resolution 2467 (XXIII). See Official Records of
the General Assembh·. Tii•enty-third Sessio11, Seco11d Committer, 1246th meeting, para. 3.
