s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/20974
20 November 1989
ORIGINAL1

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council, at
the 2893rd meeting, on 20 November 1989, in connection with the Council's
consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Namibia":
"The members of the Security Council welcome with satisfaction the
successful conclusion of the elections in Namibia, certified by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General as free and fair, ii thus paving the
way for the convening of the Constituent Assembly and the early independence
of Namibia at a date to be determined by the Constituent Assembly.
"The members of the Council congratulate the people of Namibia for the
successful exercise of their democratic rights and look forward to the early
independence of Namibia. They are deeply appreciative of the efforts of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative and the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group for the role they have played, which attests to
the effectiveness and credibility of the United Nations.
"The members of the Council reaffirm the continuing important role of the
United Nations in the transition period in ensuring the implementation of the
settlement plan on the basis of its legal responsibility over Namibia until
independence, so that the Constituent Assembly, reflecting the collective will
of the people, can draw up and adopt, in accordance with the settlement plan
and free from any interference, a Constitution that will accurd sovereignty to
Namibia. In this regard, they express support to the Secretary-General in his
continuing efforts to ensure the full implementation of the settlement plan
and request him to make the necessary arrangements under the settlement plan
to safeguard the territorial integrity and security of Namibia. They also
stress the importance of full compliance with all the remaining provisions of
reRolution 435 (1978) in its original and definitive form. The members of the
Council express the hope that, in the transition period, the utmost political
responsibility will be displayed to facilitate the earliest possible accession
of Namibia to independence.

89-29467

1330h (E)

I,••

S/20974
English
Page 2
"The members of the Council call upon the Constituent Assembly to carry
out its responsibility expeditiously and request the Secretary-General to
provide it with all necessary assistance."

l/

See S/20967, para. 5.

....... ..,,""·~ ......

---

,,.. ...........----

.1
' .. J
