United Nations

S/PV.6351

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6351st meeting
Wednesday, 30 June 2010, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Lolo
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 40 of resolution 1917
(2010) (S/2010/318)
Letter dated 14 June 2010 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/325)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-42978 (E)

*1042978*

S/PV.6351

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 40 of resolution 1917 (2010)
(S/2010/318)
Letter dated 14 June 2010 from the President
of the Security Council addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2010/325)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Germany, India, Italy, Norway and Pakistan, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. De Mistura to take a seat at the
Council table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the

2

European Union to the United Nations to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2010/318, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
40 of resolution 1917 (2010). I also wish to draw the
attention of members to document S/2010/325, which
contains a letter dated 14 June 2010 from the President
of the Security Council addressed to the SecretaryGeneral.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and by
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan, Permanent Representative
of Turkey, who led the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan. I now give the floor to Mr. de Mistura.
Mr. de Mistura (spoke in Spanish): It is a great
pleasure, Mr. President, to see you here again
following the Council’s mission to Afghanistan.
(spoke in English)
I would like to take this opportunity to elaborate
a little bit about the United Nations activities in
Afghanistan and the priorities in the current Afghan
environment. I will be a little shorter than usual,
because we had the privilege of having the members of
the Security Council visit Afghanistan. The members
of the Council have therefore seen with their own eyes
and heard with their own ears about the current
situation there. I would like, in that connection, to
thank the Council for its visit. Coming just slightly
more than three months after I took up my new
assignment, the visit was a very timely one for all of
us.

10-42978

S/PV.6351

This is indeed a crucial year in Afghanistan. I
think that anyone here who has been there must have
had the same feeling. This is a year in which all of us,
together with the Afghan authorities and the Afghan
people, are trying to reach a form of stabilization in the
situation. Everybody acknowledges the fact that there
is no military solution alone to the current situation in
Afghanistan. There must be a lot more, and that is what
we are working on together. What we need is a
political vision that addresses the concerns, the
aspirations and the hopes of the Afghan people and of
all stakeholders, in particular those in the region.
This is also a year with a calendar densely packed
with events. In that sense we are moving in the right
direction. The London Conference has been held,
which was very useful. It signaled the support of the
international community for the Afghan authorities
during this crucial year. The Consultative Peace Jirga
has also been held, which was equally extremely
helpful because it gave everyone, Afghans and
foreigners, the opportunity to realize that there is a
common feeling as to how to address the dialogue in
order to have more Afghans inside the large tent where
we all attended the Jirga. The next step is the Kabul
Conference, to which many foreign ministers will go. I
understand that the Secretary-General has also
confirmed that he will be attending. It will be a very
good opportunity for a stepping-stone.
Allow me to summarize the direction that the
organizers of the Conference — who are, of course, the
Afghans; we are co-chairing, but they are in charge —
are taking. The concept is one of a public contract
between the Afghan Government and the Afghan
people, and an offer to produce public, concrete
delivery of socio-economic improvement. The
international community will not be expected to bring
new funds, but, if they feel comfortable with those
priorities, may be asked to realign bilaterally the
resources already allocated for Afghanistan. That
would have several advantages. One of them would be
to further the concept of Afghanization, which should
become not just a word but, increasingly, a concrete
fact.
The Afghans feel that very strongly. They are a
proud people, historically proven to be so and even
more so these days. They need to feel that the future is,
in fact, in their hands, and that will be a good
opportunity. If they are proposing such concrete
programmes, they should also feel that they can lead

10-42978

them and, of course, be accountable for the results. At
the same time, this would not be putting more pressure
on donor countries, which are, at the moment, feeling
the stress of additional funding, because there will be,
at most, a request for bilateral realignment of the
current funding.
The United Nations, as you know, Mr. President,
is now focusing on a three-plus-one initiative. We
cannot cover everything, and if we did we would not
make a difference or be able to make a difference. The
three-plus-one areas are elections, internal and regional
dialogue, and constructive regional engagement. The
plus-one aspect pertains to aid coherence, namely,
helping the international community and Afghan
authorities to avoid overlaps and focusing better on
ensuring that the huge amounts of aid reaching
Afghanistan do not overlap.
Elections are the mother of all issues in
Afghanistan and, frankly, for all of us. The previous
elections did not go well, and to say they did would be
an overstatement. This time we are all trying to work
together so that they will be better — not perfect or
elections one would see in other countries that do not
have the same challenges, but better. Inshallah, they
will be better; first, because lessons were learned by
everyone and, secondly, because there is much more
monitoring taking place internally, among the Afghans
themselves.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) was able to contribute to one
major improvement in the process. As members of the
Council will probably remember — so many things
have happened — in April there was a moment of
difficulty that involved an institutional stalemate
between the two institutions of the presidency and the
Loya Jirga, which could have blocked the election
process. The United Nations, with the cooperation of
the whole international community in Kabul, was able
to propose, and get approval by everyone for, a formula
for what we called the implementation guidelines for
the elections.
That produced three results: first, a new electoral
chairmanship and a new electoral aid team; secondly,
the presence of international commissioners, who
would also be there with a role, namely, that no
decision would be taken by the Electoral Complaints
Commission (ECC) if any of the international
commissioners was not in agreement — a major

3

S/PV.6351

element of reassurance, not just nationally but, above
all, internationally; and, thirdly, a decision on the role
of women. Sixty-eight seats in the Afghan Parliament
would be guaranteed for women. If, for whatever
reason, as has happened in the past, a woman were to
give up a seat, she would be replaced not by a man but
by another woman.
All this resulted in an end to the stalemate.
Elections are now moving ahead, mutatis mutandis, in
the right direction. The new commissioners have been
doing their homework. There are now 2,679
candidates, of whom 400 are women. We also are
working on setting up 6,835 polling centres and 19,942
polling stations. Thirty thousand new voters have been
registered. We are approaching the figure of 12.5
million people expected to vote. It will not be easy.
The main challenge will be security, as will the second.
If the elections are tarnished by excessive security
problems, the result might include the closing of
polling stations, and thus the disenfranchisement of
people who could have voted. We will have to watch
that as we get closer to the date in order to be able to
assist the Afghan authorities.
It is the Afghan authorities who are in charge of
the elections, with the United Nations and the
international community proactively working to
support them. An example of that pertains to the
vetting process. Some members of the Council who
were in Kabul were part of the intense moments
relating to the vetting, where the vetting committee,
which is a purely Afghan body led by the Ministers of
the Interior and Defence and the National Directorate
of Security, were unable to come up with any people to
be vetted and excluded from the elections. I am glad to
be able to tell the Council that the latest information
indicates that we are very close to 40 — we had been
down to zero — representing different provinces.
A decision is now imminent. If that proves to be
the case, it will be a substantive improvement on the
impression we had previously, which suggested the
vetting was not conclusive in any way. We will face
difficult moments with regard to the elections. But I
can certainly tell the Council that, at the moment, the
decisions of the Chair of the Electoral Commission and
the members of the other commissions are reassuring
to everyone, including those Afghans who felt that the
elections could have been heading in the wrong
direction. We will cross that bridge when we get there,
and I may require the support and assistance of the

4

Council if we get into difficulties. But at the moment,
it is so far so good.
Dialogue is the second area of priority for our
own focus. As you know, this is, again, Afghan-led and
should be Afghan-led. But the United Nations has the
capacity in assisting those types of discussions that
may take place or are taking place. One example was
the Hezb-i-Islami visit to Kabul, where the United
Nations, in coordination with the presidency, did
receive the Hezb-i-Islami team in order to make them
feel that, when they move into a dialogue-type of
conversation instead of fighting, the international
community does recognize that fact and is ready to
facilitate it.
We are of course looking forward to confidencebuilding measures, in which we can play a role, and we
are. Also, His Excellency the Ambassador of Austria is
actively involved in the issue of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and was able to hold quite a few discussions
while he was in Kabul. I will leave it to him to make
any relevant comments on the elements of important
confidence-building issues regarding future dialogue.
On regional issues, there is agreement by
everyone that no substantive, continuous, sustainable
stabilization of Afghanistan can or will take place
unless we have a constant constructive engagement by
all regional players, stakeholders and beyond. That is
why I myself, with the permission of the SecretaryGeneral, have been traveling to several regional
countries — Pakistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
elsewhere — in order to make sure that we are able to
hear their concerns and, in a way, facilitate their
constructive engagement in the right direction.
There are other very useful initiatives, and they
are to some degree led by countries like Turkey, which
has been very active, as the Council knows. We heard
the latest relevant information recently when we were
in Istanbul and Ankara. These initiatives include the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan initiative, the Shanghai initiative, the
Dubai process, which is being proactively supported by
Canada, and for our part, on the basis of the mandate
the Council has given us, the Silk Road initiative. It
has a very charming name, but in fact goes beyond
charm. It is meant to engage countries that are not
necessarily geographically linked to Afghanistan but
have historical or political links. It is aimed at ensuring

10-42978

S/PV.6351

that, finally, when this difficult time comes to an end,
they will all be part of it.
We are also working on the economic side of it
because sometimes that leads to a lot of dialogue. One
example is, of course, the issue of drugs, which affects
many countries, such as Russia, Iran, Pakistan and,
frankly, all of us, once it gets to the countries that are
far away. There are also the issues, for instance, of
transport or energy. They are all opportunities for a
regional dialogue that may then also enhance the
political engagement that we all need.
Aid coherence is part of our mandate, but it is
also part of a major necessity. The good news is that
there are no major contradictions. We have done a lot
of studying of that issue on the spot. There is no
excessive, shocking overlap between bilateral and
multilateral at the moment. What is needed is more
help to the Afghan authorities to do what they should
have the right to do, that is, undertake the aid
coherence approach themselves. We have a mechanism
called the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board,
which is meeting on 8 July. Everyone is part of it. I am
co-chairing it on behalf of the Secretary-General. That
mechanism needs to be revitalized.
Secondly, the next opportunity for aid coherence
is the Kabul Conference. If we come to the Kabul
Conference with the type of contract that we have just
mentioned — that is, the opportunity for realignment
between bilateral and Afghan priorities — the United
Nations has the capacity and the duty to assist on that
issue. That becomes, by itself, a new form of aid
coherence.
Last but not least, there is the possibility of the
so-called transition, that is, the movement from
military to civilian, particularly with regard to the
provincial reconstruction teams, and from civilian to
Afghan. In that sense, “Afghan” means with the
support and the capacity-building of our 21 regional
and provincial offices. By the way, as the Council
knows, we have, at the moment, 742 international
colleagues on the ground; 940 posts are filled by
international staff and 6,000 by national staff. So we
are not reducing.
Our position is to simply be careful in squaring
the circle between security — we had an attack
yesterday and there have been attacks in the past, as
the Council knows, as in October when we lost five
colleagues — and being present, being proactive,

10-42978

increasing quality when we cannot increase the
quantity, focusing on 3+1 areas and not all over, and at
the same time, having security in our accommodations.
The attack on 28 October was on sleeping
accommodations. That is why we are so keen to have
the Council’s support on the issue of the financial
package that is being discussed, not only for
Afghanistan but also for Iraq, in order to enable our
colleagues to feel that they are not being treated worse
than those who are in a more secure environment. We
also need support in pushing for the excellent solution
that the Dutch Government, through the Dutch
embassy, is offering to the United Nations in order to
have secure accommodations there. We are working on
all that.
The next point is partnership. The Council will
ask, and it is right to ask, how we are doing with the
International Security Assistance Force and the
European Union — in other words, the two civilian
representatives who were appointed at more or less the
same time that I was. The short answer is, excellent.
Members of the Council can ask them. We have a
feeling of constructive, common work. We have the
right chemistry. We have different mandates, and we
should. One would expect us to have that. We
sometimes represent different countries as well. We go
beyond that in the United Nations, representing many
countries that are not in NATO or in the European
Union. And we also have slightly different priorities in
our focus, and that should be the case.
But the goal is the same, and coordination and
common messaging to avoid contradictions at a time
when we cannot afford contradictions are taking place.
In that sense, I would like to reassure the Council, and
I feel pleased to say, that this is moving in the right
direction, while each of us is maintaining — naturally
and as the Council expects us to — our independence,
neutrality and impartiality, but also our respect of the
mandate that the Council has given us.
At the end of the day, the goal is the same: the
stabilization of Afghanistan and respect for its culture,
traditions, sovereignty and religion. That is what we
are supposed to do these days, even more than in the
past, in view of the growing feeling of the Afghans and
the Afghan Government that they should be taking
their own future into their own hands.
This year, especially in the coming months - and
when I come back, I hope to be able to brief the

5

S/PV.6351

Council again on this — we will need to be resilient.
The message from myself and my colleagues who have
been volunteering to come to Kabul is that this is the
time for all of us to be resilient, creative and respectful
of Afghan priorities. At the end of the day, only the
Afghans will find their own solutions. This is the time
to have these three qualities. We need the Council’s
help if we are to continue to have them.
Lastly, I want to again thank you, Sir, for having
come to Kabul. You have no idea how timely your visit
was, what a strong boost it was to the morale of my
colleagues and what a strong impression it conveyed to
the Afghan people that the international community
does care, is interested, is committed, and that this is
the time that we will not leave them alone.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Apakan of Turkey, in
his capacity as head of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/318) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his
comprehensive briefing. After having extensive talks
with him in Kabul on the occasion of the Security
Council mission to Afghanistan, we welcome his first
presentation to the Security Council. I also welcome
the Ambassador of Afghanistan to the Council.
I first wish to share my impressions regarding the
Security Council mission to Afghanistan conducted
from 21 to 24 June — an important period after the
Consultative Peace Jirga and before the Kabul
Conference. The visit was very productive thanks to
the excellent organization of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well
as to the sincerity of our interlocutors.
We had substantive talks with members of the
executive and legislative branches, meeting with
President Karzai, Foreign Minister Rassoul, the
Speaker of the Wolesi Jirga, Mr. Qanuni, the chairs of
the standing committees of Parliament and members of
the Cabinet. These included extended interaction with
Afghani institutions including the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission, the Independent Electoral
Commission
and
the
Electoral
Complaints
Commission. We also had useful discussions with civil

6

society. We visited the NATO training mission. We also
met with the main international stakeholders, including
United Nations agencies, the International Security
Assistance Force, NATO and the European Union.
During our field visit to Jalalabad, we met with local
authorities, United Nations specialized agencies and
families located in the returnee settlement.
During our contacts, we reiterated the Security
Council’s support for and enduring commitment to the
people of Afghanistan and its Government in furthering
peace, development and stability. We emphasized the
messages in the mission’s terms of reference. We
particularly stressed the central role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, solidarity with Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura and UNAMA. We
underlined the necessity of free and fair elections. We
welcomed the strong participation of women
candidates. We emphasized the importance of
economic and social development. We encouraged the
Afghan authorities to further their efforts to uphold the
rule of law, human rights, women’s rights and
children’s rights. We indicated the importance of
combating the narcotics industry and trade. We stressed
the importance of regional cooperation.
We were briefed on various issues, including
challenges to the legislative elections scheduled to be
held on 18 September, the security situation,
reconciliation and reintegration, and the importance of
regional cooperation. We would like to thank the
Afghan authorities and UNAMA for all of the
arrangements they have made. The official mission
report will be prepared soon.
If you would permit me now, Sir, I would like to
make a few remarks in my national capacity regarding
the report of the Secretary-General and the situation in
Afghanistan. We commend the report, which provides a
detailed outlook. We agree with its contents and
observations. I also welcome Mr. De Mistura, who held
meetings with my authorities in Turkey before coming
to New York. We appreciate and support his activities.
I wish to emphasize three points: the
empowerment of the Afghan leadership, a
comprehensive approach, and regional cooperation.
First, the Istanbul and London Conferences brought
new impetus. The key words should be Afghanization,
Afghan leadership and Afghan responsibility in the
period ahead. Afghan ownership should be supported
by the international community. Afghan administration

10-42978

S/PV.6351

should be empowered. Parliamentary elections in
September 2010 will be part of this process. There
should be an Afghan-led political process and the
United Nations should be part of it.
Secondly, a comprehensive approach should be at
the forefront. It should include security, governance,
the rule of law, human rights and social and economic
development. It should not be limited solely to military
means.
Four
areas
need
special
attention:
comprehensive economic development, a strong, welltrained and well-equipped Afghan military and police,
inclusive national reconciliation led by the Afghan
administration, and modern education and justice
systems to effectively combat extremism.
Another key is transition, although it should not
be understood as an exit strategy. We will continue to
increase our civilian efforts. Turkey has announced the
establishment of a new Turkish provincial
reconstruction team in Jowzjan. The Turkish civilian—
led team will be based on the successful experience of
our first PRT in Wardak province. It will bring
additional civilian capacity and complement ongoing
development efforts in that regard.
Thirdly, regional cooperation and dialogue should
be enhanced. Turkey hosted the fourth TurkeyAfghanistan-Pakistan trilateral summit in January with
a focus on education. We hosted the Istanbul Summit
with the participation of the neighbours of Afghanistan.
The Istanbul statement was the first regional
manifestation since the Kabul Declaration of 2002 to
emphasize regional ownership. We believe it provides a
solid basis to enhance regional cooperation. Regional
cooperation was also discussed at the London
Conference.
As a follow-up to the trilateral process, the
Foreign Ministers of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey
met in Istanbul on 7 June. They discussed the level of
cooperation reached at the trilateral process, current
developments related to Afghanistan, including the
Peace Jirga convened in early June, and the upcoming
Kabul Conference. Turkey will continue its regional
contributions by hosting the Fourth Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan after the
parliamentary elections.
Before concluding, I wish to emphasize that
Turkey sees the Kabul Conference as a milestone in
promoting dialogue and harmonizing the civilian and
military strategies towards a future vision for

10-42978

Afghanistan. Last but not the least, we would like to
offer our condolences for the Afghan UNAMA officer
who was killed the other day.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Apakan for his briefing. On behalf of the
Council, I should like to express appreciation to all the
members of the Security Council and the Secretariat
who participated in the mission, which was very ably
led by Ambassador Apakan, for the manner in which
they discharged their important responsibilities on
behalf of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and congratulate you on your work as President of the
Council for the month of June. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his most recent report
(S/2010/318) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura for his briefing
today — his first in his new role.
Mr. De Mistura and the leadership and staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) have made exemplary efforts in Kabul. In
less than three months, Mr. De Mistura has proven
himself admirably able in gathering all stakeholders,
including regional actors, together around issues and
principles of common concern. We are grateful to him,
and I would like to say that I look forward to working
with him and his colleagues closely in the coming
years.
This meeting comes less than a week after the
Council’s visit to Afghanistan, which I had the honour
to be part of. Let me thank all Council members, and
particularly Ambassador Apakan of Turkey for his
work in leading the mission.
The Council’s visit came at a crucial time for
Afghanistan. It was an opportunity to assess the current
situation and to prepare for the future. More important,
it was also an opportunity to better understand the
hopes, fears and expectations of the Afghan people. As
was evident last week, Afghans are focused in
particular on the increased role of their Government in
the reconstruction and stabilization process, their
expectations of the international community and how
to address the insurgency. Our success in the coming

7

S/PV.6351

years will depend on our ability to further involve
Afghans in those crucial issues.
Seven months ago, President Karzai presented a
comprehensive national agenda to re-engage the
Afghan people and enable them to take increased
responsibility for the governance, development and
security of their country. It was subsequently endorsed
by the international community in London.
The Afghanistan that we saw last week has made
visible progress in the past months towards meeting its
commitments, which is also reflected in the report
before us today. The Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police, now operating with increased
operational capability, are on schedule to reach their
combined target size and strength. In partnership with
the international forces, we have begun to take back
the initiative from the Taliban in some key parts of the
country.
In addition, the Afghan Government is
increasingly focused on efficiency and effectiveness,
cracking down on corruption and promoting the rule of
law. President Karzai recently called for initiatives to
prevent nepotism in the awarding of high-level
contracts and to require businessmen related to highlevel officials to disclose their assets. The Government
of Afghanistan has also taken steps to prioritize
development, particularly in the agricultural sector, in
an effort to ensure a sustainable economy, and is
investing in minerals and human resource development
to promote long-term prosperity.
Furthermore, last month’s Peace Jirga brought
together a broad and representative cross-section of
Afghan society around the common desire for security,
peace and justice. The Jirga marked an important step
towards building an inclusive and unified Afghan
approach to peace and reconciliation and identified
concrete steps to be taken in that direction.
At the same time, the Afghan-led parliamentary
election process is well under way, with 2,577
candidates, including 406 women, standing for 249
seats. There is a broad commitment on the part of the
newly restructured Independent Electoral Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission, as well as
civil society and the candidates themselves, to ensuring
that it is a transparent, fair and credible process that
learns from the lessons of the past. In that regard, we
appreciate the assistance of the United Nations and the
international community in providing financial and

8

logistical support and in helping us to guarantee the
security that is essential for a credible election, as was
emphasized by Mr. De Mistura. The election will be an
important step on the path towards strengthening the
engagement of the Afghan people in the establishment
of a democratic system.
Three weeks from now, the Government of
Afghanistan will convene the international Kabul
Conference on Afghanistan, which will allow us to
renew the partnership between the international
community and the Afghan Government and people,
crystallize our shared strategy and begin to implement
concrete action plans. It will be chaired jointly by
Afghanistan and the United Nations and attended at the
level of foreign minister, including representatives of
countries, international and regional organizations, as
well as financial institutions. It is not a pledging
conference, but a chance to detail the objectives
reflected in President Karzai’s inaugural platform and
the London Conference outcome.
Afghans have great hopes and great expectations
of our international friends and allies. They are well
aware that Afghanistan would still be under the bloody
reign of the Taliban and Al-Qaida without the support
and assistance of the international community.
Nevertheless, they are disturbed by the ongoing
debates among and between our international allies and
are concerned that sustainable progress may be
difficult to achieve if we do not show patience,
fortitude and long-term commitment.
The renewed partnership between Afghanistan
and the international community must embody the
recognition that trust and responsibility are equally
important to all partners, rather than being the sole
preserve of any one of us. We must continue to work
together jointly to meet our own expectations and those
of our partners.
To build the confidence and trust of the Afghan
people, efforts should be geared towards, first,
ensuring that the transition strategy is implemented in
practice through capacity-building, empowering
Afghans and avoiding waste; secondly, re-engaging the
people in the transition process; thirdly, ending the
negative perceptions that have favoured the enemy;
and fourthly, ensuring visible progress in both the short
and the long terms. The Kabul Conference and the
subsequent
parliamentary
elections
will
be

10-42978

S/PV.6351

opportunities to achieve some of those goals, but our
efforts should continue and intensify across the board.
The Afghan people have suffered from violence
and conflict for over 30 years, and they understand that
most of our current enemies are not driven by ideology.
My Government has made it a priority to undertake a
process to end the insurgency and consolidate security
throughout the country.
The Peace Jirga outcome document recommended
several steps to be taken towards an inclusive Afghan
peace process that would weave Afghan fighters and
enemy leaders back into the fabric of Afghan social,
economic and political life. The Government of
Afghanistan has already started to implement many of
those recommendations. We are creating a high-level
council to oversee the implementation of the peace and
reconciliation process. We have also begun to review
detention records with a view to releasing Taliban who
are being held without adequate evidence, and have
requested this Council to extend the review process of
the consolidated list as we prepare to submit a
preliminary de-listing request.
However, let us be clear. We will not sacrifice the
progress that has been made or the principles on which
our constitution is founded. We will begin negotiations
with any disenchanted Afghans who are ready to
distance themselves from Al-Qaida and to participate
in a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
Partnership with the Afghan people has been
critical to the progress made thus far and will be
critical to the success of the current transition strategy.
As was seen last week, there is intense interest and
some concern among the Afghan people, but at the
same time there is also strength of resolve both in the
Afghan Government and in civil society and the pride
that Afghans feel in their historic nation. We are eager
to build a Government and society that will do justice
to that pride. The international community has been a
true and steadfast friend to the Afghan people in that
struggle, and we look forward to a partnership that is
closer, more concrete and more focused.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the briefing by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General De Mistura on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would like to thank Ambassadors Tanin
and Apakan for their statements. My thanks also go to
colleagues from the Turkish Mission, the Secretariat,
Mr. De Mistura, the United Nations Assistance Mission

10-42978

in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Afghan Government
for their efforts and help in ensuring the success of the
visit of the Council’s mission to Afghanistan.
As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
pays close attention to the development of the situation
there. We wish to register our appreciation to the
Afghan people and Government for the efforts for
peace and congratulate them on the holding of the
Peace Jirga in Kabul from 2 to 4 June.
On 20 July, the Afghan Government will co-host,
with the United Nations in Kabul, an international
conference on the question of Afghanistan. On
18 September, parliamentary elections will be held.
With these developments, the peaceful reconstruction
of Afghanistan has entered a crucial stage. I would like
to focus my statement on three points.
First, improving the security situation is the
primary task facing Afghanistan. Although some
progress has been made by the Government in
strengthening its security forces, the security situation
in Afghanistan has deteriorated since the beginning of
this year, with a marked increase in security incidents
resulting in the deaths and injury of innocent civilians.
This not only jeopardizes the safety and security of the
Afghan people and their confidence in the prospects for
peace, but also negatively impacts the assistance work
of the international community. China expresses its
concern over this situation. We hope that the relevant
parties of the international community will continue to
support Afghanistan in implementing various
initiatives, including the National Police strategy, assist
the Afghan Government in the capacity-building of its
security force, and help the Government to assume the
important responsibility of maintaining security and
stability at an early date.
Secondly, economic and social reconstruction is
an important guarantee for the lasting peace and
security of Afghanistan. The precarious security
situation, backward infrastructure and lack of human
resources have constrained the reconstruction and
economic and social recovery of Afghanistan. The
situation not only impedes the improvement of the
lives of the Afghan people and dampens their
enthusiasm for participating in national reconstruction,
but also hampers efforts to eradicate the insurgency
and drug trafficking.
While increasing its inputs in the security area
and helping to maintain stability in Afghanistan, the

9

S/PV.6351

international community should also pay greater
attention to the economic and social development of
the country, actively support the Afghan Government
in implementing its National Development Strategy
and encourage it to make full use of international
assistance to build its own capacity for development.
We hope that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNAMA will make proposals
and provide assistance in this regard.
Thirdly, having the Afghan Government and the
people exercise ownership is an important guarantee
for the successful peaceful reconstruction of
Afghanistan. Afghanistan has unique national
conditions and a special development strategy and is
facing many acute difficulties in the process of
recovery and reconstruction. In providing assistance to
Afghanistan for recovery and reconstruction, the
international community should respect its sovereignty
and encourage the Afghan Government and people to
exercise full ownership and to choose their own mode
of governance and development in line with their
national conditions.
The international Kabul Conference on
Afghanistan will be held on 20 July. We hope that the
relevant parties of the international community will
fully hear the views of Afghanistan, consider the
priority development areas there, and reach consensus
on the next step of assistance to Afghanistan.
President Karzai of Afghanistan undertook a
successful visit to China from 23 to 25 March this year,
during which leaders of our two countries carried out
an in-depth exchange of views on bilateral relations
and the regional situation and achieved broad
agreement. China appreciates the efforts of
Afghanistan in promoting the process of peaceful
reconstruction and will, as always, provide assistance
to the Afghan Government and people to the best of its
capabilities and further strengthen bilateral cooperation
in such fields as the economy, technology, training and
trade. We wish every success to the international Kabul
Conference on Afghanistan, and hope that the Afghan
people will, through parliamentary elections in
September, further solidify their unity and common
understanding
and
advance
the
peace
and
reconciliation process.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, and Special Representative De Mistura
for his comprehensive briefing.

10

Let me start by underscoring my Government’s
continued full support for the critical role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan. We are deeply grateful for the
continuing determination and courage of the men and
women of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), who have demonstrated their
deep commitment to helping Afghans achieve stability
and build democratic institutions in the face of
enormous challenges. Our gratitude is all the greater
for having seen their work and those challenges first
hand on the Security Council’s trip to Afghanistan last
week.
Our trip reinforced our strong support for Special
Representative De Mistura and his team, who are
helping the Government of Afghanistan to face its most
important and difficult challenges. Their vital work
needs resources, especially experienced and capable
staff with a wide range of technical expertise. I am
grateful to the Special Representatives in the
Secretariat for their work in ensuring that priority
positions in Afghanistan are filled. I urge the United
Nations system as a whole to continue to move
energetically and creatively to deploy the needed staff
to Afghanistan.
During our three-and-a-half-day trip, the Security
Council saw a proud and determined Afghan people
working together across economic and social sectors
and Government ministries to build a durable future for
their country. When we sat with young Afghan students
in a refugee resettlement camp, they described their
painful inheritance from three decades of war, but they
also spoke compellingly about their ability to shape
Afghanistan’s political and economic future. Their
resilience was inspiring, and such resilience will be
Afghanistan’s crucial reserve as the country faces this
year’s challenges.
Afghanistan and the international community are
entering a new phase of our partnership on the way to
full Afghan ownership. As a result, the Security
Council focused its trip on those elements that will
allow the Afghan people to exercise full control over
their destiny, choosing their Government, beginning a
dialogue on the conflict, strengthening their ability to
provide security and fostering economic and political
development.
As part of these consultations, the Council looked
in depth at the ongoing preparations for the legislative
elections scheduled for September. We welcome the

10-42978

S/PV.6351

new leadership at the Independent Electoral
Commission
and
the
reconstituted
Electoral
Complaints Commission. The Independent Electoral
Commission leadership spoke of the lessons learned
from the 2009 election and its determination to
improve the upcoming election’s credibility. The
Commission also emphasized the need for increased
security for polling sites, noting that they did not plan
to open polling stations in insecure areas. Similarly, the
Electoral
Complaints
Commission’s
leaders
underscored their commitment to act independently.
The United States, for its part, reinforced the
importance of the United Nations being prepared to
provide enough technical and operational support to
meet the needs of both Commissions.
Afghan representatives and Government leaders
briefed the Council on Afghan-led reconciliation and
reintegration efforts designed to pull insurgent
commanders and fighters off the battlefield. President
Karzai and others emphasized in this context the
importance of removing names from the list pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999). In consultation with other
Committee members, we are thoroughly reviewing
each and every individual and entity on the list and
determining on a case-by-case basis whether the
listings remain appropriate. The United States
continues to support de-listing reconciled Taliban who
cut their ties to Al-Qaida, lay down their arms and
accept the Afghan Constitution. The United States also
continues to work with our partners on the Committee
and in the Afghan Government to ensure that the 1267
regime can effectively and accurately list individuals
and, when appropriate, remove them.
During the trip, Security Council members
underscored to our Afghan partners that the
Government of Afghanistan’s providing credible
information on each individual being considered for
removal from the consolidated list by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) is vital
and urgent. We look forward to receiving that
information.
The Council also saw the extensive efforts of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
NATO to build a multi-ethnic national army. The
Council visited the Kabul military training centre to
talk to ISAF and Afghan trainers. We had the
opportunity to see new Afghan National Army recruits
from across the country. We learned that recruiting has
increased, as has the number of international

10-42978

instructors. Moreover, Afghan soldiers are now being
trained and tested against concrete standards. The
crucial non-commissioned officer corps is being
strengthened.
But much more work remains to be done. More
trainers are needed, both to fulfil existing NATO
pledges and to fill gaps. Building self-sustaining,
capable Afghan security forces is crucial to a
meaningful and sustainable transition to Afghan
leadership on security.
Council members also witnessed United Nations
efforts to help returning Afghan refugees at the Sheikh
Mesri resettlement camp. We were briefed by the
provincial reconstruction team in Jalalabad on the ways
that civilian officials are partnering with Afghans to
develop and implement important initiatives on
governance, economic development, the rule of law
and agriculture. These multilateral and bilateral efforts
to build economic and political momentum following
military actions are crucial to our strategy’s long-term
success. To ensure that the international community’s
efforts are effective, the United Nations should
continue to promote coordination and unity of effort.
The United States expresses its gratitude to
Special Representative De Mistura, the United Nations
team and the Turkish delegation for organizing an
effective trip to Afghanistan, and to ISAF-NATO for its
support and security assistance. We look forward to
continuing to work closely with the Special
Representative to achieve our shared goal of helping
the people of Afghanistan transform and strengthen
their own society and ensure their own security.
Finally, let me underscore our profound thanks to
President Karzai, Ambassador Tanin and the rest of the
Afghan Government, including the Afghan security
forces, for hosting such a productive visit and
extending such warm hospitality.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, thank Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura for his very helpful
briefing this morning. Let me also take this opportunity
to thank him and all those who made the Council’s
mission to Afghanistan possible: the members of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA); the Government, Parliament and civil
society of Afghanistan; and, of course, the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). I
would ask Ambassador Tanin to convey our deep

11

S/PV.6351

appreciation to President Karzai and his colleagues in
the Government.
As Ambassador Apakan made very clear in his
introductory statement, the trip was quite useful not
only to the members of the delegation, but also to the
Council’s future work on Afghanistan. We are very
much grateful to the Turkish delegation for its
excellent work in coordinating this trip.
When the Council discussed the issue of
Afghanistan in March, I emphasized the need for the
further Afghanization of efforts to address issues in the
country. At the London Conference, the Afghan
Government made a commitment to enhancing its own
efforts towards Afghanization. The international
community agreed to back such efforts.
We seem to have been on the right track so far.
Efforts on the Afghan side have been moving in this
direction in such areas as advancing reconciliation and
integration, preparing for elections, ensuring aid
coherence and harmonization. Significant progress is
being made in building national security capacity with
the strong support of ISAF. International backing has
been fulfilling its role. To take one example, the
Japanese Government extended for an additional six
months payroll support for salaries of all Afghan police
personnel, providing an additional $180 million for
that purpose. Through this assistance, we help improve
the capacity of the Afghan police, which is essential to
long-term security.
One of the major developments was the Peace
Jirga early this month. I congratulate the people of
Afghanistan on their constructive discussion. Now is
time to make sure that a concrete plan for
reconciliation and integration is developed based on
the wishes expressed by people at the Jirga. We support
President Karzai’s leadership in this regard.
Japan welcomes and supports Afghan principles
with regard to the reintegration programme, which is in
line with the Afghan Constitution, including women’s
and children’s rights. We are encouraged by the efforts
of the Afghan authorities to work out the details of the
reintegration programme for endorsement at the
upcoming Kabul Conference. When it is launched,
Japan is ready to support the programme financially
through the Peace and Reintegration Trust Fund and
calls on other Member States for general support.

12

Let me also express our appreciation that
UNAMA has taken an active and constructive role in
helping Afghan authorities to promote dialogue and
reconciliation, including in designing the peace and
integration programme now being worked out. We
hope that UNAMA will continue to play an important
role in the peace and integration process.
The upcoming Conference in Kabul will be a
major milestone in terms not only of its political
significance but also of its substance. From the
political perspective, it is significant to hold such a
meeting at the ministerial level on Afghan soil at a time
when we are stressing the importance of the
Afghanization of nation-building efforts. From the
substantive point of view, also, the Conference is
expected to discuss how to implement the
commitments made at the London Conference. It is
also an important opportunity to reaffirm the compact
between the Government and the people. Japan is ready
to contribute to the preparatory work, including
through discussion at the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board, in order to realize a fruitful
outcome for the conference.
It was emphasized by everybody we met in
Afghanistan that economic and social development is
crucially important for stability in the country. We
support UNAMA’s approach in emphasizing the
Afghan Government’s function in harmonizing
development aid and taking primary responsibility for
ensuring aid coherence. During the Security Council
mission, I was impressed by the strong determination
of Government leaders to take ownership of setting
priorities in each cluster of national development and
harmonizing external assistance according to
designated priorities in the project. As one of the top
donors, Japan will uphold alignment with Afghan
priorities as a key principle. We will fully take into
account the national priorities identified in the Afghan
National Development Strategy, such as rural
agriculture development, capacity and human
development, infrastructure and energy.
At the same time, as Prime Minister Kan
emphasized to President Karzai, it is essential for the
Afghan Government to lead us and to continue to take
firm steps to tackle corruption and to ensure good
governance at the national and provincial levels.
With regard to parliamentary elections, it is
essential to ensure a fair and transparent process while

10-42978

S/PV.6351

respecting Afghan ownership. The process must be
Afghan-led and supported by UNAMA and the
international community. Security is a major concern in
realizing an inclusive electoral process. We very much
appreciate Mr. De Mistura’s active engagement with
the President in agreeing to electoral guidelines and his
ongoing proactive role in support of the Independent
Electoral Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission. We hope that the election will offer
Afghan men and women a good opportunity to
participate in building a democratic country, and that
the contribution that Japan and many other Member
States are making to support this process serves their
intended goal.
President Karzai paid an official visit to Japan
from 16 to 20 June, just before the Security Council’s
visit to Afghanistan. Through a number of meetings,
Japan reaffirmed its historically strong bilateral
relationship with Afghanistan and also sent a clear
message. The Japanese side promised to support
Afghanistan’s nation-building efforts. The Afghan side
committed to making its best efforts to address the
various outstanding issues, including in combating
corruption. For the new Prime Minister of Japan,
Mr. Kan, it was the first meeting with his counterpart,
and he took the opportunity to reaffirm Japan’s
commitment to Afghanistan, as exemplified by its
assistance package of $5 billion over five years.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
men and women of UNAMA. We have seen for
ourselves the harsh conditions under which they work
and the personal sacrifices they are making. We
support and stand by UNAMA, and very much look
forward to working closely with the Mission so that the
Council can provide the best possible support of its
valuable work.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/318) and Special Representative Staffan
de Mistura for his thoughtful briefing this morning. I
would also like to welcome Ambassador Tanin back to
the Security Council. As others have said, the Security
Council’s visit to Afghanistan was timely, and I would
like to thank Ambassador Apakan for his leadership of
that mission, and also the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Council
secretariat for their organization of the trip.

10-42978

The scale of the challenge was clear to us all, as
was the importance of a united international
community supporting the Government of Afghanistan.
The Council underlined this support to President
Karzai and welcomed the strong working relationship
between his Government and the United Nations. I am
sure my colleagues around this table would agree that
UNAMA’s focus on delivering its mandate, and Staffan
de Mistura’s leadership, were impressive. We saw
United Nations staff working under the most difficult
circumstances. The United Nations continues to play a
central role in the overall international effort, and we
fully support the Special Representative’s focus on the
“three plus one priorities”: elections, reintegration and
reconciliation, and regional cooperation, as well as aid
coherence.
As the Secretary-General has reported, the
security situation is serious. We were saddened to learn
yesterday of the death of a United Nations colleague,
killed by a gunman in Kabul. We extend our
condolences to his family and to the United Nations.
The increase in attacks on civilians by insurgent
groups is of real concern. The near doubling of
incidents involving improvised explosive devices and
the high number of targeted political assassinations
threaten ordinary Afghans. International commitment
to increasing support for police training is therefore
paramount. The International Security Assistance Force
will continue to work both to protect the civilian
population from insurgents and to build up the Afghan
National Security Forces as rapidly as is feasible. As
Ambassador Rice has said, we saw an impressive
example of that training work last week in Kabul — in
that particular case, British troops empowering Afghan
trainers to train new Afghan recruits. Last weekend,
Group of Eight leaders sent a collective signal that they
want the Afghan Security Forces to assume increasing
responsibility for security within five years. In the six
months leading up to March, the Afghan National
Army grew by almost 20 per cent, with more than
17,000 joining the ranks. We will continue to work
with the Afghans to lay the foundations for the transfer
to Afghan control of security responsibility for districts
and provinces as soon as they are ready.
As the Special Representative has spelled out, we
cannot succeed in Afghanistan by pursuing only a
military strategy. That is why we support the
emergence of an Afghan-led political process that
responds to the concerns of Afghans of all

13

S/PV.6351

backgrounds, as well as of Afghanistan’s key partners.
Next month’s Kabul Conference is important. We look
to the Government of Afghanistan to present its
detailed plans and show tangible progress in
implementing the commitments made at the London
Conference. We are pleased to see the United Nations
co-chairing this event, and thereafter expect to see
further substantive progress against London and Kabul
commitments by November, one year on from
President Karzai’s inauguration. In particular, we hope
to see a clear action plan for improving governance and
tackling corruption. These are key areas of concern to
Afghans, highlighted by the participants in the
Consultative Peace Jirga earlier this month.
On reintegration and reconciliation, we hope that
the Afghan Government will launch the Afghan peace
and reintegration programme in advance of the Kabul
Conference, enabling donors to translate their pledges
into firm commitments. Following on from the
successful Consultative Peace Jirga, this will play a
key role in the development of a political track and
wider reconciliation.
Finally, we do not underestimate the challenges
that remain for the Government of Afghanistan, for the
United Nations and for the wider international
community. But the United Kingdom remains firmly
committed to the goal of a secure, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan, and we will continue to play
our full role in helping to achieve that.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
briefing on the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission (UNAMA) in Afghanistan and all his efforts to
make the Security Council’s visit to Afghanistan a
success. I would also like to thank Ambassador Apakan
for his briefing on the recent Security Council mission
to Afghanistan to learn more on the ground about the
role and support of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
and for all his preparatory work for and excellent
management of the visit.
I would like to cover the following points. We
reiterate our support for UNAMA and its activities in
support of the Afghan Government, especially in
regard to electoral support, national reconciliation,
regional cooperation and human rights. We call for a
strengthening of coordination between UNAMA and
the other international forces in Afghanistan.

14

We stress the leading role of the Afghan
Government in security, politics and the economy, and
national unity, as well as the role of the United Nations
in helping and supporting the Afghan people to take
gradual control of their own destiny and of the
sovereignty and independence of Afghanistan. We have
concerns about the lack of improvement in the security
situation and the increase in attacks on civilian targets
and international forces.
We condemn the terrorist operations that have
taken place in Afghanistan and emphasize the links that
exist between security and development, as well as the
need to address the root causes of conflict there
through the political process. Military and security
forces alone cannot achieve a settlement. Illicit drug
cultivation and trade must also be combated, since they
are linked to the financing of terrorist activities.
We welcome the Afghan Government’s
determination to further national reconciliation and
reintegration, as well as its organization of the
Consultative Peace Jirga from 2 to 4 June, in which
hundreds of delegates participated, representing many
categories of Afghan society. A draft outcome
document
entitled
“Peace
and
reintegration
programme” was released, but we still stress the need
to pursue efforts towards reconciliation after that
meeting and to work closely on organizing more
inclusive and representative efforts covering all Afghan
political forces. This naturally calls for a new vision
and an innovative approach, as Mr. De Mistura stressed
in his briefing.
We support the efforts of the Afghan Government
and its institutions regarding preparations for the
elections scheduled for 18 September. We hope that
these will be more transparent and fair than the last
round of presidential elections. We are reassured by the
information in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/318) on the active work of the Independent
Electoral Commission and on the Commission’s fully
independent nature. However, we believe it essential to
introduce improvements and additional amendments to
the electoral law that are inclusive and long-term, and
to make the most of the assistance provided by the
United Nations in this area.
Finally, we note the importance of uniting
international and regional efforts to help Afghanistan
achieve stability and prosperity. There are close links
between the situation in Afghanistan and the wider

10-42978

S/PV.6351

region, of course, and peace in Afghanistan will help
promote the interests of all neighbouring States. In this
context, we support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to promote
regional cooperation, and we hope that the upcoming
Kabul Conference on 20 July will be fully successful,
putting Afghanistan firmly on the path towards peace
and security.

especially in complex suicide attacks and incidents
involving improvised explosive devices, remains a
cause of concern. Curbing the upward trend in violence
is key. Improving the capacity of the Afghan national
and sub-national authorities to provide not only
security but also governance and development to the
affected populations can certainly contribute to that
end.

In conclusion, through Ambassador Tanin, I wish
to thank the Afghan Government for its hospitality and
all of the facilities they put at the disposal of the
Security Council’s visit.

We note with appreciation that the efforts of the
international forces to reduce civilian casualties
continue to bear fruit. These are steps in the right
direction that must continue, including with regard to
escalation-of-forces incidents and practices, such as
night raids, that deeply affect the sensitivities of the
Afghan people.

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to join others in
thanking Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Ambassador
Ertuğrul Apakan for their briefings, respectively, on the
latest report of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
(S/2010/318) and on the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan. We sincerely appreciate Ambassador
Apakan’s able leadership. We commend Mr. De Mistura
for the admirable work he has carried out in a very short
time and under challenging circumstances.
I also thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his
remarks and, through him, the Afghan Government and
people for the hospitality extended to the Security
Council delegation. The Secretary-General’s report and
the first-hand comments gathered from Afghan
interlocutors last week highlight the progress made
since the London Conference, as well as the challenges
still ahead in building a peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan. Today I would like to address some of
these challenges, namely, security, reconciliation and
reintegration, regional cooperation, elections and aid
coherence.
On the security side, the progress in the force
generation and training of the Afghan National
Security Forces — slightly ahead of the interim targets
spelled out in London — is encouraging. The level of
coordination of Afghan and international security
forces that the Security Council mission witnessed both
in Kabul and in Jalalabad is also to be commended. In
order to promote a sustainable and successful transition
to full Afghan responsibility, the international
community should further enhance the quality of the
training of the Afghan forces and provide them with all
the necessary equipment and enablers in a timely
manner.
Despite the progress made towards fulfilling the
London commitments, the significant rise in insecurity,

10-42978

The armed opposition continues to be responsible
for the largest majority of civilian casualties, including
those of United Nations staff. Perpetrators should be
stopped. We strongly condemn the most recent attack
on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We are saddened by the loss
of another United Nations staff member in an attack in
the streets of Kabul yesterday. We reiterate our support
for the efforts of the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to enhance
Mission staff security.
The Consultative Peace Jirga resulted in strong
support and several recommendations from the Afghan
people for an Afghan-led reconciliation and
reintegration process. It is clear that the Afghan
conflict cannot be solved by military means alone and
that most low- and middle-ranking insurgents can be
reintegrated.
At the same time, as the Council delegation could
see first-hand, there are divergent views as to when,
how and with whom to pursue reconciliation talks. We
believe that President Karzai laid out important criteria
in his inauguration speech. Peace should not come at
the expense of either the fundamental rights of Afghan
women and men or accountability for egregious
crimes.
Afghanistan’s long-term stability and prosperity
depend as much on internal reconciliation as on
regional cooperation underpinned by mutual respect
and non-interference in internal affairs. Brazil is
encouraged by the several trilateral and regional
initiatives to that end. In this context, we welcome the
launching of the Kabul Silk Road initiative.

15

S/PV.6351

The Security Council mission to Afghanistan
coincided with the beginning of the official launching
of the campaign for the Wolesi Jirga. We welcome the
adoption of the implementation guidelines for the
electoral process. Those guidelines reinvigorated
electoral institutions and led to a number of women
candidates that was even higher than in 2005.
Provincial electoral complaints commissions are being
set up in order to respond more swiftly to possible
irregularities. Such measures help us to draw practical
lessons from the 2009 polls. Ensuring the security of
the campaign and the polling is now crucial, as was
emphasized by Mr. De Mistura. We call on the Afghan
National Security Forces and the International Security
Assistance Force to redouble their efforts in this
regard.
On aid coherence, the Secretary-General’s report
once again notes significant progress in prioritizing the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy and in
improving the financial and managerial capacity to
implement it. The development cluster system, in
particular, is exceeding the initial expectations of the
London Conference. The donor community should
match these achievements with comparable progress in
its commitments to channeling aid through the Afghan
budget. Donors should do their best to realign their
assistance behind Afghan-led priorities and projects
and improved transparency on off-budget aid. The
attachment to national ownership and mutual
accountability must be measured in deeds.
The very initiative of holding the Kabul
Conference, the first international meeting on
Afghanistan to be held in Afghan territory, sends a
strong message of increasing ownership by the Afghan
Government and its people of their future. The
Conference is being envisaged as a contract between
the Afghan Government and its people that the
international community will be called on to support.
The international community has a fundamental role to
play in assisting the Afghans, whose stability and
prosperity are linked to those of its neighbours, near
neighbours and allies. We should all remain steadfast
in our long-term commitment to Afghan stability.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I, too, would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for the clarity of
his introduction of the Secretary-General’s report

16

(S/2010/318) on developments in the situation in that
country. I would also like to congratulate him on his
commitment to promoting stability and peace in
Afghanistan despite an especially difficult security and
political context. Finally, I would like to thank
Ambassador Apakan for his outstanding leadership
during the mission and the briefing that he just
delivered, which my delegation fully endorses.
The presentations we have just heard provide us
with a clearer understanding of the current situation in
Afghanistan and prompt my delegation to speak to the
three following points: security concerns, the evolution
of the political process and future prospects.
My delegation remains deeply concerned by the
fresh wave of violence against the civilian population,
UNAMA and NATO personnel and humanitarian
workers in Afghanistan. In this regard, we welcome the
plan currently being formulated to transfer some
support functions from UNAMA to Kuwait in order to
reduce its overall personnel numbers in Afghanistan
without compromising the implementation of its
mandate.
Concerning the security of United Nations staff,
the Security Council should seize the opportunity
presented by the upcoming debate on the protection of
civilians to include this specific case in its
consideration of the topic.
Despite the alarming security situation, it
behooves us to pay tribute to the efforts of the Afghan
Government, with the support of NATO, in the field of
security sector reform, and in particular in training
military personnel and civilian police. These actions
are part and parcel of Afghanistan’s National
Development Strategy adopted at the London
Conference of January 2010 and support the political
process under way in the country.
The implementation of priorities identified at the
London Conference — in particular the return of
refugees, national reconciliation, the organization of
legislative elections and the strengthening of regional
cooperation — are all essential to leading the country’s
peace and development process to a successful
conclusion. The Kabul Conference of 20 July will
afford the Government an opportunity to present a
national development plan focused on security,
economic and social governance. The meeting will
afford the people of Afghanistan an opportunity to take
ownership of the peace process.

10-42978

S/PV.6351

On the elections scheduled for September, my
delegation welcomes the democratization of the
mechanisms tasked with organizing the legislative
elections,
namely,
the
Independent
Electoral
Commission
and
the
Electoral
Complaints
Commission. These reforms, which contribute to
ensuring transparent elections and credible results,
enjoy the significant assistance of UNAMA and the
international community. The national reconstruction
strategy will be effective only if it is accompanied by
ongoing constructive dialogue among Afghanistan and
countries of the region.

the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAMA for their excellent organization of last week’s
Security Council mission. I believe, like others, that we
had a very productive visit, which has helped us to
enhance our understanding of the situation in
Afghanistan and of the extremely difficult
circumstances under which the United Nations is
operating. The lack of improvement in the security
situation and ongoing reports of recent events —
targeted attacks by the Taliban on the civilian
population and on United Nations staff members — are
of great concern to us.

Regional cooperation is indeed crucial in the
context of security, development and the fight against
narcotics trafficking. A military strategy alone will
never suffice to resolve the Afghanistan issue. The
international community must invest itself more in
favour of the political process already under way with
a focus, inter alia, on inclusive political dialogue. We
therefore support the strategy being implemented by
NATO’s International Security Assistance Force which
takes security, political and development aspects into
account in its operations.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later in this debate by the European Union
delegation on behalf of the European Union. In
addition, Austria wishes to make the following points.

Gabon, which participated in the Security
Council’s recent mission as a member of this body,
welcomes the fact that the mission gave the
international community an opportunity to reiterate its
solidarity with the people of Afghanistan, as well as its
resolve to backing the Government of Afghanistan and
its people in their efforts for peace and reconstruction
in their country.
Finally, I cannot conclude without reiterating to
UNAMA, Mr. De Mistura’s team and the Government
of President Karzai our gratitude for having hosted and
welcomed the mission during its visit to Afghanistan.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I wish to join other
speakers in welcoming the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, to the
Security Council. I think I can say that we were all
impressed by and grateful for the leadership he is
showing in Afghanistan as head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
listened with great interest to his briefing and to the
statement of the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir Tanin, whom I also
welcome at this table.
Let me also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Apakan for his leadership and his team,

10-42978

We appreciate the work undertaken by the Afghan
Government to advance a political solution to the longstanding conflict by way of the development of a peace
and reintegration programme and the holding of the
Consultative Peace Jirga earlier this month. We
welcome
the
significant
efforts
to
include
representation from a wide spectrum of Afghan society
in the Jirga. Looking ahead, it will be vital to ensure
that all relevant sectors of society are fully involved in
the next steps, such as the implementation of the peace
and reintegration programme and the establishment of
a national high-level peace council. UNAMA should
continue to support the Afghan-led reconciliation and
reintegration process.
We would be interested in receiving more
detailed information in the next report of the SecretaryGeneral on how Afghanistan’s ethnic communities and
the women of Afghanistan are included in the planning
and implementation of relevant programmes, including
with a view to the implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1889 (2009).
We also note that, according to the final
communiqué of the Peace Jirga, the people of
Afghanistan demand a just peace that can guarantee the
rights of all its citizens, including women and children.
The Jirga further urged that the law be applied equally
to all citizens of the country. It is clear that sustainable
peace in Afghanistan will be achieved only if justice is
served in tandem with a political solution ensuring
accountability for serious crimes of the past. Hence,
the Afghan national action plan for peace, justice and
reconciliation — approved by the Afghan Government

17

S/PV.6351

in 2005 and endorsed by the London Compact in
2006 — should be fully respected in the reintegration
and reconciliation process. From our point of view, the
amnesty law that came into force at the end of 2009 is
not in line with the demands of the Peace Jirga or with
international law and should therefore be repealed.
We are also aware that the Peace Jirga called for
the removal of the names of the Afghan opposition
from the list established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). During the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan, our Afghan interlocutors expressed keen
interest in the issue of de-listing. In my capacity as
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, I had a chance to meet with interlocutors on
the subject, and I am grateful to UNAMA for
facilitating these contacts.
I explained that the review of the 1267 sanctions
list is an ongoing process based on resolution 1822
(2008), that it is conducted on a case-by-case basis and
is not, as such, linked to current developments. I also
indicated that, with regard to possible de-listings of
Taliban-related individuals, the Committee would be
guided by the following principles: individuals should
convincingly renounce violence, lay down arms, break
ties with Al-Qaida and fully respect the Afghan
Constitution. I note with satisfaction that these criteria
square fully with those mentioned by Ambassador
Tanin, earlier in this debate.
In recent months we have been working actively
with the Afghan authorities to obtain relevant
additional data on listed individuals. I encourage the
Afghan authorities to urgently provide to the
Committee the information required to conclude the
review successfully by the extended deadline of
31 July. Let me make this absolutely clear — if this
information is to be taken into consideration in the
course of the ongoing review, receiving it must be a
matter not of weeks, but of days. As I said, I encourage
the Afghan authorities to move along these lines. We
look forward to continued cooperation with the
Government of Afghanistan and UNAMA in the full
implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1822
(2008) and 1904 (2009).
Let me now turn to the preparations for the
September legislative elections. We appreciate the
successful efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to facilitate a solution regarding the

18

status of the electoral law and commend the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission for their ongoing work,
including the successful conclusion of the registration
phase. The high number of female candidates is a
remarkable and positive development. All efforts must
be undertaken to ensure their security. Beyond the
upcoming elections, we fully agree with the assessment
that a more comprehensive and long-term electoral
reform is necessary.
Let me also mention that Austria welcomes the
recent instruction by the Afghan Ministry of Education
that, in view of the threat by the Taliban, schools
should no longer be used as polling stations in
elections. We therefore hope that the Afghan
authorities will do their utmost to act in accordance
with that commitment and where, or if, possible extend
it to health facilities. I say that because using schools
as polling stations in past elections not only led to a
marked increase in attacks on schools, but also
unfortunately resulted in a lasting decrease in the
school enrolment rate.
Let me also say in more general terms that youth
make up more than half of the population of
Afghanistan and constitute its most valuable resource.
In that context, we are also grateful to UNAMA for the
efforts that it has already undertaken to strengthen its
child protection capacity. We hope that such efforts
will be continued.
Finally, Austria looks forward to the Kabul
Conference, co-chaired by the Afghan Government and
the United Nations. Effective transition to greater
Afghan control over security, governance and
development, based on a renewed commitment by the
Afghan Government to its people, must be the common
objective. It will be critical to long-term success that
all those initiatives be firmly based on the principles of
good governance, the rule of law and respect for
human rights. That will make it easier for donors to
give their support to Afghan-owned national priority
programmes. Austria stands ready to continue to
support Afghanistan on its way to a more secure and
prosperous future.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of the European Union.
We would like thank Special Representative
de Mistura, for his work. We listened with interest to

10-42978

S/PV.6351

his briefing. Under his leadership, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
made a fresh start and has contributed to a constructive
dialogue between the Government and the international
community. We support the priorities that it has
developed in its three-plus-one approach, which is in
line with the mandate bestowed by resolution 1917
(2010). The refocusing of his work on political good
offices, the preparation of the elections, support for the
reconciliation process and regional cooperation should
be
continued,
while
maintaining
UNAMA’s
commitment to coordinating international assistance by
working to that end with the Afghan Government and
the special representative of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). In a word, we give our fullest
support to the work of the Special Representative.
Here, I would also of course like to pay tribute to
the men and women of UNAMA, who assist the
Afghan people in difficult conditions, as we know.
Their safety must be a priority. To that tribute I would
like to add a word of remembrance for the sacrifice of
our soldiers, who contribute to the same goal.
This meeting of the Security Council takes on
particular significance in the light of the holding of the
Peace Jirga in May, the preparations for the upcoming
Kabul Conference and the prospect of legislative
elections in September. It also takes place at a time
when major counterinsurgency operations are taking
place in the field.
The Security Council visit was an opportunity to
reiterate the commitment of the international
community to Afghans in their fight to establish the
rule of law, ensure economic development and combat
terrorism. The visit also made it possible to better see
the main challenges in stabilizing the country. It
strengthened our belief that success in Afghanistan
depends on a political strategy that incorporates the
civil and security spheres.
The military aspect is related to the efforts
currently being made by ISAF, whether on the ground
or to train the Afghan army and police. The offensive
under way was necessary. It must make our enemies
understand that negotiation is the only solution.
However, the security aspect is also political.
The Afghan Government’s policy of national
reconciliation and integration is a positive element.
That policy should clearly be led by the Afghans, but
the United Nations must remain vigilant with respect to

10-42978

the conditions established by the Afghan authorities
themselves and sanctioned by the Security Council,
namely, the renunciation of violence, the breaking of
links with Al-Qaida and international terrorism, respect
for the constitution and the protection of human rights
and women’s rights.
However, if necessary, the role of the United
Nations should be more than that of an arbiter. We trust
the Special Representative to help, if necessary, to
launch negotiations. Today, we must build policy.
There will be no reintegration without reconciliation.
There will be no reconciliation without political
agreement. And it is that political agreement that we
must aim for.
With regard to this meeting, we have noted the
call by the Jirga and the authorities for a new review of
the list held to date by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We support
updating the list so as to strengthen the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime. To that end, we count on the
cooperation of the Afghan authorities to provide us
with information on the people whose removal from
the list is requested.
Reconciliation, reintegration and political
agreement will only be a reality if they are grounded in
improved governance and the fight against corruption
in order to meet the expectations of the population,
who only too often support the insurgents because they
are disappointed by their own Administration.
There is still a long way to go, but we welcomed
as very positive the reform programme presented by
President Karzai in his inaugural speech. His
commitments should now be made more specific in
anticipation of the Kabul Conference, and then
implemented without delay. Lastly, we attach great
importance to the organization of the legislative
elections in September. There too, we trust that our
Special Representative will help us avoid another
failure like the presidential elections.
The Afghan crisis — I am not the first to say it —
cannot be approached independently of the situation in
the region, in particular in Pakistan. The United
Nations is well placed to bring together all regional
actors around the common objective of stabilizing the
region. We therefore follow with great interest the
Special Representative’s Silk Road initiative.

19

S/PV.6351

In conclusion, I would like to recall a crucial
point. The transition we want to set in motion in
Afghanistan will not signal withdrawal by the
international community, much less abandonment. In
any case, as the President of the French Republic has
recalled on many occasions, France will remain
committed for as long as necessary and as long as the
Afghans wish.
Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Staffan de Mistura back to the Council and to
thank him for his first comprehensive briefing since
assuming office as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan. My thanks also go
to Ambassador Apakan for his report on, and
leadership of, the Council’s mission to Afghanistan, as
well as to Ambassador Tanin for his statement this
morning.
We condemn the attack yesterday by unidentified
gunmen on a United Nations vehicle, which resulted in
the death of one staff member in Kabul. We convey our
condolences to the victim’s family and to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
It is clear that the recurring incidence of attacks,
explosions of improvised explosive devices and suicide
bombs against the civilian population has failed to
achieve its goal of derailing the relative peace and
stability achieved so far. Such desperate measures by
the insurgents, avowed enemies of peace, could not
deter the participation of over 1,600 delegates,
including 300 women, in the Consultative Peace Jirga,
held three weeks ago.
Our debate today is of particular significance
because it draws on the assessment of the Council’s
timely and, one must admit, successful mission to
Afghanistan, which ended only a few days ago. The
engagement of the Council, through its mission, with a
widespread group of Afghan stakeholders, afforded us
the opportunity to listen to the Afghan people directly
and learn lessons on the ground, and also demonstrated
the support of the United Nations for the Government
and people of the country. We commend the courage
and resilience of people who not only risk their lives
under difficult security circumstances, but also send a
loud message to the enemies of peace by participating
in large numbers in high-profile activities.
With regard to the political and electoral process,
the year 2010 is a significant watershed. The legislative
elections slated for September should serve to

20

consolidate the peace process. We feel that the
elections should avoid the pitfalls of the 2009
presidential elections and be conducted in a free, fair
and transparent manner. The three security ministries
responsible for vetting candidates and submitting
results to the Independent Electoral Commission and
the Electoral Complaints Commission should take
every step to preserve the credibility and integrity of
the electoral process. We acknowledge the enormous
scale of the electoral challenges in Afghanistan. While
reforms may take a while to yield the desired results, it
is necessary to underscore the need for Afghanistan’s
electoral process to garner public confidence and
acceptance.
The commendable contribution of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, under the
able leadership of Mr. De Mistura, should be sustained
and intensified. In particular, UNAMA should continue
to support the Electoral Commission, especially in its
efforts to strengthen national capacity and to build
mutual confidence and security during the electoral
period.
There is also a need for concerted efforts to
support the national security forces in their
determination to counterbalance insurgency attacks.
The successes recorded in the London Conference and
the recent Peace Jirga should serve as impetus for the
forthcoming Kabul Conference in July 2010, and thus
contribute to the consolidation of dialogue,
reconciliation, peace and reintegration programmes in
Afghanistan. We urge the Afghan Government to seize
the momentum of the Conference to rekindle its
commitment to tackling the priorities on its agenda,
such as stamping out corruption and promoting justice
and the rule of law. But we acknowledge also that the
best efforts of Afghanistan would not achieve lasting
peace without effective and sustained regional support.
Therefore, we urge regional actors, especially those
with leverage, to remain steadfast in their peace
initiatives in the country.
We welcome the important role of the United
Nations in supporting and coordinating international
efforts to strengthen Afghanistan’s capacity to
coordinate aid, formulate its own development
priorities and receive and disburse funds to finance its
needs. The transition to Afghanistan’s assumption of
greater responsibility for its own security and
development, as endorsed at the London Conference,
cannot be overemphasized. We hope that the Council

10-42978

S/PV.6351

will respond to the concerns raised at the Consultative
Peace Jirga regarding the removal of Afghan
opposition names from the sanctions list established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) — a point that was
made by Ambassador Mayr-Harting this morning. We
note that those de-listed should meet the criteria laid
down, including denouncing violence, recognizing the
Government and Constitution of Afghanistan, and
breaking their links to and affiliations with Al-Qaida
and other terrorist groups. Indeed, the sanctions
Committee has only recently completed the review of
all the Taliban names, involving more than 300 persons
on the consolidated list, and made appropriate
recommendations. In January, the Committee de-listed
five men who had held senior positions within the
Taliban regime. This action points to the fact that the
Committee is responsive and willing to contribute to
the efforts to create an environment that is conducive
to peace and development in Afghanistan.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Afghanistan.
I also thank Ambassador Apakan, who provided
effective leadership during the visit, for his report on
the recent Security Council mission to Afghanistan. I
also thank Ambassador Tanin for his briefing.
We note from the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/318) that, in spite of the strong efforts of the
Afghan Government and the international community,
the overall security situation in the country remains
serious. We are concerned that the number of security
incidents increased significantly during the reporting
period. As members of the Council know, yesterday a
United Nations vehicle was shot at in Kabul, resulting
in the unfortunate death of one staff member. We
convey our condolences to the bereaved and the United
Nations families.
Insecurity remains a great constraint to efforts to
achieve peace and development in Afghanistan. This
has remained an obstacle to the progress which the
Afghan Government and people are striving for. We
note, however, that, in spite of the volatile security
environment, the Afghan Government has continued to
forge ahead with the implementation of national
programmes that are critical to the achievement of
peace and development in the country, and we
commend it for that.

10-42978

We would like to stress the importance for the
Government to reach out to all Afghans in the quest for
peace and stability in the country. In this regard, we
welcome the hosting of the Consultative Peace Jirga by
the Afghan Government early this month. This
nationally driven effort is critical to the achievement of
peace and stability in the country. We look forward to
the effective implementation of the outcome of the
national Peace Jirga.
Despite some concerns, we are encouraged by the
progress being made in preparation for the September
legislative elections. In particular, we welcome the
successful registration process conducted by the
Independent Electoral Commission. The significant
increase in the number of female candidates will
enhance the participation of Afghan women in nationbuilding. We also welcome the progress that the
Afghan Government and people are making by
increasingly assuming leadership and responsibility for
the development process. This is a sure way to build
sustainable peace and development in the country. In
order to give effective support, we call on development
partners and the international community to align their
support with the priorities and programmes of the
Afghan Government.
We support the four priority areas that UNAMA
has identified for United Nations assistance to the
Government and people of Afghanistan, namely,
support for elections, reconciliation and reintegration,
regional cooperation and aid coherence. They will
facilitate laying the foundations for sustainable peace
and development. Emphasis on these areas would
support efforts in other areas of development.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore the close
linkage between stability, security and development in
Afghanistan and the region as a whole. A coordinated
approach at the regional level and enhanced
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours
are also essential, especially in the fight against
insurgency and the trade in narcotics. In this regard, we
commend UNAMA for its support to regional
initiatives that contribute to regional stability.
Finally, we highly commend Mr. De Mistura and
his UNAMA team for their good work under very
challenging conditions.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General De Mistura for his comprehensive

21

S/PV.6351

analysis of the situation in Afghanistan and for the
work undertaken by him and the Mission he leads. We
also thank the Permanent Representative of Turkey,
Mr. Apakan, for his detailed briefing on the Security
Council mission to Afghanistan and for his outstanding
leadership. We further thank the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their effective
assistance to the Security Council mission.
We support the efforts of the leadership of
UNAMA to constructively assist an Afghan settlement
in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the
Security Council. We believe that the main result of
international efforts in Afghanistan should be the
consistent achievement by the Afghan authorities of
sovereignty over the country’s security and economic
development and a phased assumption of its principal
responsibility in these areas, including security, with
the assistance of the international community and
under the central coordinating role of the United
Nations.
It is in that context that we view the series of
forthcoming events, including the international Kabul
Conference and the parliamentary elections scheduled
for September, which must promote the further
building of a democratic Afghanistan and effective
State institutions. We also support the processes of
political settlement and national reconciliation in
Afghanistan provided that they do not run counter to
the interests of long-term stability and corresponding
Security Council efforts.
Dialogue is possible only with those who have
laid down their weapons, recognized the Constitution
of Afghanistan and genuinely severed all ties with AlQaida and other terrorist structures. We believe in the
necessity of strict compliance with and the further
enhancement of the effectiveness of the sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. It is a true
counter-terrorism instrument in the hands of the United
Nations and the international community. It is of
fundamental importance that the aforementioned
fundamental principles guide Afghanistan’s leadership
and UNAMA in assisting a political settlement in
Afghanistan.
We continue to harbour serious concerns
regarding the security situation in Afghanistan. Of
heightened concern in that respect is the growing
negative trend in the northern regions of the country,

22

which have been relatively calm until recently, where
Taliban and other extremist incursions are on the
increase. We share the United Nations alarm at the
number of civilian casualties caused by the terrorist
activities of Al-Qaida and the Taliban. At the same
time, it remains urgent to ensure that the operations
undertaken by the international military presence in
Afghanistan be more targeted.
The Russian Federation is deeply concerned by
the situation in Afghanistan in the field of the
production and illicit traffic in narcotics, which have
evolved into a real threat not only to regional but also
international peace and security. We believe that such a
description of these challenges should be incorporated
into future Security Council decisions on Afghanistan.
Combating this phenomenon, which is directly link to
the spread of extremism and terrorism, requires a
comprehensive and systemic approach combining the
ongoing use of force, including in the eradication of
drug crops, and solving the social problems of Afghan
society, which would involve the elimination of
poverty, a transition to the cultivation of alternative
agricultural crops, and the fight against corruption.
It is clear to us that, given the scale of the Afghan
drug threat, the efforts of the Afghan Government
alone will be insufficient. There is a need for joint
action by the international community under United
Nations auspices and with the active participation of all
interested States and international and regional
organizations, including NATO, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
would be
Organization. These objectives
furthered by the forging of a broad counter-narcotics
coalition, with the involvement, beyond the
aforementioned structures, of civil society institutions.
We expect the contingents of NATO State members in
Afghanistan to cooperate even more actively on this
issue with the Afghan Government. More energetic
action is also needed to suppress the trade in
precursors, without which heroin cannot be
manufactured.
As a reliable partner to Afghanistan, the Russian
Federation is convinced that, through joint efforts
under the lead role of the Government of Afghanistan,
we will achieve a robust political settlement in that
country. Afghanistan’s future must be determined by
Afghans themselves. The Russian Federation will
continue to strengthen its cooperation with Afghanistan
and a broad range of international partners for the

10-42978

S/PV.6351

successful post-conflict reconstruction of that country
and the establishment of a viable State structure,
including police and counter-narcotics bodies.

the adoption of the framework for an intra-Afghan
dialogue and give confidence in further discussions on
how to reach a sustainable peace process.

Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let
me first thank the Secretary-General for his detailed
report on the latest developments in Afghanistan and
the United Nations activities in the country
(S/2010/318). I would like to welcome Special
Representative Mr. Staffan de Mistura and to express
our gratitude for his comprehensive briefing.
Furthermore, we would like to express our appreciation
to Mr. De Mistura and his team for having organized a
very successful visit of the Security Council’s members
to Afghanistan.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned by
the security situation in the country. During the
reporting period, the number of victims considerably
increased, particularly among civilians and children.
The sad number of 332 children killed or maimed
during the past three months is terrifying testimony to
the reality in which Afghan children live. We therefore
call upon all sides to the armed conflict in Afghanistan
to take all possible measures to preserve the lives of
children and civilians.

Our thanks also go to Ambassador Apakan and
the Turkish Mission for their leadership during our
visit. Our gratitude also goes to the Afghan
Government and Ambassador Tanin personally. I would
like to take this opportunity, if I may, to thank the
Secretariat and its team, which was of great help
during our trip.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully aware that the
forthcoming September parliamentary elections led by
the Government of Afghanistan are of crucial
importance to the future political and security
development of the country. In that context, we
commend the leading and efficient role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in providing the coordination of international technical
and logistical support to the electoral process. We are
particularly encouraged by the successful work of the
Independent Electoral Commission in candidate
registration for the election and by the valuable
contribution of the Electoral Complaints Commission
to those efforts. These achievements give us hope that
Afghanistan will succeed in building up the necessary
State infrastructure to guarantee the development of a
democratic society based on the rule of law and human
rights, in particular women’s and children’s rights.
We commend the realization of the advanced
draft of the peace and reintegration programme and the
successful organization of the Consultative Peace Jirga
hosted by the Afghan Government. We also take
positive note of the preparations for the 20 July Kabul
Conference and we look forward to seeing concrete
outcomes, in particular the Afghan-led plan for
improving development, governance and security. We
believe that these steps can facilitate efforts towards

10-42978

We recognize the important work of UNAMA in
providing advice on the drafting of the national threat
assessment, as well as its assistance in the development
of the Ministry of Interior’s National Police Strategy
and the National Police Plan.
We also want to emphasize the importance of the
existing good cooperation between the International
Security Assistance Force, NATO and UNAMA. We
hope that practice will be continued in the future.
Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that regional
cooperation is indeed of critical importance to
achieving a climate of security in the country.
Therefore, we highly commend the efforts of the
Special Representative and the Afghan Government
aimed at promoting and developing relations between
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, in particular
Pakistan and Iran.
In addition, we believe that
Afghan-led reconciliation and reintegration processes
are also crucial for sustainable peace and stability in
the country. For that reason, we welcome UNAMA’s
contribution in that area, in particular its technical
support to the preparations of the Consultative Peace
Jirga, as well as in providing advice on the design of
the Afghan Government’s programme for peace and
reintegration.
In the area of governance and justice, we take
positive note of UNAMA’s continuing work with
justice institutions and the donor community on reform
in the context of the National Justice Sector Strategy.
An efficient justice system is one of the preconditions
for lasting peace and security.
Afghanistan still has enormous humanitarian
needs. The remarkable efforts made by UNAMA to
respond to the difficult humanitarian situation of

23

S/PV.6351

thousands of displaced persons and families in
Helmand province deserve great commendation. More
generally, in our opinion, UNAMA’s role in overall aid
coherence is also an important contribution to the longterm development strategy for Afghanistan.
Assisting the Afghan Government in identifying
priorities and indicating to donors where gaps and aid
duplication exist are among the most essential elements
for the better effectiveness of the entire international
effort to provide aid support. In that context, we
welcome in particular the Afghan Government’s
progress in establishing four development clusters
intended to support economic growth and job creation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina supports all efforts
aimed at the return of refugees. We are especially
encouraged by the return of 48,000 Afghan refugees
from Pakistan through the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees programme. We sincerely
hope that this trend will continue when it comes to the
2.7 million registered Afghans in Pakistan and Iran.
The international community should take the leading
role in creating conditions for their sustainable return.
In that regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that
UNAMA can also contribute to that goal, in concert
with the Afghan Government.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina is particularly
sensitive to the issue of mines in Afghanistan. As many
observers in the field have reported, children, and
especially young boys, are the most frequent victims of
mines in Afghanistan. Mine clearance is a long-term
process. Providing mine-risk education to the
population, with particular focus on children, is
essential to the prevention of mine incidents. We
therefore commend the United Nations support for the
Mine Action Coordination Centre of Afghanistan and
its activities in the field.
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina would
like to express its full support for UNAMA and its
entire staff for their efforts. We would also like to
express our support for their request for further
arrangements to enable UNAMA to address the
recruitment of badly needed staff to fulfil the Mission’s
mandate.
I would also like to extend our condolences to the
family of the victim of yesterday’s attack and to
UNAMA staff.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of Mexico.
We, too, are grateful to Staffan de Mistura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his introduction of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/318) and for his resolve in
carrying out his responsibilities. We also express our
gratitude for the statement delivered by Ambassador
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, as
well as for the hospitality and cooperation of his
Government during our recent stay in his country. We
also wish to commend the leadership of Ambassador
Apakan, Permanent Representative of Turkey, which
made possible the success of the recent visit of the
Security Council to Afghanistan.
This debate and the recent trip of the Security
Council to Afghanistan reflect the fact that peace and
stability in that country are and must remain among the
main priorities on our agenda. During our trip, we were
able to take note of the political and military
dimensions of the conflict in Afghanistan and of the
prospects for its eventual resolution, bearing in mind
the regional context.
We agree with the report of the Secretary-General
in that, during the current transition towards greater
Afghan responsibility for the peace process, it is
important that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) focus its efforts on a host of
priority tasks to which it can bring the greatest added
value and on which it can work effectively. In that
regard, my delegation attaches the greatest importance
to the following aspects of UNAMA’s mandate.
The first is the strengthening of cooperation with
the civilian command of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and NATO with a view to
improving civilian-military coordination. The second is
support for legislative elections by providing technical
assistance and promoting the participation of society in
the elections with a view to strengthening democratic
practices and conferring legitimacy on Government
institutions. The third is the Mission’s use of its good
offices to support the implementation of reconciliation
programmes under the leadership of the Afghan
Government itself and in line with its national
priorities.
With regard to security, we regret that ongoing
incidents of violence remain the crucial factor affecting

24

10-42978

S/PV.6351

progress in Afghanistan. The development of the
country and its people is seriously affected by the
absence of a secure environment, especially for the
most vulnerable, including women and children. In that
regard, we believe it essential that, given the recent
change in its command, ISAF operations should
continue to make the protection of the Afghan
population a high priority. We emphatically condemn
violence against UNAMA personnel and regret the loss
of life among its staff.

Lastly, we trust that, during the upcoming
international conference to be held in Kabul, the
Afghan Government will adopt specific measures to
strengthen institutions and the rule of law in that
country, especially through the fight against corruption
and impunity.

In addition, we are also concerned by the high
number of children who have been injured or killed in
acts of violence associated with the conflict. We
support the executive order issued by the Ministry of
Interior on 25 April to prevent the recruitment of
children to police forces.

Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada thanks the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2010/318)
and welcomes his assessment of the situation in
Afghanistan. At the outset, I would like to join others
in expressing our deep condolences for the death of the
United Nations staff member killed yesterday.

Against that backdrop, it is a matter of priority
for the Afghan Government to gradually assume its
responsibilities in the area of security and that Afghan
forces responsible for ensuring justice have at their
disposal the human, political and financial resources
necessary to fully assume their responsibilities. To that
end, UNAMA and the Security Council will need to
continue to provide the necessary support.

The security situation indeed remains very
challenging. However, it is encouraging to see progress
in such areas as electoral reform and reintegration.
Canada also welcomes the recent Security Council
mission to Afghanistan under Turkey’s leadership. It is,
in our view, very important to maintain the Council’s
focus on Afghanistan and for Council members to be
able to meet with key interlocutors in Kabul and
elsewhere in the country.

On the issue of the fight against organized crime,
we reiterate the importance of addressing illicit drug
production and trafficking by adopting an approach
based on shared responsibility, taking into account that
this will contribute to generating mutual trust and will
promote common strategies to combat that
phenomenon in the region.
We also believe that to contribute to restoring the
confidence of the population in Afghan public
institutions, justice and accountability processes must
be implemented, focusing on vulnerable groups such as
children and ethnic and religious minorities, in order to
consolidate sustainable peace.
We welcome the holding of the Peace Jirga,
which had a high percentage of women among its
participants, and we support the peace and
reintegration programme of the Afghan Government to
promote the reintegration into society of antiGovernment elements who want to lay down their
arms, bearing in mind that, given the country’s current
circumstances, military actions must be complemented
with measures for dialogue and confidence-building in
order to counter the current cycle of violence.

10-42978

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Canada.

The
upcoming
Afghan-led
international
conference, the first of its kind in Kabul, will be an
important opportunity for the Afghan Government to
engage Afghans in the future of their country. At the
Group of Eight (G8) Summit held on 25 and 26 June in
Canada, leaders outlined their interest in seeing the
Government of Afghanistan deliver detailed plans and
show tangible progress in implementing the
commitments made at the London Conference.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Staffan de Mistura, is giving strong and
skilful leadership to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The four priorities
on which he has chosen to focus — namely, support for
the elections, reconciliation and reintegration, regional
cooperation and aid coherence — are of critical
importance and include areas of interest that were also
highlighted by the G8. The United Nations efforts to
focus on these priorities are very important.
Nonetheless, it will also be necessary not to lose sight
of other crucial areas such as humanitarian assistance
and sustained support to security transition efforts.

25

S/PV.6351

Canada recognizes UNAMA’s need to restructure
in order to ensure that its important work in
Afghanistan continues with minimal disruption,
considering the ongoing challenges such as security
threats against its staff, high vacancy rates and
operational difficulties in some areas. Given these
challenges, Canada supports the United Nations
decision to consolidate its offices. However, given the
Afghan Government’s lack of capacity at the
sub-national level, which impacts on its ability to
deliver services to Afghans where they live, the United
Nations Mission will need to seek ways to enable its
continued engagement outside Kabul.
In our view, the United Nations should continue
to coordinate the international community’s political
engagement in the context of the upcoming elections.
Canada welcomes the Afghan Government’s steps to
address some of the international community’s core
concerns, including a new Independent Electoral
Commission Chair, the inclusion of two international
commissioners
in
the
Electoral
Complaints
Commission and the clarification that a minimum level
of women’s representation in elected office remains
guaranteed under the law.
Despite these areas of progress, the upcoming
elections face continued challenges. The United
Nations support for the elections must be sufficiently
robust to allow for the resolution of key issues related
to the electoral law, while at the same time supporting
the technical delivery of the elections.
Key to stability in Afghanistan is Afghan-led
reconciliation and reintegration that reaches out to
those who renounce violence, respect the Afghan
Constitution and have no links with Al-Qaida or other
terrorist organizations. In that context, the recent Peace
Jirga was an important milestone. Canada commends
Afghan Government efforts to develop a peace and
reintegration programme. We urge the Government to
ensure that this programme and the work of the peace
council are consistent with Afghanistan’s international
legal obligations, such as the protection of human
rights, including the rights of women, victims and excombatants.
The implementation of a well-coordinated,
gradual transition of security responsibilities to Afghan
authorities is a key objective to be achieved as soon as
conditions on the ground permit. An increase in the
capability of the Afghan National Security Forces —

26

well coordinated with the Afghan Ministries of
Defence and Interior — is essential in that regard. The
anticipated
joint
Afghan-International
Security
Assistance Force transition plan to be presented at the
Kabul
Conference
should
garner
functional
capabilities, resources and regional conditions to
enable the Afghan National Security Forces to ensure
and maintain peace and stability.
Canada supports efforts to reform and build the
capacity of the Interior Ministry and, more specifically,
the separation of the Minister’s political functions from
operational police command. Canada also welcomes
the development of the National Police Strategy and
Plan and continues to encourage the finalization of
those documents. The progress made on police
recruitment is also welcome. We recognize that
improving the quality of the police force is perhaps as
important as its size.
(spoke in French)
Canada recognizes the continued role played by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in coordinating humanitarian assistance. Canada
applauds the efforts made to date by the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations to update
contingency plans to respond rapidly and effectively to
conflict-affected and displaced persons. We urge that
lessons learned be applied in Kandahar, especially in
view of the impending military operations.
The regional dimension of the situation in
Afghanistan requires momentum and attention from
Afghanistan’s neighbours, the countries of the region,
the broader international community and the United
Nations, in particular in terms of the implementation of
durable solutions for Afghan refugees and internally
displaced persons. Recent efforts to increase regional
cooperation in Kabul are encouraging. Canada
continues to support regional cooperation through
confidence-building initiatives such as the Dubai
process, which is delivering tangible progress on
Afghan and Pakistani shared border management
issues, and the G8 Afghanistan-Pakistan Border Region
Prosperity Initiative, which aims to improve regional
connectivity and dialogue.
The coming months, during which the Kabul
Conference and the parliamentary elections will take
place, will be crucial for achieving measurable success
by the Afghan Government and the international
community. It is essential at this critical juncture for

10-42978

S/PV.6351

Afghans, the Afghan Government and the international
community to continue to work together intensively to
rebuild a peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Let me join previous
speakers in welcoming Ambassador Staffan de Mistura
on the occasion of his first appearance at the Security
Council as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan. I would also like to thank him
for his briefing and his comprehensive overview of the
situation in the country. Italy looks forward to working
with him and wishes him success in his challenging
mission.
Let me also take this opportunity to express my
sincerest condolences for yesterday’s killing in Kabul
of a United Nation’s staff member, an Afghan national.
I also wish to express my appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Tanin, for his important remarks.
I would like to underline that Italy fully supports
the statement to be delivered by the head of the
delegation of the European Union. I would like to add
just a few remarks drawing on our national experience
and our significant civil and military commitment to
Afghanistan.
The Kabul Conference, which will be co-chaired
by the United Nations, will open in less than three
weeks. It will not be a pledging event; rather it will be
an opportunity for the Government of Afghanistan to
renew its commitment to its people. At the same time,
President Karzai is expected to follow up on the
commitments made at the London Conference, namely,
assuming greater responsibility in the areas of security,
governance and development.
The international community, for its part, must
continue to encourage the Afghan authorities to make
further efforts to speed up the transition process, the
fundamental pillars of which will be formally
determined at the Kabul Conference. As emphasized
previously by Special Representative de Mistura,
donors are also expected to commit to the
harmonization and alignment of aid, ensuring that
Afghan institutions achieve the highest degree of
ownership. Italy fully shares that goal and is already
channeling most of its funds through the Afghan
budget.

10-42978

We share the view that the military presence in
Afghanistan is still necessary to guarantee a stable
security framework. Strengthening international
cooperation and enhancing training and mentoring
programmes for the Afghan National Security Forces
and Police are mainstays of that effort.
The number of Italian trainers in the framework
of the NATO training mission should reach a total of
almost 600 by the end of this year. In that regard,
approximately 400 training and mentoring operatives
have already been deployed in the field, namely in
Herat province. The number will be brought to
approximately 520 by the end of this summer. We are
currently planning the deployment of a support team of
40 specialists who will train Afghan helicopter pilots at
the airbase of Shindand. We are also planning the
deployment of a group of 30 carabinieri to train Afghan
border police. In addition, the specialization training
centre of the Guardia di Finanza — the Italian financial
police — has just completed a three-week training
course for 20 officers of the Afghan customs and
border police. The initiative aims to strengthen the
border control capacity of the Afghan authorities.
The military presence, however, cannot be openended. It has to be accompanied, and then replaced, by
increased civilian cooperation. Afghanistan is not just a
security challenge; it can also be a source of economic
opportunity. For example, the western region of the
country,
including
Herat,
whose
provincial
reconstruction team is led by Italy, provides an
example of best practices at work, with the positive
cooperation in the marble and agro-industrial sectors
becoming a model of private sector development.
Boosting investment and trade in Afghanistan could, no
doubt, break the vicious cycle of poverty and
instability.
That approach must go hand in hand with
increased efforts to strengthen governance both at
national and local levels and to support anti-corruption
strategies and capacity-building programmes in the
public sector. The key to success in Afghanistan lies in
building strong and reliable institutions and in
consolidating trust between institutions and the people.
In that context, I would like to mention the support
provided by the Italian Government to the Independent
National Legal Training Centre. Thanks to this and
other similar initiatives, over 2,500 judges, prosecutors
and Afghan officials have been trained so far. Another

27

S/PV.6351

Italian initiative — a training course for Afghan
diplomats — is already being prepared.

development of the Kabul Silk Road initiative recently
launched by Special Representative de Mistura.

Provincial reconstruction teams should also play
an important role in the transition process. We
therefore support expanding the scope of teams’
intervention and giving it more of a civilian focus. At
the same time, Afghan authorities must play a more
extensive and independent role in the management of
security, governance and development.

The importance of a regional approach,
particularly in countering illicit trafficking, as
reaffirmed at the meeting of foreign ministers of the
Group of Eight held in Trieste in June 2009, as well as
in London last January, is widely recognized. Regional
programmes such as the one developed by United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in line with the
deliverables of the Paris Pact initiative and the
Rainbow Strategy indeed support participating Member
States in their response to the threat of drug trafficking
and related crimes, such as money-laundering,
smuggling in precursor chemicals and organized crime.
Our involvement must continue, and possibly increase.

Italy is now more convinced than ever that the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) should remain at the helm of the civilian
sector, ensuring coherence in international assistance.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment, as outlined in his latest report
(S/2101/318), to a continued long-term presence in
Afghanistan.
We also welcome UNAMA’s continued support
for the electoral process and appreciate Special
Representative de Mistura’s efforts, which have led to
renewed consensus following last year’s strained
presidential elections. We also commend the concrete
approach of the United Nations Development
Programme’s project on enhancing legal and electoral
capacity for tomorrow. In terms of its engagement,
content and expected goals, it seems to create the right
conditions for long-term reform of the electoral
system. We hope that the lessons learned from the 2009
elections will be taken into account so as to improve
the electoral process beyond this fall’s parliamentary
elections and build a lasting and truly democratic
electoral system.
Italy welcomes the Peace Jirga, which took place
at the beginning of this month and focused on the new
strategy for reintegrating insurgents. Italy favours that
process, provided that it is adequately balanced,
Afghan-led, inclusive and endorsed by the international
community. Italy is willing to contribute to the
financial instruments that will be set up in this context,
provided they allow for full control over the use of
resources.
Finally, with regard to regional cooperation,
which remains an indispensable part of the overall
strategy of stabilization and economic development in
Afghanistan, Italy strongly supports initiatives based
on a consensus platform open to the participation of all
the countries of the region and the international
community. We therefore look forward to the

28

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing this morning and, more generally, for his
strong leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which he has
displayed since taking office. I would also like to
express to him my condolences for the death of his
staff member, who apparently fell victim to a terrorist
attack this morning.
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the European Union.
My country enjoys a close relationship with
Afghanistan and its people. We are a major contributor
to the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
as well as of development assistance to Afghanistan. I
should like to highlight three issues that are key to any
further development in Afghanistan. They are the
Kabul Conference, the Peace Jirga and the role of
UNAMA.
The upcoming Kabul Conference will be an
important next step to review implementation and
agree on further specific implementation steps, in
particular in the field of economic and social
development. The improvement of basic services and
governance will be a focus of the Conference. At the
same time, the future of Afghanistan will depend as
much on a stable regional situation as on a genuine
domestic reform process. The relationship between
Afghanistan and Pakistan remains key to regional
stability. We therefore welcome the fact that regional

10-42978

S/PV.6351

cooperation will also be a key topic in Kabul. We
believe that emphasis on Afghan ownership and the
concept of transition of responsibility should be
guiding principles. We welcome the fact that, for the
first time, an international Afghanistan conference will
be held in the country itself.
Germany believes that reintegration and
reconciliation are cornerstones for a political solution
to further positive development in Afghanistan. The
Peace Jirga was an important first step. We should all
focus our efforts on proper implementation, which is
likely to remain a challenge. That process needs to be
Afghan-led. The international community can provide
only a supporting role. Germany is ready to work
constructively towards that.
The reconstruction process in Afghanistan has
more than one component. My country has sought a
comprehensive civilian-military approach all along. We
therefore welcome ISAF’s new strategy of focusing
counterinsurgency
operations
on
the
civilian
population, with a view to further enabling the Afghan
National Security Forces to operate and improving
governance and development.
Let me conclude by highlighting that under the
umbrella of the United Nations my country will
continue to contribute substantially to the efforts of the
international community in Afghanistan. We will
double our civilian assistance to about $550 million per
year, support the reintegration trust fund, further
strengthen our training efforts for the Afghan Security
Forces by providing 1,400 soldiers to train the army
and, in the light of a tense security situation, continue
to focus on training Afghan National Security Forces in
joint operations. We are also sending 260 police
trainers to the country to train the Afghan Police.
With the new UNAMA leadership team
appointed, the budget increase approved and the
granting of special delegation of recruitment authority
to the Mission, important parameters have been set that
pave the way for re-energizing UNAMA on the ground.
At the same time, our expectations should remain
realistic and focused on key priorities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ambassador Pedro Serrano, acting head of the
European Union delegation to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for giving the floor to the European

10-42978

Union. The candidate countries Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
Let me join others in welcoming the first briefing
by Special Representative Staffan de Mistura to the
Security Council, as well as the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2010/318). Let me also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his important statement, and
Ambassador Apakan for his presentation on the
Security Council’s recent trip to Afghanistan.
During the past few months, as mentioned by
Mr. de Mistura, the European Union (EU) has
continued its excellent cooperation with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The EU Special Representative, Mr. Ušackas, has taken
up his duties and is working closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The European
Union commends the efforts by the Afghan
Government since the last debate of the Security
Council, on 18 March, to further advance the agenda
agreed at the London Conference, particularly since
they were pursued against the background of an
increasingly deteriorating security situation that
particularly affected the civilian population.
The European Union agrees that the Peace Jirga
held in Kabul was successful and notes in particular
that participation was high and from a wide spectrum
of Afghan society, with 20 per cent of the delegates
being female. As the steps towards reconciliation and
reintegration take shape, the EU wishes to stress that
those processes should remain Afghan-led, based on
renunciation of any form of violence and in conformity
with the Constitution, as well as on Afghanistan’s
international commitments, including to human rights.
Strengthened regional cooperation also remains
essential. In that context, we welcome the renewed
diplomatic engagement between Afghanistan and
countries in the region, and look forward to the next
session of the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan.
The EU agrees that the Kabul Conference on
20 July should not be a pledging conference but an
occasion for the international community to lend
support to the Government’s renewed commitments to

29

S/PV.6351

its people. We also welcome the co-chairing of the
Conference buy the United Nations. We look forward
to the presentation of a peace and reintegration
programme and national priority programmes on
security, governance and the three development
clusters, as well as the joint Afghan-International
Security Assistance Force way forward for the
transition to Afghan security. The EU welcomes
Afghanistan’s determination to set priorities at the
Conference and supports increasing the proportion of
aid delivered through the Afghan Government.

In the European Union’s view, UNAMA is well
on track with the implementation of its refocused
mandate. Yet we note that recruitment continues to be a
matter of concern, mainly for security reasons. Against
this background, we commend the commitment of
UNAMA’s staff and would like to express our
condolences for the recent loss of one of its members.
As stated in the European Union action plan for
Afghanistan, the EU will continue its support for
UNAMA and the role of the United Nations in the
region.

Since governance, the rule of law, respect for
human rights and Afghan institution-building are also
the bases for progress in other areas, including security
and development, we strongly believe that the Kabul
Conference should give explicit political support to
achieving progress in all of these areas, including the
fight against corruption under the governance cluster.
In particular, there is a need to advance the
development of the formal justice sector and police
reform, which the European Union supports through
the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan and
its contribution to the Law and Order Trust Fund.

In closing, let me reiterate that the European
Union welcomes the Government’s intention to make a
new contract with the Afghan people, and stands ready
to lend strong support to this endeavour. The European
Union remains fully committed to a secure and
democratic future for the Afghan people.

The Kabul Conference will also provide an
opportunity to give a much higher profile to issues
such as human rights, gender equality, freedom of
expression and transitional justice. We note with
concern reports that the space for human rights
defenders has become increasingly limited, and not
only because of the deteriorating security situation.
Turning to the upcoming elections on
18 September, we commend the work done by the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission, with support from UNAMA,
to prepare for elections, building on lessons learned
from 2009. Holding credible, fair, inclusive and secure
elections, reflecting the will of the Afghan people, is in
the interests of the Afghan Government. In view of
that, we note with satisfaction that the registration of
candidates has concluded without incident and that the
number of female candidates, compared with the 2005
parliamentary elections, has significantly increased.
Ensuring adequate security will be crucial to the whole
electoral process, particularly for female candidates. As
the Secretary-General indicates in his report, we would
also like to underline the need for more comprehensive
and long-term electoral reform.

30

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): International support for
Afghanistan is taking its toll in many ways. A few days
ago, Norway lost four soldiers in action, and yesterday
we were saddened to hear of the loss of one United
Nations national staff member. The International
Security Assistance Force losses for June this year
totaled more than 100 soldiers.
It is more important than ever that we maintain
our resolve to see our effort through. Afghanization is
not a euphemism for exit and implies no quick
solution, but rather underlines the importance of an
Afghan-driven process that is responsible, inclusive
and truly national in nature, aiming at a better future
for the Afghan people. That resolve to help the Afghan
people is mandated by the Security Council and is
increasingly focused on being Afghan-led and on
prospects for a political solution. Our international
obligations are long-term but our commitments should
be guided by pragmatism and realism, thus avoiding
unrealistic benchmarks and artificial deadlines.
We welcome the first briefing by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan
de Mistura. We commend the very professional and
sound commitment he brings to the task. We also
welcome his focus on the three-plus-one priorities for
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in implementing its new mandate in a
flexible and realistic way that also reflects current
political realities.

10-42978

S/PV.6351

However, we would particularly emphasize the
importance of continued United Nations support for
advancing the human rights agenda in close
cooperation with Afghan authorities and the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission, including the
role of civil society in promoting fundamental rights
and freedoms for all Afghans in tomorrow’s
Afghanistan. The need for international civilian
support to the Afghan people is undiminished, as is the
need for constructive partnerships between Afghan
authorities and the United Nations.
It is important to protect UNAMA’s added value,
in particular its international legitimacy, political
outreach, field presence and role as international
guarantor for the integrity of the political process
leading to increased Afghan ownership. To that end, it
is vital that the vacancy rate in UNAMA is further
reduced and security for its staff properly ensured.
More flexible use of UNAMA’s critical staff is
welcomed, but should never compromise the Mission’s
ability to implement its comprehensive mandate.
The Consultative Peace Jirga, held in Kabul four
weeks, ago, also highlighted the need for reconciliation
and sustainable peace. We note in particular the
commitment to demand a just peace that guarantees the
rights of all of the country’s citizens, including women
and children. Many women in Afghanistan are
concerned about their role and rights in terms of the
outcome of the reconciliation process. Any Afghan
reconciliation process must be Afghan-led and in
conformity with the country’s Constitution. But only a
political process that can provide a political settlement
with the armed opposition without alienating groups
that support the Afghan Government will be
sustainable.
Addressing issues of transitional justice and
human rights in a context of ongoing conflict is indeed
challenging, but all Afghans need to be included in a
meaningful way and to have their rights protected in
the context of the peace process. The Afghan people
have an enormous desire and need for justice and good
governance. If that is not met, it will be further
exploited by the armed opposition. A just and durable
solution in Afghanistan must be one that brings about
better prospects for all Afghan citizens.
One of the first public achievements of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General was to
obtain the necessary guarantees for the upcoming

10-42978

parliamentary elections — particularly to secure the
seats reserved for women and ensure an international
presence in the handling of complaints. We welcome
the work done thus far by the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission
to prepare for parliamentary elections in September,
including the implementation of fraud mitigation
measures. We also welcome the independent nature of
the electoral institutions and urge them to ensure
transparency and avoid any political interference. But
we also note the shortcomings so far with regard to a
proper vetting process for candidates.
Adequate security for electoral staff and
campaigners will be a crucial task, as will the proper
staffing, in particular when it comes to female staff, of
the Independent Electoral Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission at the provincial
level. Building on lessons learned from the 2009
elections will also be crucial. We urge the Afghan
authorities to start planning for comprehensive longterm electoral reform.
The parliamentary elections will be an important
test for Afghan democracy and for the political
processes, which go together with Afghan ownership
and reconciliation. Strengthening legitimate democratic
institutions will enable an intra-Afghan dialogue to
take place and will mitigate the risk of further political
fragmentation.
The Kabul Conference in July will be the first of
its kind to take place inside the county. It will focus on
a renewed partnership between the Government and its
own people. Rather than raising high expectations for
the event, we should focus on realistic achievements
and the need to strengthen the implementation phase.
The Kabul Conference is an important step in a longer
process where Afghan authorities are determined to set
their own priorities and implement tangible national
programmes supported by the international community
under the leadership of the United Nations. Norway
looks forward to contributing to that process as a
reliable partner for a transition towards responsible
Afghan ownership.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
de Mistura’s presence here and his briefing this
morning. We also appreciate the latest quarterly report

31

S/PV.6351

of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan (S/2010/318),
the presence of Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan and
the briefings provided today on the recent Security
Council mission to Afghanistan. That level of direct
engagement in the field by the Council is very
reassuring.
The Secretary-General’s report and today’s
briefings underline some crucial and evident factors:
the need for an intelligent, hard-headed political vision
for Afghanistan’s future and a credible political process
to achieve that vision; the fact that while military
efforts alone will not resolve Afghanistan’s conflict, we
cannot lose sight of the importance of security to
making progress in other areas, such as governance,
development and human rights; the indispensability of
a credible and effective partner in the Afghan
Government itself that can provide basic services and
take action against corruption; and the obvious need to
give priority to developing Afghan capabilities in order
to transition to Afghan ownership.
Australia believes that the basic International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) strategy — which
emphasizes protecting the population, increasing and
integrating civilian activity within a truly civilianmilitary approach and focusing on building Afghan
capacity — provides a sound basis for addressing those
priorities. We look forward to working with General
Petraeus in furthering that strategy’s implementation.
Equally, of course, we look forward very much to the
results of the Kabul Conference in July, which should
be seminal for determining how Afghanistan sees its
own future.
Australia remains fully committed to doing its
part in international efforts in Afghanistan. We recently
welcomed the decision by ISAF to establish new
multinational arrangements, for instance in Uruzgan
province to replace the Netherlands lead in that
province from 1 August. Most of Australia’s troops are
in that province. We will continue to play a substantial
role in those new arrangements. We will provide a
senior civilian to head the provincial reconstruction
team as well as the core members of the civilian
elements of the team, including diplomatic and
development assistance and policing personnel.
Those new civilian enhancements will build on
our military contribution, which overall totals some
1,550 Australian defence personnel. The focus of this
effort remains on mentoring and training the Afghan

32

National Army’s fourth brigade in Uruzgan province so
that it can conduct independent security operations and
provide security for the Afghan people. Our military
personnel are also involved in providing force
protection for civilian efforts and in conducting and
supporting operations more broadly across regional
command south.
We would like to recognize and thank the
Netherlands for its achievements in Uruzgan. Australia
looks forward to working with the United States as the
future lead in the province, as well as with our other
ISAF partners, Slovakia and Singapore, to assist in
stabilizing the province. We also look forward to
continuing engagement with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
expanding civilian efforts across Afghanistan. We
strongly support UNAMA’s focus on the three-plus-one
priorities, namely, support for elections, reconciliation
and reintegration and regional cooperation and aid
coherence.
We welcome the work under way in preparation
for the September Afghan parliamentary elections. We
also note that, vitally, that process is Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led. The United Nations of course retains a
necessary and very important role in coordinating
international support for that electoral process.
As Ambassador Tanin has said today, it is
important that the Afghan Government learn from the
experience of the 2009 elections. Progress to date has
been promising, but there is of course, always, more to
be done. The Government needs to press ahead with
key electoral reforms, with a focus on strengthening
anti-fraud measures and improving the capacity of the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission. Those reforms will obviously
be critical to building a strong democratic foundation
for the elected Government.
We strongly support Afghan-led reconciliation
and reintegration. We believe that work in that area, at
both the grass-roots and the political levels, is critical
to ending the conflict, and we will contribute
$25 million to the Peace and Reintegration Trust Fund.
We greatly welcome the Afghan Government’s draft
peace and reintegration plan, and we believe that it
obviously marks an important step towards Afghan
ownership of the reintegration process.
As the Special Representative and others have
emphasized today, regional cooperation involving all

10-42978

S/PV.6351

Afghanistan’s near neighbours is vital to securing
stability in Afghanistan and regional stability,
including combating transnational issues, such as the
narcotics trade and the illegal movement of people.
UNAMA’s efforts to encourage regional countries to
cooperate in halting those activities and to support
Afghanistan in its own efforts to achieve security and
stability are very welcome.
We share the assessment of the Secretary-General
that this is a critical year for Afghanistan. There have
been setbacks and there will be more, but we are also
seeing real progress. In 2002, 9 per cent of Afghans
had access to health care; today, 65 per cent do. Afghan
women hold almost a quarter of all seats in
Afghanistan’s National Assembly, which, I should say,
is above the average of 18 per cent right across the
world when one does an aggregation. This is a stark
contrast to conditions under the oppressive Taliban
rule. The number of teachers has almost doubled since
2002 and access to education has, of course, grown
dramatically. We need to extend and intensify that
progress, but there is progress.
In conclusion, it is obviously important that the
Afghan Government and its international partners,
including Australia, remain committed to and focused,
with fortitude and resolve, to use the words of
Ambassador Tanin, on the task at hand: fighting the
insurgency, combating corruption, and improving
governance and the delivery of essential services to the
Afghan people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. We always appreciate your country’s stand on
the issue of Afghanistan and, of course, the importance
of discussing the Secretary-General’s quarterly report,
which seems to have become traditional.
I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Turkey, Ambassador Apakan, for
having led the Security Council’s mission to
Afghanistan and Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his lucid and very
fair comments earlier today. I would like to welcome
Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, who certainly brings much
experience and, for many of us, more hope for the
United Nations work in Afghanistan.

10-42978

It is the fourth decade of conflict and tragedy in
Afghanistan, and I think that the international
community must take a more retrospective look at what
is emerging there and review what it needs to do to
take us towards a better understanding and a better
tomorrow for Afghanistan. Needless to say, Pakistan
has a very vital interest in our neighbour and
developments there as a whole have in fact affected
Pakistan equally in all directions.
The latest report (S/2010/318) provides useful
information on the reintegration and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan. It outlines the complexity of
the security situation and identifies the challenges of
development and governance, as well as preparations
for the forthcoming elections. I need not emphasize
that the people of Afghanistan also greatly look
forward to the vast sea of change that should become
clearer in the next few months.
We believe that a stable Government in
Afghanistan, supported by the international community
and its own people, is in the vital interest of a peaceful
future in the region. We believe that the Consultative
Peace Jirga, which was attended by 1,600 people and
did not get much mention here today, deserves the
international
community’s
recognition
and
acknowledgement of the importance of their discourse
and
their
conclusions,
recommendations
and
suggestions. We support the Afghan-led intra-Afghan
dialogue as the singular most important symbol of
ownership of the entire process that we are discussing
around the table here today. The communiqué issued
by the Peace Jirga on formulating a national strategy
for sustainable peace is a very important document that
needs further promotion here in these halls.
To say the least, the forthcoming parliamentary
elections will, I believe, play a very important role in
what will emerge in Afghanistan. I believe that the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has a critical and key role to play at this
stage in creating the credibility that will make it
acceptable to all of us, which at this stage is so
important to so many around the world.
We know that the Afghan challenge has been
insecurity driven by insurgency and some exploitation
by drug traffickers and criminals, who abound
everywhere in the world but may be slightly more
prominent there. The Secretary-General’s report notes
no great improvement in that area, and that is

33

S/PV.6351

regrettable. However, stereotyping our disappointments
has also become regrettable. We must be more
understanding. We must try to understand from the
perspective of what works.
Here, I digress — with your kind indulgence,
Mr. President. The situation is much like a burst tyre or
a tube on a bicycle, and we seem to be busy not getting
fresh air into the tube, but in fact trying to repair the
pump that will bring in the fresh air. That always
becomes something that costs much more and creates
less of a focus and impact. Very regrettably, that is
rather what is happening. We must avoid complacency
about what we can achieve and have really achieved. I
feel that any real discernment on that ground will prove
that we have been a little too complacent.
In his previous report, the Secretary-General
noted that we must resolve to implement
“a political reform that addresses the root causes
of the insurgency, including through efforts aimed
at improving governance and an Afghan-led
political
process
to
re-establish
peace”
(S/2009/674, para. 25).
I believe that we are yet to start doing something
concrete in that direction.
The present report emphasizes that
“[d]eveloping the security sector requires an
overarching framework that includes a national
threat assessment, which is basis for Afghan
national security policy and concomitant
strategy” (S/2010/318, para. 15)
At this particular stage, I would like to say that the
normal answer to this sort of a thing is twofold. First,
let us build the capacity of the Afghan National Army
and police institutions; secondly, let us talk to the
insurgents — that is, the Taliban. I believe that, as far
as the latter is concerned, if any one should talk to the
Taliban, I must stress to this body that the people
sought out must be on a list provided by President
Karzai, who will know better whom to talk with in the
interest of Afghanistan and the international
community. As far as the Afghan National Army is
concerned, I will say here without any doubt in my
mind that, in a society that does not understand central
federal leadership as easily as we do in many other
parts of the world — and I quote now Mr. Brzezinski,
who put it so ably and is supported by Mr. Brent

34

Srowcroft — “you have to understand that regional
loyalties play an important role”.
In my own country and the country of my friend
the Ambassador of India, when regiments were raised
by the British, we very often had regional loyalties. We
had the Sikh army, the frontier forces, the Baluch army
and the Marathas; and I could go on and on. There was
a certain loyalty which came with that. It did not
impede an empire from inspiring loyalty, but it worked.
I think that should be understood here. And it will be
understood if we raise from the absolute base those
loyalties at local levels that can then create a stronger
National Army and protect and be more successful.
I would like to recognize specifically the role of
UNAMA, ably led by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura. With regard to
the resolutions for expanding its presence, they are
fine, I think. We have talked about it before; it has not
happened yet, but we hope to see it happen. One of the
greatest things I would admire Mr. De Mistura for,
because I know that it is within his capability, would
be for him to work with the confidence of President
Karzai, because it is so important at this stage for some
sort of unanimity to emerge.
With regard to the London Conference, I believe
that the implementation of Afghanistan National
Development Strategy is going to be very important.
But again, as I mentioned earlier, we must ensure that
funding reaches to all levels and that it percolates and
permeates down to those levels that can find benefit
and take substantial consolation and comfort in the fact
that the international community cares. UNAMA must
leverage this advantage to further streamline resultoriented activities, specifically in the areas of security,
development and reconstruction.
I would say that Pakistan is very committed to
strengthening
our
bilateral
relationship
with
Afghanistan. We have had two very important
declarations which, again, have not been talked about
here much but would be interesting documentation to
read and draw lessons from. They are the 2009 Joint
Declaration on Future Directions of Bilateral
Cooperation, signed by the two Presidents, and the
2010 the Joint Declaration on Next Steps in
Afghanistan-Pakistan Comprehensive Cooperation. I
believe that we will see further developments with
respect to these documents in the coming weeks and
months.

10-42978

S/PV.6351

Our bilateral trade has recorded very steady
growth, and Pakistan has doubled its efforts for
education in Afghanistan, despite our own situation.
We are also engaged in security and intelligence
cooperation with Afghanistan, including through the
Tripartite Commission, which includes the United
States and the International Security Assistance Force.
We are also engaged in a trilateral process with the
Afghan and Turkish Governments.
We are committed to a voluntary, gradual, safe
and dignified return of nearly 3 million Afghan
refugees still in Pakistan. There is a need for more
diligent and sustained efforts at creating necessary
pull-factors in Afghanistan. We would stress the need
to strengthen reintegration programmes for refugees
within Afghanistan’s National Development Strategy.
We expect the United Nations and the international
community to assist in this endeavour and to
understand it specifically from this perspective.
At the conclusion of one decade of engagement
with Afghanistan, I repeat a call for introspection and a
genuine appraisal of achievements and failures.
Afghanistan needs the sustained engagement of the
international community, but without interference in its
internal affairs. I would conclude by reiterating that
long-term objectives of peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan can be realized only by
respecting its sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for scheduling today’s debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. We are grateful for the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/318) and are
appreciative of the briefing by his Special
Representative, Staffan de Mistura. We also thank
Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement.
As we move forward, the international approach
towards
Afghanistan,
including
the
London
Conference, has focused on the areas of security,
reintegration, development, governance, and regional
and international cooperation. We support the efforts of
the Afghan Government to reintegrate those individuals
who are willing to abjure violence, do not have ties
with terrorist groups, and are willing to abide by the
values of democracy, pluralism and human rights, as

10-42978

enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. The process must
be inclusive and transparent. The forthcoming Kabul
Conference and the parliamentary elections scheduled
for September will be important milestones in
consolidating the progress made so far.
Complementary to the military effort, a
sustainable strategy for the stabilization of Afghanistan
must focus on development and governance issues. In
this context, the focus of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on its priorities, in
particular support for elections, regional cooperation
and aid coherence would be helpful in achieving
greater synergy and coordination of efforts with the
Afghan Government.
The success of all our endeavours will be
enduring only if their ownership is vested in the
Afghan Government and people. In this context,
closely intertwined is the need for tangible and
sustained improvement in the security situation. This is
also absolutely critical to expanding the footprint of
the Afghan Government and to creating an enabling
environment for lasting peace and stability in
Afghanistan.
As we discussed today, an overall deterioration in
the Afghan security environment underscores the
significant challenges that confront Afghanistan. The
report of the Secretary-General notes that there was a
94 per cent increase in incidents involving improvised
explosive devices during the first four months of 2010,
a 45 per cent rise in killings of civilians by insurgents,
and an increase in complex suicide attacks.
Despite a reinforced presence of the International
Security
Assistance
Forces,
the
continuous
deterioration in the security situation is a stark
reminder that the challenge from a resurgent Taliban
and Al-Qaida is real, and it is one that threatens us all.
The wellsprings that sustain such terror still show no
signs of being drained. Civilians, humanitarian
personnel, international and United Nations staff and
diplomatic personnel, including in our mission in
Kabul, have been repeatedly targeted in terrorist
attacks. I join others in expressing our condolences for
the United Nations staff member killed only yesterday.
There is broad recognition that the increase in
terrorist actions in Afghanistan is due to the support
and sanctuaries available beyond its borders. The
security and stabilization of Afghanistan will remain a
distant goal unless we are able to isolate and root out

35

S/PV.6351

the syndicate of terrorism, which includes elements of
Al-Qaida, Taliban, Lashkar e Toiba and other terrorist
and extremist groups operating from within and outside
Afghanistan’s borders.
We fully support efforts towards the expansion of
the capacities of the Afghan National Police and the
Afghan National Army. They should be provided with
appropriate resources, combat equipment, enablers and
training before any plan for a progressive handover of
security responsibilities is considered.
The security of Afghanistan and what happens
there impacts us, as a country in the region, a close
neighbour and a civilizational partner whose ties with
the Afghan people stretch into antiquity. A stable and
settled Afghanistan, where the rank and file of the
Taliban has given up violence against the Government
and the people, cut all links with terrorism and
subscribed to the values of the Afghan Constitution and
its laws, and where development is the hard rationale is
what we seek and strive for. It is important also that
such a structure be durable and enduring. Afghanistan’s
neighbours and regional partners will need to be kept
in the picture, both by consultation and by adherence to
the principle of non-interference in the country’s
affairs, ensuring that it thrives as a trade and transit
hub for the region and by eradicating transnational
terrorism.
While moving forward on the sensitive issues of
reintegration and reconciliation, we need to guard
against the impulse to arrive at quick-fix solutions.
Against the backdrop of today’s worrying security
situation, these issues need to be tackled with prudence
and the benefit of hindsight, foresight and caution.
In India’s efforts towards the stabilization of
Afghanistan, the focus has been on development and
humanitarian work to assist the Afghan people as they
build a peaceful, stable, inclusive, democratic and
pluralistic nation. We have sought to assist Afghanistan
within our means. Our $1.3 billion assistance
programme is aimed at building infrastructure;
capacity-building in the critical areas of governance,
health, education and agriculture; and generating
employment. Last year, over 300,000 Afghans, mainly
women and children, were provided with free medical
treatment at the Indian medical missions in Kabul,
Jalalabad, Kandahar, Herat and Mazar-i-Sharif. The
economy of the battle-scarred Nimroz province was
transformed with the building of the Zaranj-Delaram

36

highway, and the homes of the people of Kabul have
been lit, after more than a decade, by the Pul-i-Khumri
transmission line from the Uzbek border.
The international community as a whole has
made a contribution in assisting Afghanistan to stand
on its feet. We welcome these efforts and are fully
supportive of them. We support the good work done by
UNAMA. If lasting peace and stability are to be
established in Afghanistan, it is critical that the
international community remain engaged there, both on
the security side as well as in development and
capacity-building efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. De Mistura to make some final comments.
Mr. De Mistura (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Sir, but I would like to apply the principle that we have
spoken of today — the priority should go to our
Afghan colleague.
(spoke in English)
I will speak after him, with your permission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I think we have had a
very important and constructive debate. We were all on
the mission, and we came back with a better
understanding of the situation in Afghanistan.
There has been an emphasis in all of our
statements today on how, in a short period of time —
that is, three months — Mr. De Mistura tried, after a
difficult year of elections and issues surrounding the
elections, to bring all the stakeholders together, to
establish a new dialogue with the Government of
Afghanistan, and to help the elements of the
international community to work together. I would like
again to express our gratitude for his work, which is
important and vital for Afghanistan.
I think the only comment I can make after all this
debate is that the Government of Afghanistan and the
Afghan people are continuing their partnership with the
international community. They know how vital are the
aid and assistance of the international community.
They are well aware of their own responsibilities. As I
said before, we would like to work together in this time
when it is important for all of us to succeed in
transitioning towards a new situation in which Afghans
will be at the centre in the defence of their country and

10-42978

S/PV.6351

take on the responsibility of security, governance and
development of the country.
Here, the United Nations, as it has for all these
years, is playing an important role. We appreciate the
ideas that participants have raised today and will work
together with the Council and with all the
representatives of the international community who are
engaged towards a successful transition in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Sir, for giving me the floor a second time.
(spoke in English)
First of all, I thank the Council for all the
comments. We have taken careful note of the many
good and constructive pieces of advice we have heard.
I have three brief points. The first one is that
security is a concern, and participants have been kind
enough to remind us of what happened yesterday. In
fact, some of us who were together in Jalalabad on the
field trip will remember that there was even yesterday
an incident at the airport. This is a clear reminder that
security is an area in which I myself, on behalf of the
Council, will constantly have to square the circle
between being proactive, being present, being

10-42978

everywhere and at the same time staying alive. The
combination of these will be the challenge that we are
going to face during this critical, crucial period, which
will be important for Afghanistan and for all of us.
I would like also, on behalf of each of my
colleagues, and certainly on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, to thank the Council for the trust and
confidence it has placed in me and my team in
Afghanistan. We need that trust and confidence when
things get rough — and they are likely to be rough
before they get better.
That having been said, the feeling that I am
having — perhaps because I am overly optimistic by
nature and by professional need — is that the Afghans
will find a way. This year is the year when they will be
indicating to us in which direction they will go. That is
why the issue of security becomes important — and
remains important — but our resilience becomes even
more important.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

37
