S/PV.8739

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8739th meeting

Tuesday, 3 March 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Gonsalves
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-fifth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2020/133)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2470
(2019) (S/2020/140)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-05620 (E)
*2005620*

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is
the first public meeting of the Security Council
for the month of March, I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve,
Permanent Representative of Belgium, for his service
in the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of February. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing our deep appreciation to
Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-fifth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2020/133)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2470 (2019)
(S/2020/140)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/133, which contains the twenty-fifth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4
of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2020/133),
and document S/2020/140, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2470 (2019).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
2/21

03/03/2020

Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: Iraq has not left the
headlines in recent months, as domestic, regional and
international events have continued to take their toll on
the country. While we will explore these events today,
I choose to begin with hope: the hope of a people that
remains united in its determination for a more just and
prosperous future; the hope of a sovereign nation that
refuses to become a battleground for conflicts that are
not its own; and the hope that Iraq may very well find
itself at the most opportune moment for genuine and
lasting political reform in a generation.
But for this to materialize, political leaders and
communities will have to step up to the plate by placing
the country’s interests above all else and building
domestic strength. Within this context, it is important
not to sugar-coat the current harsh reality. The many
brave Iraqis who continue to pay an unimaginable price
for their voices to be heard deserve recognition of the
intolerable abuses they have been subjected to: killings,
abductions, violence, intimidation and threats. These
abhorrent human rights violations are ongoing and fly
in the face of all that is decent. They have no place in a
democracy, any democracy.
Yes, of course, we recognize the challenges of
operating within a fluid, puzzling security context with
multiple actors. However, as I have stated many times,
the ultimate responsibility for the people’s safety and
security undeniably rests with the State. It is therefore
imperative to put an end to these abuses. Moreover, it
is imperative that perpetrators be brought to justice.
Impunity ends where accountability begins.
Let me emphasize that justice and accountability
are a matter of burning importance to the many Iraqis
who have lost their loved ones or seen them injured for
no other reason than having expressed their frustration
with poor economic, social and political prospects.
Justice and accountability should also be a pressing
matter for the State of Iraq. The rule of law must be
strengthened if public trust is to take root.
As I have stated time and again, Iraq’s problems
did not occur overnight, nor will they be solved in
an instant. Yet times of crisis also present opportunities.
I sincerely hope that the political leaders of Iraq will
recognize that they are now at a crossroads where they
must choose either to stand idle or to place themselves
at the service of their countrymen and women; but I
have to say that the critical window of opportunity is
closing fast.
20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

The participation of Iraqi women in the ongoing
public protests is unprecedented and marks a new page
in the history of women’s grass-roots mobilization in
Iraq. Political leaders should heed that call.
Turning to the streets, the security picture is
undeniably complex and most challenging to manage.
We witness ambiguously identified armed entities with
unclear loyalties. We see groups or individuals using
the cover of peaceful protesters and/or security forces
to muddy the issues, thereby misleading the public,
harming the country’s interests, confusing the scene
and causing casualties. All of this is part of Iraq’s tough
reality. As Secretary-General Guterres recently stated,
the large number of armed groups operating outside
State control is preventing the country from functioning
as a normal State. However, it bears repeating that this is
not something political leaders should hide behind. On
the contrary. They must dismantle or formally integrate
those armed entities under full State control without
delay. In other words, this is no excuse for political and
governmental inaction.
After five months of protests and the many people
injured or killed, it should be clear that peaceful
protesters, backed by a silent majority, will not budge
on their aspirations. That should be the first and last
concern of the political class. Let me be clear: delivering
on the demands of the people will require a collective
effort. I again emphasize that no Prime Minister can go
it alone. Every single political actor and leader is fully
responsible for restoring the critical confidence of the
public in their Government and its institutions.
In late November, the Prime Minister announced his
resignation, which was soon approved by Parliament and
the President. The designation of a new Prime Minister
and subsequent attempts to form a new Government
ultimately failed due to distrust and disunity. That led
to a complicated situation in which the Prime Ministerdesignate was not able to obtain sufficiently broad
support to form his Government within 30 days.
Within the past three days, we saw the
withdrawal of the candidacy of the Prime Ministerdesignate — accepted by the President — and the
announcement by the previous and current caretaker
Prime Minister that he was stepping back from most
of his duties, while calling on Parliament to seek early
elections in December 2020.
Under the Constitution, the President now has
another 15 days to nominate a new Prime Minister-

S/PV. 8739

designate, whose Government and programme would
also be subject to parliamentary endorsement. While
political consultations are ongoing, the question
remains whether political parties will find a new
consensus-candidate within those time limits.
Clearly, all of that prolongs uncertainty and causes
significant challenges, thereby further eroding public
trust. One way or another, the road ahead remains
fraught with difficulties. I already mentioned the
pressing need for accountability and justice. Another
top priority is corruption, which is perhaps the greatest
source of dysfunction in Iraq and, sadly, a core feature
of Iraq’s current political economy. It is built into
everyday transactions.
A related feature of Iraq’s political economy is
its reliance on patronage and clientelism. That has
resulted in a ballooning, inefficient public service
that functions more as an instrument of political
favour than as a servant of the people. A cynic would
describe this payroll corruption as the perfect electoral
mobilization strategy, where, perversely, low turnout
benefits those pursuing their own narrow, partisan and/
or transactional objectives. It is important to tackle the
system as precisely that — a system rather than just
a series of individuals or occurrences. Each bribe or
favour serves to reinforce the existing structure. As a
result, full systemic reform will be necessary. No one
understands that better than the Iraqi women and men
whose opportunities for a more prosperous life continue
to be undermined by a system that ignores them.
Iraq is by no means a poor country but, as I
said, private and partisan interests conspire to divert
resources away from critical investment in the way
forward. Iraq’s massive oil wealth has financed a crude
rentier system that sees enormous revenues converted
to salaries in unproductive sectors.
While external factors such as regional tensions
and oil price fluctuations will certainly continue
to weigh on the national economy, there are internal
factors that Iraq can control — reducing bureaucracy,
increasing the ease of doing business and strengthening
the rule of law and anti-corruption mechanisms. Those
measures can all incentivize the domestic private
sector while attracting foreign investment. Those steps
are necessary to build a healthy environment that is
conducive to broad-based, fairly distributed growth
and employment generation.

20-056203/21

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq must also build, repair and upgrade critical
infrastructure and broaden its revenue base to reduce
its dependency on hydrocarbons. The good news is that
agriculture is already showing promise as a candidate
for investment. An agricultural revival, in the birthplace
of agriculture, will not only improve employment and
social cohesion but also strengthen Iraqi food security.
In that context, I would also like to highlight the
creative resilience of the Iraqi people because, if one
looks beyond the statistics and legal structures, we
observe — on the streets — plenty of commercial
activity. One can only imagine what this spirit of
innovation and entrepreneurship could achieve if freed
from the burdens of red tape and bribes.
An important aspect of corruption is illicit
financial flows. They help explain why Iraqis continue
to await roads, hospitals, schools and legal employment
opportunities, and also contribute to further
destabilization by providing channels for the financing
of organized crime and violent extremism.
With regard to violent extremism, we cannot ignore
the continued threat of terrorism. Although the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has been defeated
territorially, in the past two months it has continued
its attempts to increase its military operations in
north-eastern Diyala, northern Baghdad and areas of
western Iraq. It goes without saying that ISIL must not
be allowed to regroup and recruit. While constructive
negotiations between Iraq’s Government and its allies
have been ongoing since the voting on the parliamentary
resolution on the presence of foreign troops, Iraq’s allies
continue to assist the Government and its institutions in
the fight against ISIL. It is obvious that a strong State
with a monopoly on the use of force is best equipped
to face those multiple security threats. Of course, an
equally powerful tool against violent extremism is
fairness and justice.
I would now like to touch upon the need for free, fair
and credible elections. While the electoral reset is a top
priority for many, broad, fundamental systemic reform
and a strong Independent High Electoral Commission
will prove crucial. In other words, the newly appointed
Electoral Commission will need to demonstrate greater
resolve in adhering to the principles of transparency,
accountability, independence and professionalism as it
rebuilds the Commission’s institutional capacities and
kick-start technical electoral preparations.
4/21

03/03/2020

Moreover, in order to firm up the electoral calendar,
there is an immediate need to complete the electoral
legal framework. Parliament must act on pending,
urgent elements of the electoral law, in particular
constituency demarcation and seat apportionment,
which will, hopefully, bring voters closer to the
candidates and make future elected representatives
accountable to their constituents.
Turning to Baghdad-Erbil relations, notwithstanding
an encouraging preliminary deal between the Kurdish
Regional Government and the federal Government on
oil-revenue sharing, we continue to await a final, longterm and sustainable agreement on this file, as well as
on security cooperation and Sinjar.
I think we can all agree that the volatile domestic
and regional climate took an extraordinary toll on
Iraq in the past months. To point out the obvious, the
state-to-state violence we saw play out across Iraq
earlier this year was received as a clear and substantial
threat to the country. The modus operandi and rules of
engagement have shifted, and the risk of rogue action by
armed groups with unclear reporting lines is a constant
concern. Beyond the immediate security threat, that
also takes critical political attention away from urgent
unfinished domestic business. However, as I have
stated before, regional security developments should
not eclipse domestic priorities and rightful demands for
reform. The question is whether Iraq will flourish as
a venue for peace and understanding or suffer as the
arena of external battles.
I will now turn to the issue of missing Kuwaitis,
third-country nationals and Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives. Hopes were renewed
in January when new human remains were discovered
and exhumed from a third grave in Samawah. Despite a
very challenging operational context, the Iraqi Ministry
of Defence has demonstrated commendable focus on
that important file, leading the excavation efforts with
assistance from the International Committee of the Red
Cross. I truly hope that the DNA identification of the
newly discovered human remains and of those that are
still being analysed in Kuwait will prove positive and
bring closure to the families and relatives of those who
went missing nearly 30 years ago. The contribution
of the Tripartite Commission members through the
provision and analysis of satellite imagery, supported
by witness information, proved crucial in locating the
Samawah sites. I would like to urge all members of the
20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

Commission to continue their steadfast support to the
efforts under way for other potential burial sites.
It was my intention to conclude with words of hope,
but the ongoing political indecisiveness and dissension,
leading to a further paralysis in decision-making,
unfortunately do not give cause for immediate
optimism. The country and its people continue to be
pushed into the unknown. Also, the repeated pattern
of parliamentary sessions failing to reach quorum
is exactly the opposite of what the country needs,
especially during a period of acute political crisis. The
fundamental mandate of an elected representative is to
be present, to be counted and to vote.
As I said last time (see S/PV.8676), out of the
ongoing political crisis, a fairer, stronger and inherently
more resilient Iraq can emerge. But again, for that
to materialize, political leaders will have to act fast,
placing the country’s interest above all else. Iraq must
and can find strength in diversity, recognizing a cohesive
society as more than the sum of its parts. Putting out
one fire after the other is no strategy. Iraq must move
from constant crisis management to sustainable and
stable politics, building resilience through deep and
broad systemic reform. As we all know, strength at
home is a prerequisite for strength abroad.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
Mr. President, I wish you and your team every success
as you assume the monthly rotating presidency of the
Security Council. I thank Belgium for its presidency
last month.
I also very much thank Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert for being here, for her informative
briefing and for her leadership. We also extend our
thanks to the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and the entire United Nations country
team for the indispensable work they carry out in
support of Iraq’s security, stability and prosperity.
Iraq still stands at a crossroads — as it did when
we were briefed last December (see S/PV.8676) — and,
as the Special Representative said, it is in fact still in
the headlines. Iraqis are choosing their new political
leaders as a result of their legitimate demands regarding
economic opportunity, good governance, electoral

S/PV. 8739

reforms and responsiveness to all Iraqis. We call on
Iraq’s next leaders to urgently deliver those reforms,
which will combat corruption and promote fair and free
elections. We also call on them to protect demonstrators
and hold their killers to account, transparently and in
accordance with the rule of law and Iraq’s Constitution.
Such reforms should be embraced because they are in
Iraq’s national interest. Doing so will limit the influence
of destabilizing armed groups outside State control,
attract foreign investment and ultimately help convert
Iraq’s rich natural resources into a higher quality of life
for all Iraqis.
Iraqis continue to demand a sovereign State that
affords them dignity and to resist Iranian coercion, and,
in the face of outrageous killings, beatings, kidnappings
and torture, the reformist movement endures. That
violent assault on the freedom of peaceful expression
and assembly has no place in a democracy. The United
States will continue to use all available national tools
to promote accountability for corruption and serious
human rights abuses. That includes our recent national
designation of four Iraqis implicated in serious human
rights abuses and corruption.
I should note that we still face threats by Iranbacked militias, even following the attacks against
United States and coalition forces hosted on Iraqi bases,
which killed an American earlier in the year. Iranbacked militias besieged the United States Embassy
in Baghdad for nearly 26 hours in recent days, and
there continues to be rocket attacks on it, as recently
as the last 48 hours. We underscore the Government
of Iraq’s special duty under the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations to take all appropriate steps to
protect the premises of diplomatic facilities.
Together, Iraqi and coalition forces continue to
jointly pursue the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
(ISIS) on the battlefield. We should be mindful that
ISIS remains a threat and we call on the international
community to assist Iraq in its critical counterterrorism efforts.
Looking ahead, if Iraq’s new leaders do not address
the people’s legitimate economic and governance
grievances, the country could reverse years of progress
towards stability and prosperity for a new generation of
Iraqis. It is because of those high stakes that the work of
UNAMI and Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
is so crucial. We call on Iraq’s new leaders to fully
embrace UNAMI’s mandate in promoting inclusive

20-056205/21

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

political dialogue and reconciliation, advancing
structural reforms, facilitating regional engagement
and addressing long-standing issues between Baghdad
and the Kurdistan Regional Government.
In a country as full of potential as Iraq, it is hard
to isolate a single priority today, but I wish to draw
the Council’s attention to the topic of credible early
elections, as several Iraqi leaders have called for. As
part of its mandate, UNAMI’s technical electoral
assistance, in coordination with the Government of
Iraq and the Independent High Electoral Commission,
will be critical in the months ahead. We encourage
UNAMI, alongside locally based non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), to assist Iraq towards an
inclusive electoral process. I would also like to stress
the value of UNAMI’s work, as directed by its mandate,
in the monitoring and documenting of human rights
abuses and violations. That paper trail is essential to
promoting accountability for those responsible for
violence against peaceful protesters.
We are increasingly concerned about the lack
of progress and humanitarian access for NGOs.
Humanitarian NGOs, including many United States
partners, have been unable to carry out life-saving
activities for all Iraqis of all faiths and ethnicities over
the past three months owing to a backlog of access
requests. We commend UNAMI’s engagement on that
issue and call on the Iraqi authorities to urgently find
a solution.
On the unresolved issue of Kuwaiti and thirdcountry missing persons, property and archives from the
first Gulf War, the United States is strongly committed
to the efforts of UNAMI, the Tripartite Commission
and the International Committee of the Red Cross to
make further progress. The recent discovery of remains
in Samawah, as was mentioned this morning, is one
step towards healing and reconciliation between Iraq
and Kuwait.
Iraq’s political landscape may seem challenging
in the immediate term, yet we remain optimistic that
Iraq’s new leaders will put the interests of all Iraqis
first and believe that they can deliver structural reforms
to chart a new prosperous course for Iraq, with UNAMI
and the international community standing by its side.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I wish the delegation of
China well as it takes up the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. I would also like to
thank Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent
6/21

03/03/2020

Representative of Belgium, for the Belgian presidency
of the Council in February, although we did not win
a prize.
With regard to today’s topic, I welcome the
Ambassador of Iraq. We are glad to have him in the
Chamber today. We naturally recognize the difficult
situation his country is facing. We heard Special
Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert’s account, which was at the same time
hopeful and sobering, and I very much appreciate her
briefing. I would like to pick up on her theme of hope,
which is a theme to which we can subscribe.
We hope, first of all, that the country will be kept
out of regional tensions. After the very dangerous
escalation we all witnessed in January, it is, for us, very
important that we now see a de-escalation. We appeal
to all stakeholders inside and outside the country to
exercise maximum restraint. Iraq must not be dragged
into regional confrontations; rather, it should be allowed
to focus on post-conflict recovery, reconstruction and
growth and on utilizing the economic potential it has,
as Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert has outlined.
Speaking of hope, the demonstrations we witnessed
were also a sign of hope. We witnessed that there is a
very vibrant civil society. There are many women now
active in the country, which we support. We also support
and appreciate the mostly peaceful demonstrations.
But it is really unfortunate that we also had to witness
the excessive use of force. As Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert
described it, we witnessed abhorrent human rights
violations. I can only echo what she and the United
States representative said before, the perpetrators have
to be brought to justice. We cannot allow impunity.
Returning to the theme of hope, we also hope that
there will soon be a new Government. The responsible
politicians have to overcome the political divisions and
indecisiveness in their country. The country needs a
united political class. As Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert has
said, no prime minister can go it alone. Only when we
have a new, strong Government will it be possible to
rein in the criminal activities of armed groups, many
of whom were responsible for the killings, kidnapping
and violence against unarmed protesters and
journalists. These criminal gangs have to be dismantled
and reintegrated.
In addition, I echo what the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General said about the fight against
corruption. It is unacceptable that it is, as she said,
20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8739

built into everyday politics. I also echo the call for
providing access to humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and relief workers.

quality basic services, employment opportunities and
growth in an inclusive society free from corruption
and impunity.

Let me end on the theme, again, of hope. If there
is a new Government, if there is good governance, if
the new Government allows civil society to flourish, if
there is an inclusive electoral process, there is hope for
the country and hope for an economic recovery. If the
country is kept out of regional tensions, the fight against
terrorism and extremism will also be successful.

We reiterate our call on the authorities to respect the
right to free expression, protest and peaceful assembly
and to refrain from all acts of violence and repression
against demonstrators, within the framework of respect
for their fundamental human rights. Furthermore, we
hope that investigations will continue with a view to
identifying and prosecuting the perpetrators of acts of
violence during the demonstrations.

Let me end, having seen the Ambassador of Kuwait
in the Chamber, by expressing appreciation for what he
said about the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq on the Kuwaiti missing. It is very
important that, even after so many years, this work
continues to be conducted.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, I would
like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
I wish you every success. I would also like to highlight
the excellent way in which the Belgian delegation
conducted the work of the Council in February.
We thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
briefing and for the hard work she is doing with her
team in these complex circumstances. We welcome her
to New York.
First, with regard to the political situation, we
support the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to find a solution to the
political impasse by promoting dialogue among the
parties on Iraq’s political and social spectrum, boosting
institutional strengthening and providing assistance
for electoral processes. We welcome the adoption
of the new law on the Independent High Electoral
Commission for the appointment of nine electoral
commissioners, including the election of a woman to
the executive board.
On the other hand, we note with concern that a
consensus has not yet been reached on the election of
the prime minister and the formation of a Government.
We therefore call on political actors to reflect on their
decisions and to place the well-being of the population,
not partisan or personal interests, at the centre of their
objectives. We also urge them to take into consideration
social demands for a Government restructuring that
guarantees functional institutions, the provision of

With regard to security, we regret the events that took
place at the beginning of the year as a result of clashes
between two nations allied with Iraq. The high levels of
tension at the national, regional and international levels
generated by this situation led in turn to the decision by
parliament to call on the Government to cancel support
for the international coalition to counter the Islamic
State. We hope that this decision will not reverse the
successes achieved so far in the fight against terrorism,
opening the door for the remnants of the Islamic State
to regain their strength anew. We urge the parties to
show maximum restraint, avoid any destabilizing
actions or inflammatory rhetoric that could deteriorate
the already fragile situation of this nation, and respect
the territory and sovereignty of Iraq.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
commend the rehabilitation and aid-delivery efforts
made by United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations, despite the operational and security
challenges they face. We stress the importance of
continuing to address the needs of internally displaced
persons and refugees and to provide durable solutions
that facilitate their return in a safe, voluntary and
dignified manner.
In conclusion, we hope that UNAMI’s efforts will
facilitate national reconciliation through dialogue
among political actors and other sectors of society,
allowing for comprehensive reform that addresses
the population’s demands and opens the door to the
development, peace and security desired in Iraq.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We congratulate you, Mr. President, and
our Chinese colleagues on assuming the duties of the
presidency of the Security Council. You can always rely
on the support of our delegation. We thank Belgium for
its presidency of the Council in February. It was a short
month, but a very busy and intensive one.

20-056207/21

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

03/03/2020

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, for her
briefing. We support the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), the work of
which has provided useful assistance to reconciliation
processes with respect for the country’s sovereignty.

We welcome the ongoing dialogue aimed at
rebuilding mutual understanding between Baghdad
and Erbil. We are confident that further improvement
in relations between them will help Iraq strengthen its
security and effectively realize its economic potential,
for the good of the entire Iraqi people.

We are closely monitoring developments in Iraq.
On 1 March, as Council members knows, the prime
minister-designate Mohammed Allawi withdrew his
candidacy to form a Government. The President of the
Republic, Barham Salih, must now, in consultation with
leading political forces, determine a new candidate for
Head of Government. We trust that this process will
take place in a timely manner and in accordance with
the provisions of the Constitution.

We note with concern that the terrorist threat in
the country remains high. The situation is compounded
by an intensification in the number of Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant terrorists slipping over from
Syria into Iraq. We are convinced that this challenge
can be effectively countered only through the broadest
possible coordination of counter-terrorism efforts. At
the same time, we believe it necessary for all those
involved in the fight against terrorism in Iraq to support
the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate their
actions with Baghdad.

We understand that Iraq’s leadership faces the
difficult task of including and taking into account
the entire spectrum of the political, social and
ethno-religious landscape of the country. We are
convinced that inclusive dialogue would help to
overcome the internal disagreements in Iraq, which is
fundamentally important to the country and the entire
Middle East region. For our part, in our contacts with
all the political forces in Iraq, we encourage them to
join forces to address all issues on the domestic agenda
and reach mutually acceptable agreements.
The country continues to see mass protests
demanding political and socioeconomic reforms. As we
have heard from Iraqi officials, the authorities see these
protests as a form of democratic self-expression and
are committed to their obligation to ensure freedom of
peaceful assembly. We note the reduction in the level of
violence and we commend the forces of law and order.
We call for all parties to continue to show restraint. At
the same time, we believe it unacceptable for outside
forces to use the protests as a lever to exercise pressure
on the domestic situation.
The authorities are drafting plans to implement
reform, but without a stable, functioning Government,
that will not be possible. The same goes for solving
the broad range of problems that has built up over the
years due to objective reasons. Iraq has to rebuild after
the events of 2003 and the subsequent gruelling war
against terrorists. It is important for the international
community to support Baghdad in devising
comprehensive measures to rebuild the economy and
improve the social sphere.
8/21

We are concerned about the possible negative
impact of the artificially exacerbated situation in Iran
on the domestic political situation in Iraq. Iraq cannot be
dragged into a regional confrontation. We reiterate our
consistent refrain that Iraq must not become an arena
for the settling of geopolitical scores. The country has
the right to build and develop normal relations with its
neighbours and no one has the right to undermine those
relations. We all witnessed the dangerous escalation at
the beginning of the year, when the region found itself
on the brink of conflict as a result of the illegal killing
by the United States in Baghdad of the Iranian military
commander Qasem Soleimani and Iraqi officials. That
act, committed without Iraq’s knowledge, undermined
the stability and security of a sovereign State Member
of the United Nations.
We once again stress the need to launch dialogue
mechanisms in the region instead of sanctions and
threats. In this connection, we recall once again that
the Secretary-General has a mandate to craft security
and confidence-building measures in the region, in
accordance with resolution 598 (1987). We stand ready
to cooperate on that basis with all interested regional
and international partners in the framework of our
proposed concept for collective security in the Persian
Gulf region and other constructive initiatives.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in welcoming you to the presidency, Sir, and say that
the United Kingdom looks forward to working with you
and your delegation. I also thank the representative of
20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8739

Belgium for an excellent stewardship of the Council’s
business during the month of February.

protestors’ demands, including for credible, free and
inclusive elections.

Let me start by thanking the Special Representative
for her briefing and her continued efforts, together
with those of her Mission, to support and advise the
Iraqi Government. Their work is important and, as
we have all heard, it is a difficult time. She has our
staunch support.

As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/140)
highlights and as the Special Representative outlined,
Da’esh remains a persistent threat to Iraq’s security, as
well as to the region and the wider world. We therefore
hope that Iraq and the international community can
continue to work closely together to address that
common threat. The Global Coalition to Defeat Da’esh
continues its support to and close partnership with the
Iraqi security forces, in full respect for Iraqi sovereignty.
I am proud that British troops in Iraq have trained over
100,000 members of the Iraqi security forces.

While Iraq has made notable progress in recent
years, as many speakers, including the Special
Representative, have said, the past few months have
been challenging. Regarding the latest setback, the
resignation of the Prime Minister, I agree with the
representative of the Dominican Republic — we need
to appeal to Iraq’s leaders at this time to put the Iraqi
people and the sound governance of the country first.
The delay in forming a new Government that will
command the confidence of the Iraqi Parliament and
people is regrettable. The United Kingdom calls on all
Iraqi leaders to put the national interest first and to work
together constructively to support a new prime minister.
Iraq urgently needs an inclusive and representative
Government committed and able to deliver on the
demands of the Iraqi people. That aim is all the more
important given the clear dissatisfaction with the status
quo shown by the large-scale demonstrations in Iraq
since October last year. Thousands of Iraqi citizens
have protested to voice legitimate demands for political,
economic and social reforms, but hundreds have been
killed and thousands injured. The Iraqi people have the
right to protest peacefully, and we are deeply concerned
by the disproportionate use of force by security forces,
including the use of live fire, and human rights abuses,
including attacks on journalists. The United Kingdom
urges the Iraqi authorities to follow through on their
commitments to conducting credible investigations into
the violence and holding those responsible to account.
We also unequivocally condemn attacks on diplomatic
premises. It is vital that protests remain peaceful.
I would like to tell the Iraqi Ambassador that
the United Kingdom stands ready to support Iraq
in delivering crucial reforms that address popular
concerns. We welcome the progress made on electoral
reforms and urge the Government of Iraq to continue
engagement with the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) and the international community to
ensure that the new electoral reform law delivers on

Militia groups continue to threaten Iraq’s stability
and risk escalating regional tensions. We condemn the
storming of the United States Embassy in Baghdad
on 31 December and the continued attacks by militia
groups on military bases and diplomatic premises. The
Government of Iraq has a duty to ensure the safety
of all diplomatic premises in Iraq, but we urge all
parties — and I want to stress that this includes Iraq’s
neighbours — to show restraint and to avoid dragging
Iraq into a conflict, which is not what the Iraqi people
need. We are deeply concerned that 1.4 million Iraqis
remain displaced and over 4 million Iraqis will need
some sort of support and assistance this year. Reports
of forced and undignified returns of displaced persons
are troubling, and I take this opportunity to recall that
under international conventions all returns must be
safe, dignified and voluntary.
The United Kingdom is ready to support
Iraq in delivering durable solutions, including on
reconciliation, reconstruction and provision of services.
It is particularly important that political instability and
the protests do not distract from or prevent action being
taken to address the grievances that drove the rise
of Da’esh.
Having heard the briefings today, we all know that
recent months have been difficult for the Government
of Iraq and the Iraqi people. There has been progress
on key issues, including regional outreach, discussions
between Baghdad and Erbil and reconstruction through
the Funding Facility for Stabilization. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, there
are grounds for hope and we should not overlook the
progress. But I want to echo what was said by the
German representative in particular about corruption
and the importance of tackling it.

20-056209/21

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

My last point relates to the Iraq-Kuwait file. I pay
tribute to the work of the Kuwaiti representative, who
is in the Chamber. As the United States and German
representatives said, the recent developments on the
file are very welcome. The United Kingdom remains
committed to helping to strengthen relations between
Iraq and Kuwait through the work of the Tripartite
Commission, which we support.
We stand ready to continue to support the next
Government of Iraq as it continues to deliver on the
legitimate demands of protesters and to implement
crucial reforms. We urge maximum restraint and
peaceful dialogue on the part of all sides. There is space
for hope and for a brighter future for the Iraqi people.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
congratulate China on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March,
during which it can count on the French delegation’s
cooperation. I also thank Belgium for its outstanding
leadership of our work last month. I would also like
to start by thanking Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, for her briefing and particularly for her excellent
work, together with her team, in the service of peace
in Iraq.
Iraq, which has suffered repeated trials in its recent
past and which is a country with which France maintains
strong and long-standing ties, is at a crossroads. The
country is strongly affected by regional tensions. It
must complete the fight against Da’esh. It must also
meet the aspirations that the Iraqis have been voicing
since last October and continue to make progress on the
path to democracy and justice.
In order to meet all those challenges, one goal is
essential. It is important to ensure that Iraq is fully
sovereign and that it rapidly recovers its institutional
stability and has the means to address the various
challenges. It is crucial that Council members stand
by the Iraqi people and their authorities to achieve
that. In that spirit, I would like to highlight two key
messages today.
My first message is one of support — above all,
support for the Iraqi people, who must be able to express
their legitimate demands without fear for their security,
in accordance with the constitutional principles of Iraq.
The human toll of the demonstrations is extremely
high, with more than 500 dead and thousands injured.
10/21

03/03/2020

As mentioned in Geneva during the forty-third
session of the Human Rights Council, France is especially
concerned about the arbitrary arrests, assassinations,
forced disappearances and indiscriminate use of
force against people exercising their right to peaceful
protests, documented in particular by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). It is
the responsibility of the Iraqi authorities to ensure the
safety of demonstrators and to guarantee the freedoms
of expression and assembly and the right to protest. In
that regard, we urge them to heed the recommendations
of UNAMI.
In that difficult context, Iraq must have a
Government that is able to implement the reforms
expected by the Iraqis, in particular with regard to
combating corruption, providing good services to
the population and holding fair and transparent early
elections. Women must play their full role. We will
work alongside the Iraqi authorities in implementing
such reforms.
Lastly, I would like to express our full support,
as I said, for the United Nations Mission and for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, whose
courageous and effective commitment I would like to
commend. It is essential for UNAMI to continue its
work in support of the Iraqi authorities, particularly in
the area of electoral assistance. Its efforts to encourage
dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil is also valuable.
With regard to the sensitive issue of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti national archives and property, the progress
made following the discoveries at the Samawah site is
encouraging and once again underline the importance of
resolute progress towards a settlement. We will ensure
that UNAMI continues to have adequate resources and
the proper mandate.
My second message is a call for international
mobilization. Iraq needs the active support of the
Security Council and its other international partners.
We must mobilize first to do everything possible to
ensure that Iraq remains free from regional tensions
and preserves its sovereignty. A stable Iraq is essential
to creating the conditions for lasting de-escalation in
the region.
We must also ensure mobilization in the fight
against Da’esh. We all know that the fight is not over.
The international coalition is committed to continuing
its support to the Iraqi authorities to prevent any
20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

widespread resurgence of terrorism in the country, while
taking into account the changing political environment.
Lastly, there must be international mobilization
to deal with the humanitarian emergency and the
challenges of stabilizing and rebuilding the country.
That is all the more vital in order to counter the risk of
a resurgence of Da’esh and to promote reconciliation
among the various sectors of the Iraqi population.
Particular attention must therefore be paid to the areas
liberated from Da’esh as well as to the conditions
necessary to allow the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of internally displaced persons. In that context,
it is important to ensure that non-governmental
organizations have access to Iraqi territory so as to
facilitate the effectiveness of their work.
Given all these challenges, Iraq can count on
France’s commitment at its side. It can also count on
the European Union (EU), whose High Representative
has been given a mandate by the Council of the EU to
contribute to de-escalation efforts in the region. Iraq
must also be able to count on a Security Council that
is united and committed to supporting it on the path to
reconstruction and peace.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me first
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the people of
the People’s Republic of China on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for March. I pledge
my delegation’s support and cooperation in your work.
We would also like to thank Belgium for its excellent
presidency in February. We would like to thank
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her briefing
and, through her, her colleagues on the ground for their
steady work in very difficult circumstances.
Iraq has been ravaged by numerous cycles of
conflict, crippling sectarianism and, most destructively,
the threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). Following the military defeat of ISIL, Iraq
continues to face severe security challenges as a result
of violent extremism and the transnational nature of
the threat.
The mandate of UNAMI remains crucial in
coordinating United Nations efforts to support Iraq.
South Africa supports the mandate of UNAMI in
assisting the Government’s efforts and the electoral
processes in Iraq. South Africa welcomes the reforms
proposed by the Government of Iraq to improve

S/PV. 8739

governance structures and the implementation of
service delivery to its people. We also support the drive
for an inclusive Government that will bring together
the diverse elements of Iraqi society in governance
structures. We believe that national reconciliation
and unity in Iraq are vital to promoting lasting and
sustainable peace in the country.
With regard to the security situation, South Africa
joins others in condemning the recent incidents that
occurred in Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah
al-Din, resulting in casualties and the destruction
of crops. That is indicative of the deadly threat that
persists in the country, which requires continued
support and sustained efforts by the international
community to bolster the Iraqi Government’s efforts to
gain full control of the security situation in the country.
Peace and security are fundamental prerequisites
for Iraq to develop and grow its economy and provide
basic services to all its citizens. In that regard, South
Africa supports the full consolidation of control by
the Iraqi army over its territories and the efforts of the
Government to eradicate the threat posed by ISIL.
South Africa urges continued cooperation between
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government in order to promote peace and stability
throughout the country.
On the important role of women during the political
transition in Iraq, South Africa welcomes the new
electoral law and the appointment of a female Chief
Executive Officer of the Independent High Electoral
Commission. Women in Iraq continue to play a vital
role in calling for political and economic reform. We
welcome the upsurge in women’s activism in Iraq, as
this augurs well for the future of the country.
South Africa also joins the Secretary-General
in encouraging the Council of Representatives to
disseminate the text of the electoral law and to clarify
all outstanding issues regarding the text.
South Africa welcomes the latest developments
regarding missing Kuwaitis, and all efforts to identify
any potential mortal remains of Kuwaiti citizens are
highly appreciated and help to bring closure to and
end the pain of the Kuwaiti people. We congratulate
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Iraqi Government for efforts to identify such
mortal remains.

20-0562011/21

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

The situation in Iraq has improved substantially
in the past 17 years. The country was devastated
by a conflict that resulted from misguided military
misadventures. Today the country is going through a
period of reconstruction and development as it rebuilds
itself, which will require support on the part of the
international community. The international community
must do its part to assist Iraq on this journey while
respecting the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the country. For their part, the people of Iraq
must strive for an inclusive political process that will
set the country on a path to lasting peace, prosperity
and development.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We wish you every success.
We also commend the Belgian presidency during the
month of February. We would like as well to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, for her valuable briefing. I
also welcome the presence here today of His Excellency
the Ambassador of Iraq.
Tunisia is closely monitoring the situation in
brotherly Iraq and has taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2020/133). We hope that Iraq’s
institutions and the various components of the Iraqi
political scene will be able to move beyond this sensitive
phase to reach consensus on forming a Government and
achieving calm and stability in the security situation,
through the collective efforts of all actors, peaceful
dialogue and prioritized general interests above all else.
Iraq is facing many challenges, including the
effects of a tense regional situation. With the support
of the international community, Iraq has been able to
defeat the Da’esh terrorist organization and protect its
internal security, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
All of that has contributed to regional and international
peace and security.
Today Iraq needs continued international support
in order to consolidate stability and bolster the efforts
to bring about reconstruction, economic development,
reform, anti-corruption, strengthening of democracy
and holding elections. That would lead to achieving
the aspirations of the brotherly Iraqi people to security,
stability and prosperity. In that context, we support
the call made by the Secretary-General to the various
regional and international parties to maintain their
12/21

03/03/2020

commitments in terms of supporting Iraq. We also
reaffirm the need to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq and to not interfere in its
internal affairs.
Despite a relative improvement in the Iraq’s
economic situation, the Secretary-General’s report
refers to the continued need for delivering humanitarian
assistance to those who need it in the country during
this year. For that reason, we call on the various parties
involved in the humanitarian efforts to continue their
support to address the needs of the Iraqi people.
Given the importance of the issue of missing
Kuwaiti persons and others from third countries,
as well as missing Kuwaiti property, especially the
Kuwaiti national archives, we express our satisfaction
at the constructive cooperation that is noted in the
twenty-fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2020/133). That cooperation among the Iraqi and
Kuwaiti authorities, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other international partners will make it
possible to achieve further progress on this issue and to
resolve various other issues related to it.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the
positive role that the Mission is playing in supporting
Iraq during this important phase of its history.
Notwithstanding current difficulties and complexities,
there are indicators in terms of Iraqis’ determination to
completing the reform process, entrenching democratic
practices and achieving economic and social recovery,
as well as strengthening the role of Iraqi women in
managing public affairs.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and I thank Belgium for the
excellent job it did in February. I also welcome our
good colleague the Ambassador of Iraq to the Council
and would like also to thank Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert for her informative briefing. I wish
also to extend my appreciation for the continued work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq under
challenging circumstances.
Iraq is facing significant challenges on its way
to peace, stability and prosperity. In the context of
increasing regional tensions, the continued support of
the international community for Iraq’s security and
reconstruction remains crucial. All actors have to
20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
At the same time, I call on the Government of Iraq to
continue engaging with international stakeholders.
In that context, we also condemn the numerous
rocket attacks on the military bases hosting foreign
troops as well as the United States Embassy in Baghdad.
Another challenge Iraq is facing is the continued
political crisis. I urge all political parties and factions
in Iraq to urgently resolve their differences and agree
on a consensus candidate for Prime Minister. It is high
time to put national interests first and overcome the
prolonged political crisis. Hopefully, a new Government
will be formed promptly, which will make it possible to
respond to the legitimate aspirations of the Iraqi people.
It is vital that the Government continue with
credible economic reforms, create jobs, provide basic
services, improve governance and take effective
measures to counter corruption and implement the rule
of law. A greater presence by women and young people
should also be secured when appointing new ministers.
I also call on Iraq to complete the electoral reform
process and to continue engaging with the United
Nations in that regard in order to ensure free, credible
and fair elections.
It is deeply worrisome to hear continued reports
of human rights violations in the context of public
demonstrations, which have now entered their sixth
month. The use of live ammunition against unarmed
protesters, threats against activists and journalists and
detainments without due process have not stopped. I call
on all actors to exercise maximum restraint, and I stress
the Government’s responsibility to protect peaceful
protesters and to conduct thorough investigations
into violations.
Taking note of the latest report by the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict in Iraq
(S/2019/984), I commend the important steps taken by
the Government of Iraq to prevent the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflicts. I look forward to
further efforts in that regard.
There is also a need to find a sustainable solution
to the situation of internally displaced persons, as their
voluntary, safe and dignified return is not secured. I
encourage the Government of Iraq to engage with
the United Nations and respective non-governmental
organizations in efforts to bring about reconciliation
and social cohesion.

S/PV. 8739

In conclusion, it is crucial that all Iraqi political
actors put aside their differences and engage, with
the support of the United Nations and international
partners, to overcome the multiple challenges they are
facing and respond to the legitimate aspirations of their
people for stability, security, prosperity and peace.
They can count on our support.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your presidency this month. I assure
you of our full support. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq for her
briefing and, above all, for her important work and that
of her team in this difficult situation.
As the Special Representative indicated, Iraq today
indeed faces particular and significant challenges. As
it emerges from the conflict, the country has embarked
upon the long road to reconciliation. Meanwhile, the
Government must respond — in the short term and in a
very difficult context — to the aspirations of its people.
The freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly
are fundamental rights that must be respected. They
are crucial for advancing democracy. We condemn the
use of violence, including by the security forces, in
the context of the protests that began in the fall. As we
have said before, we also expect that all human rights
violations during the protests will be investigated and,
if necessary, prosecuted.
We call on all parties to engage in constructive
dialogue in order to form a new Government that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the people. The
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq has an
important role to play in assisting the Iraqi authorities
in that endeavour.
I once again stress that the challenges are
significant. We hope that the future Government will be
able to continue the efforts of the previous Government,
in particular with regard to the fight against corruption,
economic recovery, job creation, security sector reform,
reconciliation and the provision of basic services to
the population. In addition, the Government should
continue its important and courageous security sector
reform initiatives so that it can eventually restore its
monopoly over State authority.
We have been very concerned for several weeks
now about the lack of humanitarian access following
the decision taken by the Iraqi authorities at the end of

20-0562013/21

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

2019 to put an end to the system of access letters for
non-governmental organizations. That has had alarming
consequences for the delivery of humanitarian aid in
the country, as repeatedly emphasized by the United
Nations Resident Coordinator. We therefore call on the
authorities to immediately resolve that problem.
Although the Islamic State is defeated militarily,
the causes that enabled Da’esh to develop have not
been eliminated. We must do all we can to avoid its
resurgence, which implies continuing military and
stabilization efforts. In that connection, we commend
the important work and role of the Global Coalition
against Da’esh, and hope that the international
community and Iraq can continue their joint work. As
the Special Representative stated, Iraq finds itself in a
volatile regional environment. We call on all actors to
show restraint.
Finally, as Chair of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we recently
reviewed the Secretary-General’s latest report on the
situation of children in Iraq (S/2019/984). Of course,
most grave violations took place during the conflict,
but it is clear that many challenges remain in that
regard. The Working Group is committed to issuing
conclusions in that regard.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I welcome
China’s presidency of the Security Council and assure
you, Mr. President, of my country’s support. We wish
your presidency every success.
I cannot proceed without reflecting on our happy
memories of Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve
and his excellent presidency. Among Belgium’s main
achievements during its presidency was its level of
representation in the form of its King, Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister. I therefore congratulate
the Ambassador and his team for their excellent work.

03/03/2020

hopes that the political process, which has experienced
some difficulties of late, will lead to the establishment
of institutions that guarantee the country’s stability with
the appointment of a new consensus Prime Minister.
The Niger remains convinced that a sustainable
process must include Iraqi women. In that regard, we
welcome the consultations with the Women’s Advisory
Group on Reconciliation and Politics, whose demand
for representation at all levels of political and economic
governance remains legitimate. That political process
must seek solutions to the many challenges Iraqis are
currently facing.
In addition to the terrorist threat, corruption poses
an equally dangerous threat because it saps the country
of the means to rebuild. My delegation expresses its
concern about the way the protests have been managed
and reiterates its commitment to respect for public
freedoms, including the freedom to protest.
The Niger also calls on the Iraqi Government to
take measures to overcome the existing administrative
and security difficulties so that the violations against
children documented in the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2019/984), so aptly pointed out by the
Committee Chair, Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve, cease
and so that children can obtain civil status documents
and have access to education after so many years of
violence that have deprived them of schooling.
It is most regrettable that the transnational threat
of terrorism remains in the country, with Da’esh
continuing its rapid rebuilding. The Iraqi authorities,
with the support of their partners, must continue the
fight against terrorism while ensuring respect for the
rights of individuals.

I also commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq for painting this picture of
Iraq, including reasons for hope and causes for concern.
I also note the presence of Ambassador Bahr Aluloom
and hope his statement and information to the Council
will be illuminating.

As the Special Representative said, Iraq has come
a long way. The efforts made, however minimal, must
be appreciated, supported and encouraged. Although
the responsibility for building a peaceful, stable and
prosperous Iraq lies with Iraqis — and they have the
means to achieve that — the country must cease to
be the scenario for confrontation, the use of force and
external interests. To that end, Iraqis need our support
now more than ever.

On reasons for hope, the Niger welcomes the
recent calm in Iraq and encourages the Iraqi authorities
to continue their efforts to foster friendly relations
with neighbouring countries, while broadening their
partnerships at the regional level. The Niger very much

In conclusion, the Niger congratulates and
encourages the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and her team for the convincing results
achieved during her mandate.

14/21

20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines congratulates you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. We also
recognize the presence of the representative of Iraq in
the Chamber. We thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
for her insightful briefing. Since taking up our seat on
the Council, this is the first time that we can officially
extend our gratitude to the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for its indispensable work.
We therefore welcome this opportunity and reaffirm
our support to her and her team.
UNAMI’s mandate provides a platform to support
the Government of Iraq in tremendous ways, including
in the advancement of political dialogue. We welcome
UNAMI’s engagement with the Women Advisory
Group for Politics and National Reconciliation in
Iraq to solicit input on the Government’s ongoing
constitutional review. Meaningful participation by
women in political processes and economic and social
planning is essential for achieving peace that extends
beyond silencing the guns. On that note, it would be
remiss of me not to mention the appointment of a
woman as Chief Executive Officer of the Independent
High Electoral Commission as indicative of the kind
of transformation required to secure a more just
organization of Iraqi society and polity. Similarly, we
recognize as progressive UNAMI’s engagement with
young civil activists. We appreciate that UNAMI has
created a platform for dialogue between local youth
representatives and senior local political figures.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the
constructive cooperation between UNAMI and the
Government of Iraq regarding missing Kuwaiti persons
and third-country nationals. We note the success of
those efforts, as catalogued in the most recent report
(S/2020/133). We encourage the Government to
continue building on the progress made with regard to
the return of missing Kuwaiti property, including the
search for Kuwaiti books and national archives.
We remain concerned about the ongoing protests
and the allegations of abuses. While the establishment
of a committee to investigate reprisals against
protesters is a positive move, we urge greater progress
in holding individuals and groups accountable. In
addition, we encourage steps towards the formation of
a Government.

S/PV. 8739

In our efforts to assist the Government of Iraq, we
recall relevant international principles, namely, those
of sovereignty, non-intervention and non-interference.
Those are the pillars upon which we can peacefully
coexist. Iraq, as a sovereign State, has full authority
to oversee its domestic affairs in accordance with
international law, free from any external interference.
That right, deeply embedded in our rules-based system,
must not be abrogated in practice. It must be respected
by all States, including those that operate in Iraq,
and, therefore, within the parameters set out by the
Government. In that regard, the Government of Iraq’s
commitment and efforts to work constructively with
UNAMI are commendable. It is a mutually reinforcing
and beneficial relation that should be encouraged.
Too many Iraqis have suffered at the hands
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
We remain deeply concerned that ISIL’s remaining
elements continue to carry out attacks. The complete
eradication of those spoilers is critical in safeguarding
reconciliation and redevelopment in Iraq.
We wish to reiterate that issues related to conflict
and development must be addressed concurrently.
There is a need to combat poverty, unemployment
and inequality, and for the urgent economic and social
reconstruction of Iraq. Sustainable reconciliation and
reconstruction are achievable only when accompanied
by efforts to safeguard human security. The international
community remains duty-bound to provide the Republic
of Iraq with all of the support necessary to materialize
its future possibilities across the peace, security and
development nexus.
We end by reaffirming our support to UNAMI and
the Government of Iraq as they work towards achieving
a lasting and positive peace.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): We extend our best wishes
to you, Mr. President, for a successful presidency of
the Security Council this month and assure you of our
full support and cooperation. We express our thanks
and appreciation to Belgium for its excellent presidency
in February. We welcome the Ambassador of Iraq to
this briefing and extend our appreciation and thanks
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing, her first
since we joined the Council. We heard a lot of hope,
which we share, for a better future for Iraq, first
in terms of stability then in terms of forming a new

20-0562015/21

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

Government. Iraq is embarking upon a new course to
national reconstruction and economic development.
We are encouraged by the progress Iraq has made
in recent months, as reported by the Secretary-General
(S/2020/140). We are happy to see that the Government
of Iraq is taking a number of measures to meet the
legitimate demands of its people, is continuing efforts
towards national reconciliation, is investing more
resources in reconstruction and is strengthening
relations with countries in the region. We welcome the
adoption by the Council of Representatives of the new
laws on the Independent High Electoral Commission
and on elections.
We express our appreciation for the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) to assist the Government and the people of
Iraq. We note UNAMI’s efforts in the implementation
of resolution 2107 (2013) and encourage the parties to
continue their cooperation on that issue. However, the
situation in Iraq remains challenging, especially in
the context of increasing regional tensions. We share
the concerns of the Secretary-General that, during the
reporting period, various forms of violence continued
in Baghdad and several other governorates, that the
formation of a new Government has been delayed and
that the living conditions of people in some areas remain
worrisome, with about 1.8 million people in acute need.
At this very important stage in Iraq, we wish to stress
the following points.
First, we call on the parties concerned to make
further efforts to overcome their differences in order to
facilitate the formation of a new Government for the sake
of stabilizing the political situation. The Government
of Iraq should be keen to introduce reforms to meet the
aspirations of its people, which should be carried out in
parallel with policies that foster national reconciliation,
unity and stability.
Secondly, addressing the economic difficulties in
Iraq should be a priority. We are of the view that the
Government of Iraq has the primary responsibility for the
course of economic development but that international
support and assistance are very important. We call on
the United Nations, international organizations and
Member States to continue to assist Iraq in that regard
for the long-term stability of the country.
Thirdly, UNAMI plays an important role in
Iraq at this point in time. We therefore support and
16/21

03/03/2020

encourage the Mission to continue to work effectively,
in accordance with the mandate assigned to it by the
Security Council, to assist Iraq with reforms and in
achieving an inclusive political process.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me join
others in congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. Please be assured of my
delegation’s full support for your presidency. I would
also like to extend my delegation’s appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Belgium, His Excellency
Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, and
his whole team for their excellent presidency in the
month of February. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert for her comprehensive briefing.
There have been many encouraging signs of
progress in the reconstruction and reform process
in Iraq. We welcome those developments, as we are
convinced that, if we all invest more broadly in the
people of Iraq, success will be attainable. To that end,
Indonesia reaffirms its support for Iraqi sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, and would like
to underscore the following points.
First, with regard to the importance of stability
and security in Iraq, stability and security are the
prerequisite conditions for successful post-conflict
recovery and economic development in the country.
In recent months, we have witnessed how fragile those
conditions are; any miscalculation could derail any
progress that has been achieved so far. However, we are
encouraged that the parties are exercising maximum
restraint and remaining committed to supporting Iraq
in its quest for peace and prosperity. Conflict and
military operations are not an option for a country that
has been affected by war for so long.
Indonesia strongly supports Iraq’s effort to combat
the remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) with the support of the international community.
The focus must now be on eliminating every threat
posed by ISIL in the country. We believe that the
support of all, particularly neighbouring countries, is
crucial, and we commend Iraq’s efforts in continuing to
strengthen its relations with its neighbours.
Secondly, with regard to Iraq’s nation-building
efforts, my delegation would once again like to voice its
support of Iraq’s journey to democracy and prosperity
for its people. We urge that the measures undertaken by
20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8739

the Government to meet public demands be continued.
We also support the steps being taken in connection
with electoral reform and welcome the adoption of the
law on the Independent High Electoral Commission
(IHEC) and the appointment of the new IHEC Chief
Executive Officer, who is a woman. We encourage the
appointment of more female officials in the upper ranks
of governance. We also hope that the designation of a
new prime minister and the formation of a new cabinet
will soon be realized, with a view towards swift action
being taken to develop and implement reforms that
meet the aspirations of all groups, including minorities.

At present, the peace, stability and reconstruction
of the State of Iraq is at a critical stage. Against the
looming backdrop of escalating tensions in the Middle
East and the Gulf region, it is particularly important
to safeguard Iraq’s national sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. All countries should fully
respect the will of the Iraqi people and support the
Iraqi Government in properly addressing the internal
and external challenges and in achieving economic
recovery, peace, stability, national reconstruction and
national reconciliation. In that regard, I would like to
emphasize the following points.

Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian file,
as reported by the Secretary-General (S/2020/140),
recent political upheaval posed some operational and
security challenges for humanitarian operations. In that
regard, we call on the Government of Iraq to continue
to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance by
United Nations agencies and partners. Indonesia also
continues to express its support for vigorous efforts
aimed at making further progress concerning missing
Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals, as well as
the return of Kuwaiti property, including the archives.
Not only is that an important humanitarian concern, it
is also of great importance for further reconciliation
between the two countries.

First, a good atmosphere should be created for
political dialogue and national reconciliation in Iraq,
as the internal political process in the country is at
an important juncture. The international community
should support Iraq in independently managing its own
internal affairs and responding to the challenges it faces
by playing a constructive role, creating an enabling
environment and firmly opposing interference in Iraq’s
internal affairs. Any military action on Iraq’s territory
must be subject to the consent of the Government of
the country so that Iraq may avoid becoming a victim
of geopolitics.

In conclusion, we would again like to express
our support for the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq. We encourage its various
reconstruction and reform programmes in support of
the people and the Government of Iraq undertaken in
pursuit of its mandate.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
First of all, I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her
briefing. Once again, I would like to express to my
good friend, the Permanent Representative of Belgium,
and his team my appreciation for their outstanding
work during their presidency of the Security Council
last month. I also thank all the speakers for their kind
words and their confidence in China. I look forward
to working closely with all delegations in our joint
effort to complete the tasks before us in the month of
March by discharging our responsibilities in the best
way possible.

Engaging in peaceful and meaningful dialogue
towards inclusive reconciliation and harmonious
coexistence is in the fundamental interest of the
Iraqi people. We welcome the further improvement
of relations between the central Government of Iraq
and the Kurdish Regional Government, as well as the
continuation of their communication and dialogue on
oil, revenue-sharing and security arrangements.
Secondly, we should support Iraq in consolidating
the achievements in counter-terrorism and safeguarding
national security. Iraq has made great sacrifices for the
international cause of counter-terrorism. Yet the threat
of remnant forces of terrorism still exists, and the efforts
to address the issue of foreign terrorist fighters and their
families are in urgent need of support from all parties.
The international community should fully respect
Iraq’s sovereignty and jurisdiction and support the
country in bringing terrorists to justice, in accordance
with relevant domestic laws, and in preventing the
return and spread of terrorist forces and activities. We
should support the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in actively
working under its mandate and in close consultation
with the Government of the country concerned.

20-0562017/21

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

Thirdly, we should actively promote Iraq’s economic
recovery and accelerated reconstruction. Development
is the fundamental guarantee for peace. Speeding up
economic reconstruction, augmenting public-service
capacity, improving democracy and responding to
people’s aspirations are important tasks for Iraq in
its current state of development. The international
community should firmly support Iraq in exploring a
development path that fits its own national conditions
and fulfil in earnest its commitments to continued
support and assistance for Iraq, help the country with
its economic recovery, alleviate the humanitarian
situation and effectively protect the rights of vulnerable
groups, including women and children.
China supports the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq in actively continuing its work and
hopes that it will, in accordance with its mandate,
support the Iraqi Government’s efforts aimed at
achieving stability and development, and respect
Iraq’s ownership of its own affairs. China supports any
effort that is conducive to maintaining stability and
development in Iraq. We will continue to work under
the Belt and Road Initiative framework by actively
participating in the reconstruction of Iraq’s energy
and infrastructure sectors, inter alia, helping the
country strengthen its capacity-building, training more
professional and technical people, and enhancing its
capacity for self-development. China will also continue
to provide humanitarian items and economic aid to Iraq
and help the Iraqi people cope with various difficulties
and challenges, improve the humanitarian situation and
achieve lasting peace, stability and development.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate
the delegation of the People’s Republic of China on
assuming the presidency of the Council this month.
We wish you every success. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of the Kingdom of Belgium for his
distinct leadership of the Council last month.
I welcome the briefing of Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). My delegation
has taken note of the report of the Secretary-General
dated, 20 February, on the implementation of Security
18/21

03/03/2020

Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2020/133), and his
report dated 21 February, on the implementation of the
Security Council resolution 2470 (2019) (S/2020/140).
Iraqis have been protesting for five months,
demanding change, economic reform and end to
corruption. The protestors have succeeded in making
their voices heard by the Government and political,
religious and society actors alike.
Concerning the conflict in the region, it is no secret
that Iraq was targeted in January. These violations were
a breach of our sovereignty and have had a negative
impact on the stability in the country. Regarding
counter-terrorism, our security forces continue to fight
the remnants of the terrorist organization Da’esh after
having liberated all our cities, to the extent that no Iraqi
territory is now controlled by terrorists, thanks to the
sacrifices of all kinds made by these forces and with the
support of the international community. Iraq is now on
the cusp of a new era of stability and looking forward
to new prospects for joint work in order to achieve the
socioeconomic life that the Iraqis deserve.
Despite the difficult situation in Iraq of recent
times, there have been intensive political consultations
in the past few months to meet the legitimate demands
of protestors in terms of achieving the desired reforms,
which are also supported by the highest religious
authority in the country. On that basis, on 1 February
President Barham Salih of the Republic of Iraq
mandated Mr. Mohammed Tawfik Allawi to form a
new Government. In a letter addressed to the President
dated 1 March, Mr. Allawi apologized for not being
able to form a new Government. The President of the
Republic will mandate another candidate to form the
Government, in accordance with the provisions of the
Constitution and the periods specified therein.
With regard to preparations for prompt elections
in our country to meet the demands of the protestors,
a law drafted by the Independent High Electoral
Commission was enacted on 5 December 2019,
which ensures the holding of fair and free elections
with greater transparency, in line with the reforms
demanded by the people. Nine new members — seven
judges and two counsellors — were elected to the
Board of the Independent High Electoral Commission,
in the presence of the representatives of the United
Nations, the media, non-governmental organizations
and unions. A woman judge was selected to Chair
the Board of Commissioners, an unprecedented and
20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

important step towards promoting the participation of
women in high-level State decision-making processes.
It is also an incentive for the participation of women in
the political process.
Turning to the electoral law of the Iraqi Parliament,
late last year the latter adopted this law, which is
considered to represent an important change vis-à-vis
the previous electoral laws. The new law ensures a
more just representation of segments of society through
new mechanisms for electoral constituencies, and the
broader participation of young people in political life.
The law reduces the minimum age of eligibility for
election to Parliament from 30 to 25 years.
Iraq looks forward to the international community
playing an important role in assisting us in holding
the coming elections by providing necessary technical
assistance. In this respect, we call on the United Nations
to provide all technical resources necessary to ensure
the success of these upcoming elections, in accordance
with the mandate of UNAMI.
Iraq recognizes the importance of and is committed
to upholding basic rights and international obligations,
notably human rights, such as the right to life, the
right of peaceful assembly or demonstration, and the
freedom of expression. The Government continues to
carry out its responsibilities to protect the Iraqi people.
My Government therefore condemns and rejects any
form of violence.
The security forces instructed by the Government
have exercised the utmost restraint when dealing with
the unfortunate incidents during the demonstrations.
Some elements of infiltrators have sought to undermine
and subvert the peaceful movement of the protestors,
seeking to defame the security forces and the peaceful
protestors at the same time. The instructions to security
forces from their leadership prohibit the use of live
ammunition against protestors in any form or their
being targeted directly with tear gas. The number of
casualties has recently declined, despite continuing
protests in the central and southern provinces of Iraq.
This can be attributed to the strenuous efforts of the
caretaker Government to implement the package of
reforms it has announced. There is now significant
cooperation between protesters and security forces to
ensure peaceful protests and to block infiltrators.
Meanwhile, the Government has made efforts
to restore stability and ensure normalcy despite the
situation in my country. The Baghdad Operations

S/PV. 8739

Command and the Mayoralty of Baghdad have
successfully restored normalcy and opened markets and
streets, as well as gradually lifting security restrictions
in Baghdad, particularly in the International Zone and
the rest of the cities and provinces.
The applicable Iraqi Constitution provides for
the non-interference in the domestic affairs of other
States and for Iraq to resolve all conflicts peacefully.
It also emphasizes the need to preserve Iraq’s vital
interests. My Government therefore rejects being a
battleground for regional conflicts. Respecting the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Iraq is a steadfast national demand that should not be
disregarded under any pretext or in any circumstances.
Earlier this year, in four letters addressed to the
President of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/15, S/2020/26, S/2020/55 and
S/2020/84) Iraq condemned the attacks that had
violated its sovereignty in breach of the principles of
international law. At the same time, we emphasized that
Iraq was committed to ensuring that its territory was
not used to target any other State.
We acknowledge the importance for the international
community to stand by Iraq and to assist it in addressing
any violations committed on its territory through legal
and diplomatic means. Regional and international
partners of Iraq should support the country in its efforts
to restore stability and achieve reconstruction. We
therefore call on the Security Council to emphasize the
need to respect Iraq’s sovereignty, not to undermine its
security and to assist its efforts to ensure stability.
With regard to the attacks on the United States
Embassy in Iraq and the Consulate of the Islamic
Republic of Iran in Najaf, my Government has rejected
and condemned such violations and set up investigation
committees. I reaffirm before the Council that my
Government is committed to providing the necessary
protection to all accredited diplomatic missions in
Iraq, in accordance with the provisions of the Vienna
Conventions on Diplomatic Relations and on Consular
Relations of 1961 and 1963, respectively.
Remnants of the Da’esh terrorist organization
continue to constitute security concerns. The movement
of its elements from Syria to Iraq continues to threaten
the security and stability of my country. That should
be addressed through joint international efforts, which
requires the international community to continue to
cooperate in the fight against terrorism, support the

20-0562019/21

S/PV.8739

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraqi security forces and train them. In that regard, I
would like to thank all members of the international
community that provided assistance to the Iraqi
security forces, without which my country would not
have been able to repatriate 80 per cent of internally
displaced persons to their places of origin.
With regard to dealing with the elements of Da’esh
detained by the Iraqi authorities, our country has
informed their countries that they are being held by
the relevant Iraqi authorities and that the rights of all
accused persons during investigation and prosecution
are fully guaranteed. We also ensure their right to meet
representatives of their embassies during all stages of
the trial pending sentencing.
Iraq asserts that any assistance in terms of military
training, advanced technology and the weapons needed
to fight the Da’esh organization should be at the request
of the Government, in accordance with bilateral and
multilateral agreements.
Concerning the repatriation of families of Da’esh
elements to their countries, Iraq still needs to develop
programmes for their return to their homelands.
In that regard, the countries concerned must take
urgent decisions pertaining to the return of those
families to their countries in coordination with the
Iraqi Government. That issue is a great burden for
my country.
My country thanks Turkey, the Russian Federation,
Tajikistan, Azerbaijan, Germany, France, Sweden,
Georgia, Belarus, Ukraine, Algeria and Uzbekistan for
their response to the request by the Iraqi authorities to
receive their nationals who were members of the Da’esh
terrorist group, which amounted to 828 extradited
persons. From this rostrum, my Government urges
other countries that were approached to take back their
nationals who are women, young people and children
under the age of criminal legal responsibility.
In order to completely eradicate terrorism, Iraq
looks forward to cooperating with sisterly and friendly
countries as well as regional and international security
organizations. It hopes for further support from the
international community in combating terrorism
and acquiring technical assistance for criminal
investigations and identifying sources of financing for
the Da’esh organization and the accounts of persons
and entities that collaborate with Da’esh.
20/21

03/03/2020

Regarding victims of terrorism, there is still an
urgent need to step up efforts for the rehabilitation
and reintegration of men, women and children affected
by terrorism, particularly in the liberated areas. My
Government seeks through various relevant institutions,
such as the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, the
Ministry of Justice and the Department of Women’s
Empowerment, under the Office of the Prime Minister,
to establish, in cooperation with United Nations
specialized agencies, all programmes for reintegrating
such people into society, including those in camps and
detention centres. Iraq looks for more cooperation and
support in that area.
Cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait is among
our top priorities regarding our relations with the
sisterly State of Kuwait and in cooperation with the
United Nations. We stress that my country is fully
committed to implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions and will spare no efforts to fulfil
its obligations towards the international community. In
that regard, I am pleased to inform Council members of
recent developments concerning this issue, particularly
regarding resolution 2107 (2013), paragraph 4. My
Government has achieved the following.
Iraq is making efforts to implement its obligations
regarding missing Kuwaiti persons and property. As
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert said, the remains of 21 missing
persons were found in Al-Muthanna governorate on
29 January. We hope that the ongoing analysis will yield
positive results. A number of remains were also handed
over to the Kuwaiti side on 8 August 2019. In that
respect, my Government urges the fraternal Kuwaiti
side to inform it as soon as possible about the results
of efforts to determine the nationality of the persons
whose remains were handed over.
We stress Iraq’s commitment to continuing its
efforts to meet its financial obligations in terms of
compensating Kuwait, in connection with which Iraq
paid an additional amount of $250 million on 28 January.
Progress was made in the relations between the
central Government and the Regional Government
during the recent period. Successful consultations
have been held between officials from both sides, in
particular after their meetings, which led to an initial
agreement on the federal budget for 2020 as well as on
issues related to oil revenues. The federal Government
is seeking to conclude talks with the Kurdistan Regional
Government of Iraq so as to reach a final agreement
20-05620

03/03/2020

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8739

between the two parties following the formation of the
new Government.

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which have a
high priority on our Government’s agenda.

In closing, I thank the Secretary-General for his
support for Iraq through emphasizing the need to
respect its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
also thank the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq and the Head of the Mission for their efforts in
this respect. We hope that following the full defeat
of Da’esh, the international community will continue
its support for Iraq and its people in order for them to
remain strong and steadfast as well as to meet their
aspirations. My Government thanks France, Germany
and Denmark for supporting Iraqi development projects
and Iraq’s efforts and those of the Mission in the area
of mine clearance.

I would note here the statement made by the
Ministry of Planning of Iraq on 16 February indicating
that the poverty rate in Iraq decreased over the past
two years, 2018-2019, compared with 2014. This shows
that the Government attaches great importance to
developing our country’s economy and creating job
opportunities despite also combating terrorism. We are
confident that the international community will work
relentlessly to support my Government’s efforts in that
regard, because international security is contingent on
domestic security in every State of the world.

Allow me to end my statement by reiterating my
Government’s commitment to work seriously to ensure
the welfare and prosperity of our people through the
implementation of our international and national
obligations, as well as to uphold good governance in
accordance with the Constitution and our national
laws, with a view to achieving the 2030 Agenda for

I should also like to thank the members of the
Council for supporting Iraq’s sovereignty, addressing
all the challenges facing it and rejecting its being turned
into a battleground for third parties.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

20-0562021/21
