TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

12 SEPTEMBER

1969

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. .. . . . . . . ,. , . ,., , . .. . . . ,. ., , . .

1

. . . . .. , . . ., .. . , . . . ,, . ., . , , . .. .. .. .. . . ,

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the
Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add. 1
and2)
.., ., , .., , ,., , ,......,
. . . . . .,...........
. . .. . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 15 IO)

Adoption

of the agenda

S/PV.1510

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEIN

HUNDRED

Held in New York on Friday,

AND TENTH
12 September

MEETING
1969, at 3 p.m.

President: Mr. Y, A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Jordan and Saudi Arabia to take the places reserved for
them at the sides of the Council chamber, since the number
of places at the Council table is limited.

I)resent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. Sen (India),
Mr. A. A. Farah (Somaliaj, Mr. M. H. El-Farra (Jordan) and
Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the places reserved
for them.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l5101
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421
and Add.1 and 2).

3. The PRESIDENT (translated front Russian): I should
also like to inform the members of the Council that I have
received letters dated 11 and 12 September 1969 from the
representatives of Ceylon [S/9442] and Malaysia [S/9444],
in which they request the Council’s permission to participate in its discussion of the item before it. Therefore, if
there is no objection, I propose, in accordance with the
usual practice, to invite the representatives of Ceylon’ and
Malaysia to participate in the discussion of this question
without the right to vote. Since there are not enough places
at the Council table, I should like to propose that they take
the places reserved for them at the sides of the Council
chamber. I shall invite each of them to the Council table
when his turn comes to speak.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 August 1989 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and 2)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with the Council’s previous decisions, I now propose,
with the Council’s consent, to invite the representatives of
Israel, the United Arab Republic and Indonesia to take the
places reserved for them at the Council table so that they
may participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda
without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel),
Mr. A. El-Erian (United Arab Republic) and Mr. H, R.
Abdulgani (Indonesia) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with other decisions taken earlier by the Council, I
shall now invite the representatives of India, Somalia,

At the invitation of the President, Mr, 1% S. Amerasinghe
(Ceylon) and Mr. S. A. L. M. Hashim (Malaysia) took the
places reserved for them.
4. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
have already had an opportunity
to express to the
Ambassador of Spain the admiration we all feel for the
skilful leadership with which he conducted the proceedings
of the Council last month.
5. I am now glad to pay my respects to you, Sir. We know
you very well as a familiar figure and force amongst us,
powerful yet benign, always eager, so we are confident, to
work with us with as much co-operation and consideration
as your instructions permit,
6. It is with warm respect and affectionate regard that we
all pledge ourselves to support you in the search for
agreement and concord which must always be our first and
main purpose in this Council.
7. I have deliberately not spoken before, since the
question of the Al Aqsa Mosque is a matter on which it was
for representatives of Moslem countries and communities to
speak first,
8. For the same reason I shall deliberately speak as shortly
as possible; for though this is a subject on which we all have

strong feelings, it is also incumbent on all of us to speak
with the utmost restraint. We surely should have consistently in mind the hope that our debate and its outcome
will not intensify bitter disputes. Our hope must be that
our debate and its outcome will not thus make a peaceful
settlement even more difficult to achieve.

moreover, be exclusively in the hands of the religious
authorities concerned. On that we can all agree without any
reservation whatever. There are sufficient other causes for
disagreement. But the Holy Places should stand as a rebuke
to our disputes and an inspiration for our agreement.
16. I trust that even at this stage in our debate we can
avoid a result which would in the end pIease none of u;s.

9. I wish to say that I believe that there are three
propositions on which we could all readily agree. It is my
contention that we state them and endorse them, and that
we should do so unanimously in plain and forthright
language. That would be to fulfil our proper function in
this Council-not to argue over words and so to produce a
result unsatisfactory to everyone, but to state strongly and
clearly propositions on which we can all whole-heartedly
agree.

17. We should be content to say in the clearest language
conceivable, firstly, that all members of the Council stand
on the firm ground we have already taken up on Jerusalem,
secondly, that we utterly condemn the attempt to burn the
sacred Mosque and, thirdly, that we wish to make what has
happened not a reason to give up but a reason to pre;ss on,
to press on with our search for the lasting peace which
every day becomes more desperately urgent. We should be
content with nothing else and nothing less.

10. If we can do that, our findings will have maximum
effect. We shall have done something positive. Our debate
will not have created new barriers. It will have made a
contribution not to despair but to hope for the future.

18. May I make a further suggestion? We are conscious of
the commitments which await us next week at the opening
of the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly. We
are naturally anxious to bring our present debate to a
conclusion. But what we do or fail to do on this issue will
be of far-reaching importance. I very much hope that time
will be allowed for further consultations. In the meantime f
greatly hope that we can concentrate on the two main
purposes on which we are, I believe, unanimously agreed:
that is, to reaffirm our stand on Jerusalem and to conldemn
the outrageous crime,

11. What are those propositions on which we could all
unite? They are very simple, First we should reaffirm and
endorse resolution 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968 and also our
resolution 267 (1969) of 3 July 1969 for which we all
voted in this Council little over two months ago. That
resolution was clear, it was strong, it was unanimous. We do
not want or need to add to it. Certainly we do not wish to
detract from it. If we tinker with it, it will come to bits. We
should not destroy it. We should strongly and unanimously
maintain it.

19. As for the future, we may pray that Jerusalem and th;!’
Holy Places will one day become not a cause of violence ,.
and dissension and conflict but the centre and symbol of a
just peace. That must be our overriding hope and our
constant aim.

12. Let us say again that the future of the Holy City is a
matter of the deepest concern to us all and that we do not
accept, that we will not tolerate, any unilateral attempt to
prejudice or prejudge it. That should come first.

20. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I thank
the representative of the United Kingdom for the kind
words he has addressed to me.

13. The second proposition on which we all agree is this.
Every one of us joins in deploring with the utmost sincerity
the dreadful crime of attempting to burn the Mosque. It is a
crime which we .all utterly condemn, No one of us hesitates
to do so. Surely it would be well for this Council to voice in
unequivocal terms the feelings which are shared by people
of every religion and in every country. This is no time for
unjustified conclusions based on inadequate evidence. I
cannot believe that any government, any country, any
community would plan or perpetrate such a revolting
outrage. This is the time to state a clear conclusion, a strong
condemnation of the evil act on behalf of every one of us
here.

21. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Ceylon. I invite him to take a place at the Council table SO
that he may makehis statement.
22. Mr. AMERASINCHE (Ceylon): Mr. President,I thank
you and the membersof the Council for affording the
delegation of Ceylon an opportunity of participatirrg,
without the right to vote, in the discussionon the question
that has been brought before the Council by 25 Member
States. It gives me great pleasureto exercisethis privilege
under your Presidency. The degreeof experienceandthe
measureof sagacity and prudence that you commalld
should prove valuable assetsto the Council in the orderly
andbusinesslike
dispatchof its work.

14. The third proposition I put to you is equally obvious
but none the less compelling. We very well know that in the
effort to give effect to the principles and purposes of our
unanimous resolution of 22 November 1967 [242 (196’7)J
we face formidable barriers and obstacles. Many of us are
impatient and restless to press on in overcoming them.

23. It is many years since the delegationof Ceylontook
part in the debates of the Security Council, The last
occasion was when we ourselves were membersof the
Council during the years 1960 and 1961, Wehavechosento
break our long silence becausethe questionthat is now
engaging the attention of the Council is one of great
momentfor the entire world.

15. However, on one issue at least there must surely be
spontaneous agreement among us all. Whatever the general
settlement, the Holy Places must be preserved. They must
be protected. There must be free access to them for those
of all religions. The control of the Holy Places must,
2

24. The act of sacrilege committed in Jerusalem on 21
August 1969 has grievously injured the religious susceptibilities of Moslems the world over, to whom the Al Aqsa
Mosque, which was damaged by fire on that date, was a
shrine and a symbol of their faith. The sense of pain and
shock has not, however, been confined to the Moslem
world. The condemnation of the outrage has been universal,
and this, if nothing else, should offer some hope that the
means of restitution finally determined would receive
universal endorsement.

effectively enforced, the United Nations would have no
meaning or purpose. That is the heart of the matter.
28. It has been stated that a civilized man is, by definition,
one whose only reaction to the fire is one of shock and
concern, undiluted by any other sentiment or motive of
prejudice, rancour, or political advantage. But there is
another definition of civilized man which has been overlooked and which is equally applicable to the civilized
State, By that definition, a civilized State would be one
that showed a proper respect for the principles of the
Charter and for the unanimous determination of the organ
of the United Nations that is primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. For the
civilized world, the ideal of peace and security, together
with the principles that alone could ensure it, should be
pre-eminent. Hatred and mistrust result only when that
ideal and the principles relevant to its realization are flouted.

2.5. On 23 August the Prime Minister of Ceylon, Mr. Senanayake, in a statement that has been made public,
observed:
“That damage should have been caused to so historic a
place of worship must rouse the deepest sorrow amongst
everyone. The people of Ceylon share with their Moslem
brethren this sense of deep unhappiness.

29. Official Israeli opinion has also been quoted to the
effect that any attempt to exploit the fire for purposes of
political and religious incitement merits the unqualified
condemnation of all enlightened mankind. We are human
enough to know, however, that sorrow and indignation
often go together, especially when man’s deepest instinct is
outraged.

“Whatever may be the cause of the incident it is
essential for world peace that the matter should be
investigated by an impartial tribunal and that full
restoration and restitution should be made. I do not want
at this stage, without a knowledge of the facts, to
apportion blame but I cannot help making the comment
that when a foreign country occupies by force land
belonging to other countries a special onus rests on that
country to ensure that places of historic veneration
should receive the closest protection,”

30. In every community, in every society, there are
elements that are actuated, on occasions such as this,
initially by impulse and emotion. Cold reason and sober
reflection are not the attributes of man in the aggregate. If
appeals to passion and emotion are the immediate reaction
of the aggrieved, they are at least understandable and can,
with time and goodwill, be quenched. What cannot be
undone is the act of desecration itself. The solution that has
to be sought is one that would avert a similar risk in the
future. One fact is incontestable, and if that is recognized
the sohrtion is obvious. Had the area not been under foreign
occupation, the situation which we are discussing could
never have arisen.

1,’ 26. There are implications, both sacred and secular, in this
.’ insane act of vandalism, But the delegation of Ceylon does
not see this incident as a confrontation between Jew and
Moslem or between a demented incendiary and a bewildered regime whose illegal presence serves to aggravate the
situation. The feelings of shock, grief and indignation will
be assuaged with time; but it is not with those feelings that
the Council has to concern itself. As the organ of the
United Nations entrusted by its membership with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security-a responsibility delegated to it by the
membership in the interests of prompt and effective
action-it
is the Council’s duty to examine the real
circumstances that have made such a situation possible, and
to find the remedy.

.31. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) provided and
still remains the soundest basis for a just and peaceful
settlement. We have ourselves expressed concern over
Israel’s failure to abide by the Council’s resolution and have
stressed the responsibility
of the international community-and
in particular the four major Powers-for
bringing about a settlement in accordance with that
resolution. Our position has always been that Israeli forces
should withdraw unconditionally from Arab territory to
the position they occupied prior to 5 June 1967. This is an
indispensable condition for peace in the area. That is the
lesson of the Al Aqsa fire.

27. Surprise has been expressed in certain quarters that
the burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque should be cited as an
incident of exceptional gravity and one of international
significance, It has been stated that there have been fires in
other places held sacred by Moslems. To draw such a
’ comparison is to ignore, wittingly or unwittingly,
the
singular feature that distinguishes the Al Aqsa fire from
other fires in Holy Places. This distinction provides the
principal justification for the inclusion of the item in the
agenda of the Security Council. It lies in the fact that at the
time of the fire the’ territory on which the Al Aqsa Mosque
stands was under foreign occupation, an occupation established by force of arms and maintained in breach of the
principle repeatedly affirmed and emphasized unanimously
by the Security Council and the General Assembly, that
acquisition of territory by war is inadmissible. If that
principle were not scrupulously observed, and if it were not

32. Those who continue to waver on that issue would have
failed to learn that lesson and would have added one more
to history’s long and tragic list of lost opportunities. The
fire that started in Al Aqsa must not be allowed to spread
throughout the world. It must not be permitted to consume
and destroy, but must be employed to cleanse and heal. It
is neither through the punishment of the culprit nor
through the restoration of the shrine, nor through the
fervent expression of sympathy-the genuineness of which
we have no reason to question-that Israel can redeem
itself.
3

33. The only act of restitution that can eradicate the
bitterness and resentment created by this incident and set
in train a process that could lead to peace and harmony is
the relinquishment of Israeli control over Arab territory
which it now, in the judgement of the Security Council and
the General Assembly, unlawfully occupies. This result
could be achieved only if the Security Council itself showed
sufficient unity and determination to assert its authority.
The act of redemption which we seek on the part of Israel
might well create that spirit of forgiveness, compassion and
mutual tolerance which could prove to be a far more
reliable guarantee of a final settlement of the Middle East
question than any contractual arrangement.

Islam and remains to this very day a Holy Cit,y for
pilgrimage to more than 600 million followers of that faith.
It was in 638 A.D. that the second Caliph, Omar ibn
Al Khattab, built a wooden-roofed mosque there, the
forerunner of the present Al Aqsa, and for 1,300 years the
City of Jerusalem was under Islamic rule; yet Malslenn
throughout the centuries have shown themselves tolerant
towards both Jews and Christians, so much of whose
religious tradition they themselves revere. It is a deplorable
tragedy for civilization and the human spirit that that very
atmosphere of restraint and toleration deteriorated with the
annexation of the Holy City of Jerusalem by Israel.
40. The date of 21 August 1969 will long be remembered
as a day of tragedy in the annals of Islamic civilization, for
on that very day the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque was severely
damaged by fire. This act of vandalism has been condemned
throughout the world, including my own country. ‘When
the news of the fire reached Malaysia, there were wide.
spread demonstrations to protest this sacrilegious act. On
the following day, 22 August, the Malaysian delegation,
together with those of 24 other Moslem countries, sent a
joint cable to the Secretary-General and to the President of
the Security Council, requesting that appropriate United
Nations action be taken in connexion with the act of
desecration perpetrated on the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque, For
such appropriate action by the United Nations, we envisaged: “(a) an impartial investigation into the grave ‘event of
21 August 1969; (b) preventingthe recurrenceof any act of
vandalismagainst, or profanation of, the Holy PIacesin
Jerusalem;(c) enablingthe representativesof the Governments of Islamic countries to assess
the damageto the holy
Al Aqsa Mosque and to prepare and executeplansfor its
repair”.1 My delegationstill believesthat the stepsenumarated above are the most urgent and the mostsuitableto be
taken under the auspicesof the United Nations.

34. The portents are there for those who choose to heed
them. Indifference could spell disaster.
35. The task before the Security Council is to find that
special alchemy that can transmute this fire into a
benediction, We wish the Council success in its efforts.
36. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russiin): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Malaysia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table so that he may
address the Council.
37. Mr. HASHIM (Malaysia): Mr. President, on behalf of
my delegation I should like to thank you and, through you,
the members of the Security Council, for giving us this
opportunity to participate in the deliberations of the
Council on a subject which is of grave concern not only to
the Moslem world but also to men of all faiths. My
delegation has no doubt that under your wise guidance the
Council will discharge its heavy responsibilities with justice
and fairness, which will go a long way in solving the Middle
East question, and at the same time will alleviate the
profound grief and sorrow of Moslems everywhere.

41. Mr. Tekoah told us the other day that a man,Michael
Rohan, a visitor from Australia, had beenarrestedanil had
confessedto his deeds,At the sametime wealsoheard that
this Michael Rohan had beenliving for somemonthsin an
Israeli kibbutz. This revelation becomesmore significant
when the representativeof Algeria refersto the existenceof
fanatical religious sects, such as the “Church of God”,
aimingat “the rebuilding of the Tabernacleof David” and
“restoring the Kingdomof God to Israel” (1508th meeting,
para. 181. My delegation is surprisedto note that Such
organizations professing religious fanaticism are allowed
openly to hold meetingsin Israel, sincethere is nothingto
prevent such organizationsfrom usingfanaticsto desecrate
holy shrines.This possibility becomesmoreominouswhaa
we also learn that a large sum of money wasfound en
Michael Rohanat the time when he wasarrested,especially
when we know that he comes from a wool-shefaring
community of humble means.Yesterdaythe representative
of Jordan raisedthe questionsof the delayin the arrivalof
fire brigadesand the stoppageof the water-pumpsat the
crucial moment.

38. On 2 July 1969, when the Council was debating the
question of the status of Jerusalem, the Malaysian delegation sought the indulgence of the Council members to hear
the views of my Government on the subject (S/9302].
Today I come again before you to voice the profound
horror and grief of my Government and my people at the
burning of the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque. The City of
Jerusalem and its holy shrines are subjects very close to the
heart of the people in my country. It is because of this that
Malaysia, together with 24 other Member States, addressed
the joint letter to the President of the Security Council
requesting an urgent meeting on an issue of grave consequence to international peace and security [S/9421 and
Add. 1 and 21.
39. Statements have already been made by previous
speakers on the importance of Jerusalem and its holy
shrines, which the representative of Pakistan the other day
referred to as “the unique symbol of the confluence of
Islam with the sacred traditions of Abraham, Moses and
Jesus (1507th meeting, para. 141”. Jerusalem, the Holy
City par excellence of Judaism and Christianity, and, after
Mecca and Medina, also the chief shrine of Islam, has in an
unbroken span of 3,000 years been the centre and goal of
religious devotion. Jerusalem is sacred to Islam because our
Prophet originally enjoined his followers that prayer be
directed towards it, and hence it became the frrst Qibla of

42. All thesefactors certainly merit a carefulandimpartjsl
investigation to assessthe circumstancesleading to the
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twentyfourth
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1969, document

S/9441,annexI.
4

burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque; but, as was pointed out by
Mr. Shahi, the representative of Pakistan:

expresseda wish to hear answersto a number of questions
posed by them concerningthe fire of 21 August. Though a
perusal of my statements will reveal that they contain
answersto those questions,I shallrespondto them further
asfully aspossible,out of deferenceto the Council.

“ *.a such an investigation cannot be predicated on
conditions of military occupation . . . it would be futile
to deny that the environment produced by the military
occupation by Israel of the Holy City provided an
element of encouragement to the individual or group that
actually committed or abetted the committing of the
most incredible and abominable act.” [1507th meeting,
para. Il.]

48. It is being askedwhy I stated that only one tenth of
the Mosque wasdamaged,while somepressagenciesspoke
of extensive damage.The damagecausedby the fire wasas
described by me. Nine tenths of the Mosque remained
untouched by the flames. Yet in one tenth, the roof over
the southern wing and the pulpit-the Minbar-were almost
totally destroyed. Of course,we respectthe view that this is
an extensive damage, especially in a building of such
historic significanceand deepspiritual value.

43. The representative of India echoed a similar sentiment
when he said that:
6‘. . . we cannot escape the conclusion that what happened in Jerusalem on 21 August is the direct consequence of the Israeli occupation of that city and its
wanton neglect of the protection of Arab rights there.
Israel thus cannot be absolved of responsibility, for this
outrage”. (1508th meeting, para.37.1

49. Another questionis that of the duration of the fire. As
already explained by me, the fire was noticed by the
Moslem watchmen of the Mosque at approximately
7.20 a.m. It wasmasteredby 8.30. From then onwardsthe
firemen were occupiedwith the embers.

He had referred earlier to the irony of a State, created by
the United Nations, consistently flouting the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council-defiance
which had resulted in incidents like the burning of the Al
Aqsa. My colleague and friend, Mr. Abdulgani, the representative of Indonesia, also comes to the same conclusion in
his statement. A few minutes ago the representative of
Ceylon echoed the same sentiment.

50. Attention was also drawn to the fact that different
accounts of the cause of the fire were circulating in
Jerusalem,some of them originating from Mosquepersonnel and the firemen, during the first hours following the
outbreak, wheninquisitivenessand excitement were at their
peak. Is this not natural? Is it a legitimate ground for
criticism that later in the day, in the light of evidence and
expert examinations of the tracesof the fire in the building
itself, new light was thrown on the circumstances,which
the Government of Israelmadepublic?

44. This brings us back to Security Council resolutions
252 (1968) and 267 (1969), as well as the earlier General
Assembly resolutions concerning measures and actions by
Israel affecting the status of the City of Jerusalem. AI1 of
the above-mentioned resolutions confirm that all legislative
and administrative measures and actions taken by Israel
designed to alter the status of Jerusalem are invalid, and
that the Council has censured such measures in the
strongest terms and has urgently called upon Israel to
rescind them forthwith. Yet, in spite of all that, Israel has
continued to ignore and defy the United Nations, which
created it as a State and gave it life and sustenance. Now it
is up to you, Mr. President, and to the members of the
Council to examine the agenda before us in this perspective
and in accordance with the principles of the United Nations
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

51. Some previous speakershad referred to certain comments by She&h Helmi Al-Muhtasib, in a pressconference
he held in Jerusalem,which were not amongthe Sheikh’s
statements quoted by me. Indeed, I confined myself to
those of the Sheikh’sstatementswhich bore directly upon
the fire. If the Sheikh decidedto take the opportunity of
his press conference to go beyond this subject and to
express views, some of them not exactly laudatory of my
Government, that only illustratesthe freedom of expression
enjoyed in Jerusalem.
52. Another point wl+ch has come up relates to alleged
designsto rebuild the ancient Hebrew Temple. Quotations
were made from someeccentricviews uttered in Israel. The
position of the Government of Israel, made public at a
World Rabbinical Conferencein Jerusalemon 12 August
1967 and repeatedseveraltimessince,wasexpressedby the
Minister of ReligiousAffairs asfollows:

45. My delegation has an abiding faith in the United
Nations, and Malaysia is confident that on this occasion,
Mr. President, under your guidance, the Security Council
will finally be ableto bring peaceand hope to the Middle
East, in spite of the fact that Mrs. Golda Meir has the
audacity and temerity to censurethis Counciland accuseit
of interfering in the internal affairs of Israelby discussing
the presentitem on the agenda.

“According to the Halacha”-basic Jewish religious
concepts-“the Temple will be rebuilt when the Messiah
will have come. It is therefore inconceivable that we
ourselvesshould make any plansfor the rebuildingof the
Temple.”

46. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian):The next
speaker on my list is the representativeof Israel, who has
expressedthe desireto speakin exerciseof his right of
reply.

53. The question on the agendais the burning of the Al
Aqsa. We all sharein the feelings of sorrow and shock at
this grievous occurrence. Let us not mar our common
concern for the restoration of Al Aqsa to its full beauty by
concluding our deliberations on a note of asperity and
political controversy,

47. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have askedto speakin the
exercise of the right of reply, asseveralrepresentativeshave
5

-

“2. Recognizes that any act of destruction or profana.
tion of the Holy Places, religious buildings and &es in
Jerusalem or any encouragement of, or connivance at,
any such act may seriously endanger international peace
and security;

54. It is the eve of the Jewish New Year, the year 5730.
As the name of Jerusalem is heard in this chcmber, I should
like to take leave of the Security Council with the words of
prayer which we shall be saying as the sun goes down:
[The speaker continued in Hebrew]

“3. Determines that the execrable act of desecration
and profanation of the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque emphasises
the immediate necessity of Israel’s desisting from acting
in violation of the aforesaid resolutions and rescinding
forthwith all measures and actions taken by it desiglnedto
alter the status of Jerusalem;

“Remove all sorrow, hatred, strife
Spread Thy Tabernacle of peace, 0 Lord
O$er us, over the house of Israel and
Over Jerusalem, we pray.”
55. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The list
of speakers is exhausted. As a result of consultations with
the members of the Security Council, it appears that the
majority, for various reasons, is in favour of having the next
meeting of the Council to continue the discussion of this
question on Monday morning. In order to conclude this
matter, therefore, I should like to suggest that the next
meeting of the Council be held on Monday, 15 September,
at 10.30 a.m. If there are no other proposals and no
objections regarding this matter, I shall take it that the
proposal is accepted.

“4. Calls upon Israel scrupulously to observe the
provisions of the Geneva Conventions* governing military
occupation and to refrain from causing any hindrance to
the discharge of the established functions of the Supreme
Moslem Council of Jerusalem, including any co-operation
that Council may desire from countries with prcdomi.
nantly Moslem population and from Moslem communities
in relation to its plans for the maintenance and repair of
the Islamic Holy Places in Jerusalem;
“5. Condemns the failure of Israel to comply tvith the
aforementioned resolutions and calls upon it to implcment forthwith the provisions of these resolutions;

It was so decided.
56. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
representative of Pakistan has asked to make a statement. I
now call on him,

“6. Reiterates the determination in operative paragraph 7 of resolution 267 (I 969) that, in the eveutof a
negative response or no response, the Security Council
shall convene without delay to consider what further
action should bc taken in this matter;

57. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, in deference to
your wish that my delegation introduce the draft resolution
on the question before us in order to enable all Member
States to have time to reflect on the text and to obtain
instructions from their Governments, I shall present the
text, which reflects the consensus of the 25 Member States
that requested the Council to meet to consider the grievous
situation caused by the event of 21 August 1969. The text
reads as follows:

“7. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the implementation of the present resolution and to
report thereon to the Security Council at the t:arliest
possible date.” (S/.9445./
58. I shall, I hope, have the occasion at the next meeting
of the Council to recapitulate the salient points ‘of the
debate and to show how this draft responds to them. Al
this time I shall only stress the principal considerations
behind the draft resolution that I have just read out.

The Security Council,
“Grieved at the extensive damage caused by arson to
tile Holy Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem on 21 August
1969 under the military occupation of Israel,

59. First, the extensive damage caused by arson to the
Holy Al Aqsa Mosque is a grievous event which represerltsa
loss to human culture. I can say with certainty that this
point has already been endorsed by world public opinioa.

“Mindful of the consequent loss to human culture,
“Having heard the statements made before the Council
reflecting the universal outrage caused by the act of
sacrilege in one of the most venerated shrines of mankind,

60. Second, any act of destruction or profanation of the
Holy Places, religious buildings and sites in Jerusalemhas
the potentiality of disrupting international peace and
security. That point was never in dispute, but it has been
powerfully brought home to us by the grave repercussleas
of the incident of 21 August. These repercussions are
limitless in their very nature. It is not necessary for file to
cite evidence of the violent reaction of the entire Moslea~
world, The representative of Israel quoted yesterday tile
remarks’of some individuals from Moslem populations and
a string of quotations from certain sections of the world
press. I could also, if I wished to do so, read hundredsof
statements by the most reputable journalists and news.

“‘Recalling its resolutions 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968
and 267 (1969) of 3 July 1969 and the earlier General
Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) of 4
and 14 July 1967, respectively, concerning measures and
actions by Israel affecting the status of the City of
Jerusalem,
“Reafjrming the established principle that acquisition
of territory by military conquest is inadmissible,
“1. Reaffirms
(1969);

its resolutions

252 (1968) and 267

2 Ecneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 (United Nntiow WQfJ
Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973).
6

. .’

papers and organs of expression of public opinion. in the
world, and statements by leaders of all countries of the
world, particularly the Islamic countries from Morocco to
the Philippinks. But the Security Council is concerned with
the considered views of Governments, not with the
opinions of particular individuals. The 25 Governments
which have requested this meeting have acted out of their
sense of governmental responsibility, and their considered
request and their declarations and affirmations stand on an
altogether different level. Responsible opinion in this
matter and the gravity of the concern felt about it have
been conveyed to the Council by the signatures of 25
delegations affixed to the letter dated 28 August 1969
[S/9421 and Add-I and 21. They have also been conveyed
by the partidipation in this debate of the delegations of
India and Ceylon and the statements made by the representatives of those two countries.

65. Immediately after the end of the First World War,
when the question arose of the possible danger that the
Moslem Holy Places would be occupied by Great Britain or
the Western Powers, there was an upsurge of concern in the
Indian subcontinent for the preservation of the Holy Places
of Islam and the maintenance of Moslem sovereignty over
them. This movement, called the Khilafat Movement, allied
itself with the movement for home rule led by Mahatma
Gandhi, and they both laid the foundation of the independence movement of the Indian subcontinent. That was in
the aftermath of the First World War, Ever since that time
the great Indian-Moslem community, which is now the
Moslem population of Pakistan and the Moslem minority of
India, has always taken an abiding interest in the future of
the Holy Places. Therefore, if Pakistan speaks here today, it
is the expression of our historic andbbiding concern for the
sacred places of Islam.

61. Third, the Security Council has already called upon
Israel to rescind forthwith all measures and actions taken
by it designed to alter the status of Jerusalem. If the
Council felt the need, as it did, to make this call when no
grave event had yet taken place, how much more is the
need emphasized by the occurrence of the grave and tragic
event of 21 August? To say this is not to prejudge the issue
of cl-iminal responsibility; it is only to state an obvious
political fact.

66. Hence, we consider that any act of desecration,
destruction or profanation of the Holy Places of Islam and
the lack of decorum in the religious buildings and sites in
Jerusalem are a matter of deep anguish and concern to us
and may seriously endanger international peace.
67. I turn now to paragraph 3, which reads:
“Determines that the execrable act of desecration and
profanation of the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque emphasizes the
immediate necessity of Israel’s desisting from acting in
violation of the aforesaid resolutions and rescinding
forthwith all measures and actions taken by it designed to
alter the status of Jerusalem”,

62. I do not need to comment elaborately on the text of
the draft resolution which I have just read out. The
preambular part does not call for any elucidation. Paragraph 1 merely reaffirms the previous Security Council
resolutions on Jerusalem.

In this particular paragraph we do not go beyond what has
already been demanded in Security Council resolutions
252 (1968) and 267 (1969). I should like to make it clear
that, in this paragraph that I have just read out, we allege
no complicity by Israel in the act. To see a connexion
between the act of arson and the direct complicity or
otherwise of Israel in that regard is to give a meaning to our
text which was not our intention to give. I state this as a
clarification of paragraph 3 for the benefit of the members
of the Council.

63. Paragraph 2 states a reality which has been brought
home forcefully to all of us:
“ . . . that any act of destruction or profanation of the
Holy Places, religious buildings and sites in Jerusalem or
any encouragement of, or connivance at, any such act
may seriously endanger international peace and security”.
64. In this context let me state that the great Moslem
community of the India-Pakistan subcontinent has had a
historic concern with the fate of the Moslem Holy Places. It
will be recalled that in 1914 when the Ottoman Empire was
at war with the Government of the United Kingdom-which
then ruled the subcontinent of India-the Indian-Moslem
community, through its leaders, sent a memorial, a formal
statement, to the British Government. It should be appreciated that this was sent in 1914, when independence
movements had not taken birth. At that time even the idea
of home rule for India was considered revdlutionary and
the Indian peoples considered themselves to be loyal
subjects of His Britannic Majesty. Yet at that time the
leaders of the great Indian-Moslem community, under the
leadership of Maulana Muhammad Ali, declared in a formal
statement to the British Government that they found it an
intolerable situation when their spiritual allegiance to the
Caliph, who was the Ottoman ruler, the Sultan of Turkey,
was in conflict with their loyalty to the King-Emperor, His
Britannic Majesty; and since they were called upon to
choose, they would opt for their spiritual loyalty and take
the consequences.

68. I come now to paragraph 4; it is self-evident. The
representative of Israel has referred to the Supreme Moslem
Council, the high authority of the Moslems in Jerusalem,
which is concerned with the restoration of the Holy
Mosque. All we desire is that there should be no obstruo
tion or hindrance in its efforts to restore the venerated
shrine.
69, Paragraph 5 reads :
“Condemns the failure of Israel to comply with the
aforementioned resolutions and calls upon it to implee
ment forthwith the provisions of these resolutions”.
Let me state that it does not make us happy to come here
to call for the condemnation of Israel, But what choice
does Israel leave us? The elimination of this paragraph is
entirely in the hands of Israel. We wish that it could make
some response to world opinion. If there were the elements
of moderation in the attitude of Israel, the picture could be
7

transformed. We have heard of the statements made by the
leaders of Israel commending the moderation of certain
Moslem States. Nothing would give us greater pleasure,
greater satisfaction and greater hope than to see the
moderation of the Moslem countries matched by the
moderation of Israel, out of sensitiveness towards the
anguished feelings of those Moslem countries which maintain relations with Israel. How long does the world think
that the Moslem States will maintain these relations and
their moderate course of action, when on the other side
there is nothing but the most extreme insistence on the
exclusive rights or the exclusive claims of one people
against all others?
70. Let us turn now to paragraph 6. It is a reiteration of a
paragraph which is to be found in resolution 267 (1969).
7 1. Paragraph 7 requests the Secretary-General to follow
closely the implementation of this resolution.
72. In my statement to the Security Council on 9 September, I pleaded that the Council should view the issue before
it in the perspective of civilization. I stated then that “It
was a basic confidence of our times that , . . war apart,
vandalism against one people by another had become
unthinkable” [1507th meeking, para. 9/. This confidence
wasshattered on 21 August 1969 when arson wascommitted in the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque, causing extensive damage
to one of the holiest shrines of Islam. It is this confidence
which needs to be restored, or else there can be little
prospect of lasting peace in the world. It is to this goal that
we must turn our sights and our efforts, becausewhen 25
countries of the Moslem world acting together in unity and
solidarity requested the convening of the Security Council,

they did not come here solely to secure the condemnation
by the Council of the action of one fanatic: they came here
because they felt that the implications of the act wereso
grievous and so ominous as to endanger the prospects for
peace.
73. I reserve the right of my delegation to elaborate more
fully at a subsequent meeting of the Security Council on
the grave matters before us.
74. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I thank
the representative of Pakistan and wish to express my
appreciation to him for having met the wishes voicied by
many members of the Security Council to have the draft
resolution [S/9445/ on the question before us introduced
at today’s meeting. This will give the members of the
Council the opportunity to study that draft resolution in
greater detail, while those members of the CounciI who will
find it necessary to hold consultations and receive instructions from their Governments will have sufficient time to
do so.
75. I should like to remind the Council once again that, as
we have agreed, the next meeting will take place on
Monday, 15 September, at lo:30 a.m., to continue the
discussion of this question. In this regard, I should like to
inform the members of the Council that in the course of
today’s consultations many members expressedthe wish to
conclude our discussion of this question on Mond,ay, to
express their views on the draft resolution, to discuss it and
take a decision on it,
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

..

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
der Notions
Unies
rant
en vente
dons
ler librairies
et les agences
d6positairer
du monde
entier.
Informez-vow
aupr&
de votre librairie
ou adresser-vous
b:
Nations
Unies, Section
des venter, New York ou Gen&ve.
KAK
Il:~~ill~lltl

flOflYClMTb

MSAAHHFl

Oprar~~t:~a~~Ilu

ill'CIIT~'TIi:IS

110

IWCS

WtWl:lIlllC

IlaM

upo~mc

II:I~~II~~~,

COMO

CONSEGLJIR

OGzcfinllcmras

pN"lOllaX

lIllUlllTC

110
IIhdlopl~

OPrAHM3ALlMM

Wlpa.
UlNX'j-:

IIal~llir
hnO~&lTC

in United

Nations,

New York

~loitil10 IiyullTh
Ulp~llIilI

O~Wlllll3tll(lIJl

06

HAL(HR
n

muuiwax

l~llIl~lilll~lS

Il:l,$~llIlllX

~iiZC~IIIICIIlII,IS

II IMlUCJI
Ihl\llil.

II

I~llllilillOY
CCliltlI~l

110

am 3Cc1tena.

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Los publicacioner
de Ias Naciones
Unidos
ertdn
en todos portes del mundo. Consulte
a su librero
Vent-x,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

06bEAHHEHHblX

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
y casas dirtribuidoras
o dirfjase
0: Nociones
Unidos,
Secci6n

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

82235-December

1972-2W
