UNITED

NATIONS

TR’EfiTY-SIXTH

I’EAR

DEPT.OF PO!.fTICAlAl-ID
SFCLWTYr~!!s!rri. AFFAIRS

th
MEETING

NEW

: 14 OCTOBER

I97 I

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

1.594) . . . . I . . . . , _ . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

. . . . .

. . . . . . . , , . , , . _. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in Namibia :
(0) Letter dated 17 September I97 1 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the rcpresenfatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey,
Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco,
Niger, Nigeria, Peoplek Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic
of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/l 0326);
fb) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee
on Namibia (S/10330 and Corr.1) . . .

SlPV.1594

1

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 14 October 1971, at 3.30 pm.
fiesicient: Mr. Guillermo SEVJLLA SACASA (Nicaragua).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, J’apan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/I 594)

and if there is no objection, J shall invite those delegations
participating in this debate to take the places reserved for
them in the Council chamber,
2. J invire the representatives of Sudan, Ethiopia, South
Aftica, Liberia, Guyana, Chad, Nigeria, Mauritius and Saudi
Arabia to take the places reserved for them in the Council
chamber, it being understood that they will be seated at the
Council table when they wish to speak.
3. I invite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia to be seated at the Council table.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of
Algeria,
Botswana,
Burundi,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo
(Democratic Republic of). Dahomey, Egypt, Equa.
torial Guinea. Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guine;].
Kenya, Liberia, Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania. Mauritius,
Morocco, Niger,
Nigeria, People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/l 0326);
lb) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/l 0330 and Corr.1).
Adoption of the agenda

At. the invitation of the President, Mr. E. 0. Ogbu,
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, took
a place at the Council table; and Mr. C. F. G. von Hirschberg (South Afn’ca); Mr. J. R. Grimes (Liberia) and Mr. J.
Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took fhe places reserved for them,
4. T11e PRESIDENT (interpretation front Spanish): The
Council will now continue its consideration of the agenda
item.
5. J invite the representative of South Africa to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
6. Mr. VON HIRSCHBERG (South Africa): Mr. President,
thank you for giving ‘the South African delegation an
opportunity to make a further statement on the item on
the Council’s agenda for today.
7. On 6 October /1589th meeting/ the representative of
Somalia expressed the hope that South Africa would
expand on how it conceives of the principle or the right of
self-determination. He referred to this matter again yesterday /1593rd meeting/. J offer the following comments in
the spirit in which the original question was put to us by
Ambassador Farah.

Tire agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Dahomey, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, People’s Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegai, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia
(S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330 and Corr.1)

8. We consider that in principle each separate nation,
when it is ready, should have the right to determine its own
future. By nation we understand a group having its own
language, a consciousness of its own separate identity and
the desire to retain it. Such consciousness normallyderives
from a combination of features such as tradition, heritage,
history and so on.
9. A nation that has not yet determined its future shoutd
not be denied the right to do so-that is to say, it should
not be denied the right of self-determination merely
because it finds itself for historical or other reasons within
the same territory as another nation or other nations.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation j?om Spanish): In
accordance with previous decisions taken by the Council,
1

10. The principle of self-determination entails that a
nation may, if it so wishes, choose complete independence.
On the other hand, it also entails that a nation may, if it
prefers, form a political union or federation with some
other consenting nation or nations. By the same token, if a
nation does not want to unite with others it should not be
forced to do so, but should be permitted to stand on its
own, according to its wishes.
Il. This conception of the principle of selfdetermination
is fully in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, which speaks of the self-determination not of
territories but of peoples. It has, for example, been applied
in respect of territories such as the former Trust Territory
of Rwanda-Urundi, where national affiliations determined
the boundaries of the independent States that were later
formed. Where the existence of separate nationalities has
been ignored in the creation of new States serious
problems, as we know, have often arisen.
12. The- representative of Somalia also referred to statements by Bishop Auala. Those statements, he said, showed
that the people in South West Africa wish to be regarded as
one political unit. Bishop Auala is only one individual and,
like anybody else in South West Africa, he is entitled to his
views and to express them. However, we do not accept that
in this respect he reflects the views of all the population
groups in South West Africa, or even those of his own
Owambo people. Certainly he does not reflect the views of
the established political leaders in Owambo.
13. In South West Africa them are a number of nations
which are entirely unrelated one to another and have little
in common. We are honest and sincere in our commitment
to the principle of self-determination. We wish to say to
those who are equally sincere and honest in their support of
this principle that we feel obliged to take differences of
language, history, heritage and- group-consciousness into
account in applying self-determination in *South West
Africa-for the overriding reason that to force the peoples
of the Territory into one political unit would, in our belief,
simply create endless treble.
14. The, PRESIDENT finterpretation from Spanish): I
invite the representative of Liberia to be seated at the
Council table and to make his statement.
15. Mr. GRIMES (Liberia): Mr. President, once again I
thank you for the opportunity you have given me to speak
to you on this important question. I also wish to express
my sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Council.
16. When I addressed the Council just over a fortnight ago
meeting],
on the question of Namibia, I emphasized the need to take effective action for the protection of
the rights of the Namibian people against the illegal
occupation of this country by the Government of South
Africa. This appeal was influenced by considerations of
both fact and law. Nearly all of us are agreed on the facts
which constitute violations of the obligations imposed upon
the Government of South Africa in respect of the former
Mandate of South West Africa. At this stage, I think it
unnecessary to recall the details of what is fresh in the
minds of the members of this Council.
fl585th

17. The legal basis for my appeal was’ also stated. The
General Assembly made a determination, this Council
fortified that decision of the Assembly, the International
Court of Justice supported the decision of the Assembly
and of this Council, and outlined the legal consequencesof
the situation. ‘Ihe Government of Liberia qd all other
States members of the Organization of African Unity have
accepted those conclusions for the reasons enumerated in
my last statement.
18. There was some doubt as to the practical application
of effective measures, whatever their nature, to compel
South Africa to yield to the command of the General
Assembly and of this Council. I even attempted to indicate
the basis of my fears caused by what I consider an odd
phenomenon. In spite of South Africa’s acknowledged
violations of the obligations under the Mandate, the big
Powers were shown to be lending that Government massive
economic support and strong political encouragement, in
spite of their obligations under the Charter.
19. Since then, I have listened to statements made,
fortunately by only two members of this body, which in
effect question the competence of the General Assembly to
terminate the Mandate of South West Africa, as well as the
competence of the Security Council to take decisions
binding on States Members of the United Nations, without
satisfying the conditions of Article 39 of Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. They have contended that as
no determination of ore-conditions wasmade in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter in the case at hand, the decision of the Security
Council is therefore not binding. On the basis of this
rationalization, the Advisory Opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 19711 has been rejected by
them,
20. Before attempting to deal with the matter of the
competence of the General Assembly to terminate the
Mandate of South West Africa and the authority of the
Security Council to make binding decisions under its
general responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security as provided for in Article 25 of the
Charter, but outside Chapter VII of the Charter, I: should
like to refer very briefly to the nature of the obligations
imposed uppn South Africa under the Mandate. The nature
of those obligations is important and forms the basis on
which the resolutions of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council have been adopted as well as that on
which the Advisory Opinion of the International Court has
been given.
21. The view of my Government is that all Mandatories
under the Covenant of the League of Nations and the
respective Mandates assumed legal obligations in respect of
the Mandated Territories. The very nature of the system
confirms this view, which is in accordance with the general
view on this matter. The Mandates system Wasset up under
the provisions of the Covenant of the League of Nations, an
1Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Nanribia (South West Afn*ca) notwithstanding
Security Council resolrr t/on 276 /19 70Js Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports1971, p, 16.

international convention of the greatest importance at the
time. The individual Mandates were effected on the terms
of specific international legal instruments drawn up between the biggest international organization, the League of
Nations and the respective Mandatory States. In those
formal documents, provisions granting certain rights and
imposing definite obligations on the Mandatory, reserving
the rights of the League and preserving certain rights in
respect of the Mandated Territory and its people we13
inscribed. On the basis of the form and Iegafity of those
documents and the legal provisions contained therein, the
obligations were equally legal.
22. In his statement before this Council last week [1589th
meethg],
the representative
of the United King
dom, Sir Colin Crowe, contended, however, that the
obligations imposed upon the Government of South Africa
under the Mandate of South West Africa were mere moral
obligations. Apart altogether from the oddity and strangeness of such a contention, it would be Fair to say that such
a conclusion is without legal foundation, unreasonable and,
in fact, unrealistic. It is one thing to refuse to accept the
consequences of a certain situation and quite another to
deny the very existence of the dtuation, in spite of open
contradictions. The provisions of the Covenant and of the
Mandate were cited by him to support his Government’s
unwarranted argument that there was no legai basis for the
decisions of the General Assembly and of the Security
Council and consequently of the Court’s Advisory Opinion
on this issue, because there was no inclusion of a provision
granting power to the League of Nations to terminate the
Mandate. In other words, he argues that the Mandate of
South West Africa is based on law and accordingly a strict
interpretation of the relevant documents excludes the grant
to the League of the power to revoke the Mandate.
However. he equally denies the legal nature of the
obligations flowing from the same Mandate.
23. Thjs is not so, and I consider such an argument
erroneous and unreasonable. South Africa’s obligations
under the Mandate of South West Africa are legal obligations and nothing less. The International Court of Justice
has upheld this position on several occasions-a position
which this Council has, of course, similarly endorsed.

27. Without repeating my comments which were clearly
stated in this Council on 28 September /1585tfi mering], I
believe certain aspects of this matter require further
attention. The competence of the General Assembly to
terminate the Mandate of South West Africa would seem, in
our opinion, to depend on the satisfaction of two criteria.
First, it would depend on the question whether there has
been a violation by the Government of South Africa of the
obligations imposed upon it under the Mandate. Second, it
would depend on whether, in view of such a violation, if it
was shown to have occurred, the General Assembly had the
power in fact to terminate the Mandate.
28. On the first point there seems to be no doubt,
generally. This general position was recently very well
stated by Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet as follows:
“South Africa-which has violated the obligations thereof in a constant and reprehensible manner, not only
through the enactment of its annexationist legislation and
racist regulations but also by attacking the unity of the
Territory-has announced that that Mandate is null and
void .” /158&h meeting, para. 21.1

29, The question then is, in view of this violation of its
obligations under the Mandate, can its corresponding right
be brought to an end by the General Assembly? A legal
relation was established between the League of Nations on
the one hand and the Government of South Africa on the
other, for the principal and ultimate benefit of the
Mandated Territory of South West Africa and its people.
Under the instruments creating this relationship South
Africa was granted certain rights b) the League. Those
rights were granted on the condition, no less legal, that the
Mandatory would meet certain stipuIated obligations. A
violation of those obligations, in our opinion, provided the
basis for revocation of the Mandate, although such power in
the League was not specifically expressed. This proposition
is indeed supported by international law which allows for
this implication. Such an implication must be drawn from
the instrument establishing the Mandate for South West
Africa as it would be in the case of any other international

25. Subsequent Advisory Opinions in 19.553 and 1956:
which dealt, respectively, with Voting Procedure on QuesWest Africa,

26. The representative of the United Kingdom and the
representative of France, Ambassador Kosciusko-Mosizt,
have both also rejected the Advisory Opinion of 21 June
1971. First, they assert that the General Assembly has
power only to make recommendations, with Iimitcd exceptions which do not include the power to terminate
Mandates. It is argued that the League of Nations had no
competence to terminate any Mandate and the United
Nations, as successor to the League, did not acquire and
does not otherwise have the power to terminate any
Mandate.

Even the other ardent supporter of the Government of
South Africa in this matter-the United Kingdom-would
not oppose this position.

24. The Court has said that the supervisory authority of
the League of Nations, including the power to terminate a
mandate, now rests with the United Nations. In its 1950
Advisory Opinion on the International Status of South
West Africa,2 the Court stated that#the supervisory functions of the League were to be exercised by the United
Nations, and that South Africa was obliged to submit the
annual reports provided for in the Mandate and to transmit
petitions from the inhabitants of the Territory to the
General Assembly.

2 International
status of South
I.C.J. Reports 1950,p. 128.

tions relating to Reports and Petitions concerning the
Territory of South West Africa and Admissibility of
Hearings of Petitioners by the Committee on South West
Africa, reaffirmed the Mandatory’s legal obligations and the
General Assembly’s supervisory role.

Advisory Opillion:

3 South
West AfricaVoting
procedure.
Advisory
Opinion
of
June 7th, 1955: I.C.J. Reports 19S5, p. 61.
4 Admissibility
of hearings of petitioners
by the Committee
on
South West Africa, Advisory
Opinion
of June Ist, 1956: I.C.J.
Reports 1956, p. 23.

3

convention. It is founded, as I have stated, on an
established rule of international law. Such a rule of general
application must be applied to cvcry’convention, unless it is
cxpressiy excluded. This legal implication must also be
presumed to apply to the specific provisions of Article 22
of the Covenant of the League of Nations and cannot be
excluded by the general provision of Article 5.
30. Moreover, any other conclusion would postulate an
impossibility which could never have been the intention of
the framers of the Covenant.
31. The League therefore had the power to terminate any
Mandate in the case in which the Mandatory was shown to
have violated its obligations under the Mandate, in spite of
the fact that it did not exercise this power. The United
Nations, successor to the League of Nations, acquired the
powers of its. predecessor including its supervisory role over
Mandates; and this position is confirmed by the International Court of Justice in its opinions of 1950, 195.5 and
1956. Therefore, in view of the violation of its obligations
by the Government of South Africa under the Mandate of
South West Africa, the General Assembly correctly exercised its proper authority in accordance with law in
terminating the Mandate of South West Africa.
32. I have already dealt with the question whether the
General Assembly has any other decision-making power, as
may be seen in *my statement of 28 September /I585t?r
lwcvi/l~/.
33. ‘I’hc early practice of the United Nations also supports
the conclusion that it has the compctencc to terminate
manti:ttes cstablishcd by the League of Nations, as recorded
in General Assembly resolution 9 (lj. With respect to the
I’ulestine Mandate established in 1920, the General Assembly, in 1947, subsequent to the dissolution of the
League, adopted resolution 181 (II) which included the
words: “The Mandate for Palestine shall terminate as soon
as possible but in any case not later than 1 August 1948.”
34. It is interesting that I;rance voted for this resolution.
The United Kingdom representative abstained, but at no
point during the debate did he question the authority of
the General Assembly effectively to adopt this resolution.
Instead, Sir Alexander Cadogan merely expressed the hope
that his Government would be communicated with in
respect of the arrangements for the withdrawal
of the
Mandatory Power, which in that case was the United
Kingdom itself.
35. The Security Council, at its 124th meeting, acting
under Article 83, paragraph I, of the Charter, unanimously
approved a trusteeship agreement with the United States
for the former Japanese mandated island, even though at
the time Japan had not renounced its obligations or rights
under the Class “C” Mandate of 17 December 1920.
Although the agreement does not purport to terminate the
Mandate, the right of the United Nations to take this action
was based on its succession to the League.

tially, both based their objection on the assertion that
Security Council decisions are binding only if taken under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, and after
a determination under Article 39 thereof that a particular
situation constitutes a threat to the peace, a breach of the
peace or an aggression. Since a determination was not made
by the Security Council that the situation in Namibia fell
under provisions of Article 39, that argument leads to the
conclusion of the United Kingdom and French representatives that the Council’s resolutions on Namibia are not
binding. The United Kingdom representative adds that
decisions taken by the Security Council under Article 25 of
the Charter are binding only when the conditions in Article
39 have been met.
37. First of all, it is necessary to point out at this stage
that there is not and has never been such a “clear
understanding” on the limits of the Council’s decisionmaking author-i ty as the United Kingdom representative has
suggested. The powers of the Security Council as provided
in Article 24 do not seemto be so limited. This Article
provides,in paragraphs1 and 2, asfollows:
“In order to ensureprompt and effective action by the
United Nations, its Members confer on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenanceof
international peace and security, and agree that in
carrying out its duties under this responsibility the
Security Councilacts on their behalf.
“In dischargingthese dutiesthe Security Council shall
act in accordancewith the Purposes
andPrinciplesof the
United Nations. The specific powers granted to the
Security Council for the dischargeof thesedutiesarelaid
down in ChaptersVI, VII, VIII, and XII.”
38. The question which this last sentence raises, of
whether the Council has thesepowersonly, hasnot been
settled. On the other hand, it hasbeengenerally accepled
that the Council, in the dischargeof its responsibilities,can
exercise powersbeyond those specificallylisted in Article
24, paragraph2, provided, however, such Powers are
consistentwith the purposesand principlesof the United
Nations Charter. The records will show that during the
United Nations Conferenceon International Organization
which met at SanFranciscoin 1945attemptsto restrict the
powersof the Council weredefeated.
.
39. At the sametime and in like manner,attemptsto limit
obligationsof Membersunder Article 25 of the Charter to
those decisionstaken by the Councilin lhe exerciseof its
specific powers under ChaptersVI, VII and VIII of the
Charter failed. The obligationsof MembersunderArticle 2.5
ffow from the authority conferred on the Council under
Article 24, paragraph1, to act on their behalf, aswell.

40. In addition, it is indicated in the Repertory of Practice
of UrCted Naticm Organs that Article 25 “contains no
precise delimitation of the rangeof questionsto which it
relates,” and that “the Security Councilhason no occasion
defined the scopeof the obligationincurredby Membersof
the United Nations under Article 25”.s This view is fully

36. This leads to the second objection on which the recent
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice has
hecn rejected by the United Kingdom and France. Essen-

5 United
Nations
(Vol. I), p, 257.

4

publication,

Sales No.:

1957.V.4

(Supp.1)

supported by Goodrich, Hambro and Simons in their
publication: The Charter of the United Nations.6

honesty, however, 1 think we should all attach to the
Court’s Advisory Opinion of 21 June 1971 the weight it
deserves. Both the high place held by the International
Court of Justice and the size of its majority Opinion
demanda specialplacein our considerationof the question
before us.

41. In 19.51 when the question of restrictions on the
passage of ships through the Suez Canal was before the
Security Council, the United Kingdom representative, Sir
Gladwyn Jebb, argued at the 550th meeting on 1 August
that the Council had undoubted authority to take a
decision that the restrictions be removed. The draft of the
resolution presented to the Security Council on 15 August
1951 /S/2298/ providing for the Council to take action in
the matter was co-sponsored by the United Kingdom and
France. There was then no determination by the Council
that the conditions fell under Article 39 of the Charter. In
fact, hostility in the area had long since subsided.

46. I wish to concludeby appealingfor a unanimousvote
on the draft resolution of Burundi, Sierra Leone and
Somalia,7 which I understandwill be introduced at the
Council’smeetingtomorrow.

42. Moreover, it will readily be remembered that, in the
absence of any formal determination under Article 39 of

the Charter, the Security Council took important decisions
consideredby all the Members of the United Nations,
including the United Kingdom and France, to be binding, in
connetion with the Congo situation. While reaffirming its
earlier resolution calling upon Belgium to withdraw its
troops, Security Council resolution 145 (1960), which was
unanimouslyadopted, requestedall Statesto refrain from
any action which might tend to impede the restoration of
law and order or underminethe territorial integrity and the
political independenceof the Republic of the Congo.
Security Council resolution 146 (1960) called upon all
States to acceptand carry out the decisionsof the Security
Council and to afford mutual assistancein carrying out
measuresdecided upon
by the Council. The United
Kingdom voted for this resolution, and never argued that
such a decisionof the Council was not binding on Member
Stales.

47. Mr. LONCERSTAEY (Belgium)finferprefution from
French): Before speakingon the matter now before us, I
should like, Mr. President,to carry out a most pleasanttask
and express congratulationsto you, on behalf of my
delegationand on my own behalf, and to say how pleased
we are to be working here under your Presidency. Your
many qualities,and particularly your diplomaticskill, are a
guarantee of the successfulconclusionof the CounciI’s
numeroustasksduring the month of October.
43. I shouldalsolike to thank the representativeof Japan,
AmbassadorNakagawa,for his talented direction of the
work of the Councilduringthe monthof September.
49. The problemof South WestAfrica, which hasbecome
the problem of Namibia, is one that has occupied the
attention of the United hations sinceits inception. The
Security Council is once again confronted with that
problem. My delegationhaslistenedwith great attention to
the various statements that have beenmade so far. Only
yesterday, PresidentOuld Daddah,at the head of a large
African delegation,spokehere/1593rd rneetingj, and with
his usuallofty thought referred to the feelingsarousedby
the refusal of South Africa to act in conformity with the
directivesof our Organization.

43. I shallnot go into further detail at this point, but it is
clearly evident that it is by no meanstrue that the view
50. My delegationwould like to say that it understands
expressedby the representative of the United Kingdom is
in connexion
the view generallyaccepted,or that it is a clen?understand- the concern felt by our African colleagues
with a problem that is of such interest to them and on
ing on which the Council makesbinding decisions,or that
either the United Kingdom or Francehasbeenconsistentin
which no progresshas been made towards finding a
its respectiveapproach to the question. Members will
solution. The object of our debate is to seek measures
readily recall that in my statement to this Council on 28
which ihe Security Council can adopt on Namibia,followSeptember 1971 (1585th meeti&, I questioned the
ing the Advisory Opinionof 21 June1971.In requestingan
so-calledobjectivity with which somehave approachedthe
opinion, the Security Council wishedto have clarification
problem of Namibia.I still wonder whether someof these on the consequences
and implicationsof its own decisions
argumentsare genuinely believed, or whether they have on Namibia.Wehavecarefully studiedthis Opinion, and we
been advancedasa matter of convenienceand expediency.
agree with the conclusionsof the Court. We note in it the
obligation for South Africa to put an immediateend to its
44. The representativeof France has warnedthat, in this
illegal presencein Namibia; the opinionrequires Member
matter, we muststrive to be concrete and constructive, and
States to recognizethe illegality of that presenceand to
he addsthat this is the position to which his Government
abstain from all acts that might imply the contrary; and,
intends to adhere.I certainly join in his appeal for the
finally, it requiresnon-MemberStatesto cooperate in the
implementationof measures
adoptedby the United Nations
Council, without exception, to be constructive in its
on the subjectof Namibia.
considerationof this matter.
45. There is no need for me to retrace my statement on
the non-bindingnature of an Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice. With the samedegreeof
6 L. M. Goodrich, E. Hambro and A. P. Simon&TheCharzer 0f
the United Nurior~s
(NewYork, ColumbiaUniversityPress,1969),
3rd editionrevised.

51. In the grounds given for the opinion, the Court
stresseda number of generalmatters on which we have
reservations.Specifically, we feel that the Security Council
can adopt decisionsmandatoryfor all MemberStatesof the
United Nationsonly when, in conformity with ChapterVII
7 Subsequently circulated
asdocument
S/l0372.

of the Charler, it has found that there is a threat to the
peace, a bred1
of the peace or an act Of aggression. In our
opinion the Security Council has not adopted such a
decision _
52. 1 should like to say that we continue to support
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), as well as the
principles which we accepted in adopting it. Today, as was
the case five years ago, we believe that the people of
Namibia have the right to self-determination, to freedom
and to independence, in conformity with the Charter; that
the Territory has an international status which it must keep
until the Namibian people has exercised this right; that
Namibia is a direct responsibility of the United Nations;
and, finally, that the South African Government must
abstain from acting in any way that could modify the
international status of Namibia.
53. WC hope that thoseobjectives will bc achieved soon
and that it will be possibleto obtain the agreementof
South Africa on a processwhich shouldallow the Namibian
people freely to exercisethe right to self-determination.
Indeed, my delegationhopes that it has correctly interpreted the statementsmadein the Security Cour~ciland in
the GeneralAssembly. It seemsto usthat thesecould open
the way to the implementationof our previousdecisions,
through conversations between the United Nations and
South Africa. It is on the basisof theseconsiderationsthat
my delegationwill considerany draft resolutionsthat may
be submittedto the Security Council.
54. The PRESIDENT (ihterpretufion jkm SpatzbltJ: I
wish to expressmy personalappreciation to the reprcscntativc of Belgium for the kind words he addressedto me as
President.I am honoured and gratified by these words,
comingfrom a manof his calibreand a friend.
55. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (it~terprctation from
FrmchJ: The delegationof Burundi had not intended to
speaktoday and had reservedits right to do so at a later
date, dependingon the evolution of the debate. Nevertheless,we feel that we mustgive a little help to the delegation
of South Africa. For our @G-t,we would wish South Africa
to excelin history asit doesin the cult of apartheid. Earlier
today, during the statementmade by the representativeof
South Africa, when he wished to quote an example, he
spoke of the former Rwanda-Urundi. In his opinion, no
doubt, that example is a final argument in support of the
theory he endeavoursto expound to the Council. But it is
only a specious argument, as will be proved by the
clarificationsI shall give and it will be realizedthat there is
no commonyardstick betweenNamibia and the situation
prevailingthere, and the administrative and political structures in Rwanda and in Burundi before their respective
accessions
to independence,We note, in fact, that the
delegationof South Africa, which in a servile manner
reflects the racist policy, seems to be obsessedwith
division.
56. As for the caseof Rwandaand Burundi, the delegation
of South Africa should remember that until 1916 three
countries, Burundi, Tanganyika-now Tanzania-and
Rwanda, were parts of a single German colony, while
before the comingof colonialismthese three countries were
6

complctcly separate,and constituted entiti’cs in’dcpondent
of one another. In I923 the BelgianParliamentagreed to
exercisetrusteeshipover Rwandaand Burundi, two entirely
different countries; two different administrative, political
and economic entities. At the time whenthe two countries
which were under the administration of a single Power
accededto independence,thesetwo entitiesprcferrcd to do
so as two countries, with two different Headsof State.
Both before independenceand during the colonial era-and
even before the colonial-they had two different I-leadsof
State. Thus you will realize that the examplegiven by the
representative of South Africa does not constitute a
substantialargumentin favour of the position upheld by his
country.
57. I would wish to add, on the other hand, that the
negotiations undertaken within the United Nations were
not intended to prevent the separationof Rwanda-Urundi,
which had never been a single country, but, rather,
proposed unification, taking into account of course the
historical circumstanceswhich existed when the two
countries were administered by a single administering
Power.
58. In regard to Namibia, earlier in this meeting the
delegation of South Africa spoke of the concept of
nationhood, to which it attributed certain criteria, such as
the sameculture, the samelanguageor the consciousness
of
accedingto a political statusin accordancewith the wishes
of the people. I noted that the representativeof South
Africa merely gave a nomenclature to an assumption,
without replying either directly or indirectly to the
question which had been put to him: What doesJ’retoria
understand by self&termination? Thus, following the
example of the representativeof Somalia,1 should like to
put the questionagain and to receive a direct reply, not
anotherseriesof assumptions
aswasthe caseearlier.
59. To conclude, I would say that the representativeof
South Africa shouldrealize that even in so far asNamibiais
concerned,ethnic or racial variety doesnot constitute an
obstacleto accession
to independence,nor shouldit impede
the constitution of a singleindivisiblenation.
60. Wehave the exampleof the United Statesof America
or the example of the Soviet Union, which are immense
countries, due’ precisely to this agglomerationof large
ethnic and racially different groups, and this difference in
itself is a tremendousasset,for variety engenderscomplementarity, and that is a great trump card in building a
nation. Let us therefore admirethe geniusof South Africa,
iyhich forever seeksto divide, to create disintegration;
,vhereastoday we are living at a time when evencontinents
;eek to unite!

51. In South Africa, asin Namibia,the intent is to divide,
to separate,to disrupt. South Africa will not be in the dock
vhen an independentNamibia and an independentSouth
Africa meet-independentnot for only part of the populaion of South Africa, but on behalf of the population of
iouth Africa-they will give each other the floor in the
iecurity Council and sit side by side, as do Belgiumand
hmmdi at present.

07. The PR]:S]DENT (itrrcrpretati~t: fbC)tjl Sptlis/r): ~1,~
ncXt sfe:+kcr on my list is the represcfjlatjve
or
Saudi
Ar;lbia.
1 R!SpeCt~d]y invite
him
to take
a place
at tile
c’ounci] table and to makejjjs statement,
(‘3. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you, Mr. president, for affording me another opportunity to address
nlYsclft0 the itf!nl Of which the Council isseized.
64. I shou]d have preferred to defer my statementto a
Inter date but, apprehensiveIest a resolutionmight emerge
from the deliberations,a resolutionwhich mightnot clearly
define the right to self-determination,] thought it jncum.
bent upon me to take the floor becauseit fell to me and
about half a dozen representativesin 1949to elaboratethe
Principle of self-determinationinto a welldefined right. It
took USSCWtor eight years to do sb, and there wasgreat
controversy as to what self-determinationis. ]n fact, the
co]onial Powersof thosedayswereadamantthat self-determination was a vague principle and could not easily bc
defined. We maintained that we go by what we witness
rather than any philosophicalapproachto sclfdeterminatkm .
65. TO make myself clear, we went so far as to try to
define what a people is. And, havinghad an opportunity to
look into the speechof my colleaguefrom South Africa-]
happcncd to be outside, but he wasgraciousenoughto lend
me the speech;I read it and it was a short statementon
sc]f-dctermination--1 would now like to say the following,
culling what I know from the collective experienceof the
llnitcd Nationsduring the period 1949 to 1957.

nians, the Latvians, the Baltic States have their own
hWW
and dialects; the Russians
as such have their
language;thosein Samarkandor Uzbekistanor Azerbaijan
and the Asian republicshave their own languages;
but the
Peoplesin the USSRin the largercontext of nationality are
consideredone people.Somemightsaythat isananomaly,
that 15 republicsshouldconstitutea people.
68. Why go SO far? The hostcountry in which we now are
has so many socalledpeopleof different nationalorigins:
there are Africans, Puerto Ricans,Scandinavians,
Chinese
and Japanese
on the WestCoast-aIltrue Americans,with
equalrights.And therearcsomecommunitieswhichstill do
not speakthe language;yet they areconsidered
Americans.
Do they constitute a people?Of coursethey constitute a
people.
69. A peopleis determinedby the loyalty it holds to a
political entity, regardless
of language-although
languageis
essentialto make that peopleviable as such; I am not
talking about economicviability. So everyonewho comes
from abroad tries to learn the languageof America, and
evenbefore they succeed in speaking
it they areconsidered
Americansonce they have acquiredAmericannationality.

70. From the well-organizednations I go now to the
patriarchalstateof society,and I derivewhat J sayfrom the
discussions
WChavehad on selfdeterminationin the Third
Committee, Usually, in the patriarchalsociety, we have
what you call communallift. Thereis asyet nrl nation. A
community setsitself up with its chief. its patriarch;and rt
i: rccognized as such. At a stone’sthrc.iw from that
community there is another community. ]+zrluapsthe)
speakthe samrIanguagcor a different dialect.They may be
similarin their customsandtraditions,but they aredistinct
in their tribal organization.As weknow from history, from
the community the city-state emerged.There were citystatesnot only in the da1.sof ancientGreece;wefind them
even in recent times. In Italy, for instance, there was
Venice. Thesewere principalities,but they were actually
citystates and they beganwith cities.TherewereFlorence,
Rome-] do not haveto remindourcolleagues
from Italy of
the numberof principalitiesand city-states.Although they
were distinct in their organisation,they had the same
language-althoughdifferent dialectsperhaps-andsimilar
traditions.

66. A peopleneednot be homogeneous
in the sensethat
every member,every family or every community shouldbe
;I replica of the other, inasmuchason the sameboughone
does not find all the leavesexactly the same,althoughthey
look alike. When WC say “a people”, it is to simplify
matters; but a peopleis a conglomerationof individuals.To
illustrate, take the United Kingdom-and it is called
“United” Kingdom-which consistsof the Scats,the Welsh,
the socalled original English, the Yorkshiremen, the
Comish people who, incidentally, were called peculiarby
those from other parts when I ljved in England-J did not
find Lord Caradonpeculiar at all-becausethey may have
been mixed with the Spanish,with the Devonshirepeople
in the South, after the wreck of the SpanishArmada,the
Manx and, later, the people of Ulster, Northern Ireland. 1
do not how
to which they belong,but we shallnot digress.
They consider themselves“a People”. The Peopleof the
United Kingdom are a people, a politically well&fined
people.
Once in a while one hears the Scats want
surreptitiously to transport the famousstone from West.
ldnster to Scotland. And one finds many Peoplewho
would rather be provincial in their outlook on the
community or the nation. Why take the United Kingdomas
an
example?
One
might
say, well it took the Warsof the
Roses, it took SOmany armed conflicts to make them
become, soto speak,one PeoPIe.

71. It wasnot until the French Revolution that nations
becamedistinct. I think nationalism
wasa product of the
French Revolution, nationalismas such, as we know it
today, with aII the goodandevil it entails.It is goodwhena
nation is conscious of its culture, promotesits institutions,
defendsitself from foreign forces;and it is nefariouswhen
it becomesjingoisticor chauvinistic,and for thosereasons
wageswar for national gainor aggrandizement.
I maintain
that to a largeextent languagethat stemsfrom the same
roots, traditionsandcustomsthat aremoreor Iessalike,are
the factors that finally determinea peopleOr a community
assuch.

67. I shouldlike to mention the Soviet Union, the USSR.
nlere are 15 republics, diversein their culture andin their
languages: in Armenia they speak Armenian; in the
~~~~~~~~they speak a languageof their own; the Lithua-

72. Now, why have I goneinto this prefacestatingwhat I
think shou]dbe done on this question?It is because
our
colleague
from south Africa, Mr. vonHirschberg,repliedto
our colleague
from Somalia,Mr.Farah, that tht’re wasa
7

diversity of tribes in South West Africa, ahas Namibia.
Immediately I went back to the United Kingdom, where
&here is a diversity of originally different national origins,
like the SCOWS,like the Norrnans who came from
France-“1066 and All That”-when William the Conqueror
came and brought his troops. And as we mentioned, in the
United States there is a diversity of peoples.

73. But we cannot subscribe to the thesis that because
Namibia, or South West Africa, has various tribes it cannot
be viable, nationally speaking, a5 far as national aspirations
are concerned. There is a common denominator in every
territory, unless it has been invaded from outside. And if
anybody invaded South West Africa it was certain Europcan people, the German settlers, who made it a German
colony. Those were the real invaders from outside. As for
the tribes, they had what I would call a community of
interests. Sometimes they fought one another, no doubt, as
all tribes do. Here I can speak from my personal experience
of my own region. Not very long ago, before 1925, a large
part of Arabia was a conglomeration of tribes. They were
brothers in many respects. Sometimes one tribe thought it
was superior to another, and they fought one another. But
they were finally unified and became the Kingdom of Saudj
Arabia. Therefore, we cannot subscribe to the thesis of our
South African colleagues that South West Africa, or
Namibia, has many tribes and that we have to respect the
integrity of each tribe. That is exactly what our colleague
from Somalia, Ambassador Farah, had in mind when at one
of the meetings he asked our colleague from France
wh~illcr
by selldetermination and the special regime that
our collcague from France had mentioned he meant
fragmentation or not, and our French colleague hastened to
day that he did not mean fragmentation. Therefore I am

surprised at anyone’s saying that we should begin from any
premise similar to the one stated- today by our South
African colleague.

76. Therefore, self-determination has not onIy a political
but also an economic aspect. Many of our colleagues here
around this table concentrate on the poIiticaI aspect only. I
submit that the economic aspect of self-determination is
mare important than its political aspect, because any
Territory which is not economicaIIy viable cannot be
politically viable. We have come to know this: although it
may perhaps preserve the form of a political entity it would ’
be dependent on other States, economicahy and fiianciaIIy.
77. NOWwe come to South West Africa, alias Namibia, a
territory as big as France and the United Kingdom. 1t ls a
very rich Territory; its surface has not yet been scratched.
Nobody would have thought, about 60 years ago, that the
Arabian Peninsula had such wealth under the ground. In
fact, the British went there to prospect for oil; they did not
see a drop of oil. I think they went a couple of thousand
feet down into the sand. Then came American companies
and they went deeper and oil gushed, until de Colier, one
of the most famous geologists of modern times, said that
the Arabian Peninsula floats on oil-not just Saudi Arabia
but the whole Arabian Peninsula floats on oil. Although
that statement dramatizes the situation, it is true: if You go
deep enough in the peninsula you will find oil.
78. Now if you go deep enough in South West Africa, YOU
will find uranium, You may perhaps not have to dig deep to
find diamonds. You have Persian lamb. You have grazing
grounds for herds. And who knows if oil, gas and other
minerals are not there too. I am not a geologist, but we are
told that it is quite a rich Territory, and its resourceshave
not been tapped.

74. Selfdetermination was a vague principle before 1919.
But when Mr. Woodrow Wilson, a former Resident of the
United States, enunciated Iv& Fourteen Points, that, I think,
was the step forward towards defining selfdetermination.
But it remained a principle. When we were elaborating the
Universal Declaration of Human IQhts at the PaIais de
Chaillot, some of us-and I was one of these-thought that
we should include the right of self-determination in that
Declaration, Our opponents remonstrated and said that we
were dealing with individual rights, and self-determination
had to do with collective rights. We retorted that there is no

79. It so happens that there is a relatively smaIl number of
white scttlers.who have been doing quite well there for

themselves. They scratch the surface and get rich. And they
do not want to scratch more than the surface. Why should
they? After all, you cannot eat wealth; you can only
accumulate it, and it becomes a figure in the bank. It is a
good cushion for you to think: “Oh, 1 have a million
dollars.” WeII, that is psychological. AI1 they do is get the
wealth they want and rest on their laurels.

such thing as an isolated, individual right, becauSe individuaI rights are described or defined in relation to society. In

.

one’s natural resources. Incidentally, this was a Latin
American paragraph. Argentina played a part in that,
together wjth the other Latin American countries. We
formulated the political side of the issue, those of Us Iike
me. Then we gave in, and then our colleague from the
United States, who at that time was Mrs. Roosevelt, said
that if there should be a nationalization because of the
control exercised by a State over its natural resources, there
should be compensation. We then included compensation in
that paragraph.

the same Declaration we mentioned the right of the family,
which is a collectivity, and the right to form labour unions;
we mentioned many coIIective rights, such as the right to
worship with others. AI1 these are individual rights, but at
the same time they imply or include the collectivity.

80. I submit that in regard to South West Africa,
otherwise known as Namibia-I say “otherwise known as
Namibia”, but I know it as South West Africa-you, my
African brothers, should never have severed the Mandate
from South Africa. I told you that in 1966. Where are the
Africans sitting? Now you come and say “Namibia”. Well,
1 am the Emperor of China. Would they recognize me if I
say that on Monday, when we discuss the question of
China? Who is going to recognize a country which they
christened Namibia just because tlley like the word

75. Where do we go from this argument? I said that
selfdetermination was a principle. We spent almost eight
Years in formuIating it into a right, and it is now the first
article in both Covenants on Human Rights. ?%e other day
somebody cited, in the General Assembly, the second
paragraph of the first article an human rights in the two

Covenants, with reference to having the right to control
8

“Namibia”. “Namibia” does not sound bad, but it is South
West Africa, a German colony transferred lo South Africa
by the United Kingdom, which was originally granted the
Mandate at VcrsaiIles-Category
C. That is the who/e
question.
81. And here our erstwhile colleague Mr. GoIdberg, who
should have known better, being a jurist, said: “1 will form
for you a Council for Namibia .” And my African brot}lers
turned their backs on me after I had introduced a
resolution to have co-administrators and observers and to
maintain the Mandate. Why maintain the Mandate? I think
a lot of work has yet to be done politically, but first
economically, before South West Africa can become viable,
either politically or economically. I would not take any
other argument because, failing that-whether
it would be
South Africa which will carry on as it is now doing, not
heeding the admonishments or warnings of the Council, or
if tomorrow, by virtue of the decision of the International
Court of Justice some modicum is devised-I say it will fail
because selfdetermination has three conditions. The first is
education, enough education for the awakening of the
people; the second, a sound economy; and the third, a
certain measure of flomogeneity among the peoples-a
certain homogeneity, not necessarily complete homogeneity .
82. These factors do not exist. We are told by our South
African colleague that there are many tribes, and we saw in
the film shown in the Dag Hammarskjijld Auditorium the
other day how certain tribes are isolated from other tribes
and there is no communication.
83. Of course you cannot form a viable State-either
politically or economically-from
such a situation. But is
there anything that could be done? 1 maintain that
something can be done, provided there is goodwill on the
part of South West Africa and provided our African
colleagues-and Asian colleagues, because we are in the
same boat, fighting the same tight against colonialism-face
the fact that seIf-determination cannot be won overnight.
The right to self-determination is a process. Before it can be
exercised you must first go into the mechanics of preparing
the people for it, That is why I should have preferred to
have the word “Mandate” retained rather than have a
Council as a pacifier-a pacifier that those Africans and
Asians come and build up and where they vent their
emotions. They become articulate, and it is good for them
to purge themselves of emotion. That is what the Council
for Namibia is: petitioners coming here. My foot, my eye!
What petitioners? What can they do? They are helpless.
There is no movement inside. If there were any movement,
there would be arms and clashes.

86. But why go into this process of conflict and tribulation? Why? Therefore, the special rCgime referred to the
other day by our colleague from France /1593& ineetir?g/
should be explored further; and the statement of our
colleague from Argentina at the same meeting should also
merit scrutiny. I leave myself to the last. I have been
proposing, for the last six or seven years, in the Fourth
Committee and in the General Assembly, that we should
agree to place Ihat Territory under the continued administration of South Africa.
87. Now, do not tell me that they practice apartheid. We
know that, but that is another question; let us not mix
issues. And then, because many, rightly or wrongly-I
do
not go into that, I am not a judge or a tribunal-have a
suspicion of South Africa, and since South Africa all the
time wishes to show its goodwill, 1 think it should agree to
place the Territory under the supervision of the Trusteeship
Council, with one or more, perhaps three, co-administrators. One of them should be African, one might be
Scandinavian or from some neutral country; and there
should be observers. The agreement between South Africa
and the Trusteeship Council should be realistic, in that it
should not set aside the interebts of South Africa.
88. Why should South Africa, if it has no interest, bother
with that Territory? Nobody bothers with another Territory unless there is a material interest. Let us face the facts.
We have an Arabic proverb to the effect that a girl says to
her jewelled bracelet: “I love you, but not as much as I love
my wrist.” Even if South Africa loved Namibia, it would be
concerned with its “wrist”--whether
the ‘%?e!;t”
fits lhe
“wrist”; and we should see to it that the interest of South
Africa is not undermined. It is in our interest and in the
interest of Africa that it should not be undermined, because
they have the means and they have the knowledge.
89. They practise discrimination. I will come to that in the
Fourth Committee; but let us not mix issues, I say again.
Maybe they practise discrimination for the simple reason
that they are a small minority. They do not want to say it,
so I will say it on their behalf, if they will allow me; but
even if they do not allow me, I will say it. They are afraid
to be deluged. They would lose their identity. If the black
population in South Africa proliferates, in no time there
will be no white man. There might be mulattoes, “chocolat
au lait” or whatever, but no whites. They like their skin.
What shall we do if they like the colour of their skin? It is
natural. Do you hate your skin? Blacks should be proud of
their ebony skin, Let everybody be proud of the colour of
his skin. But we are not mentioning discrimination now,
They would lose their identity. That has a bearing.
90. If that country, which is as big as France and the
United Kingdom, is developed and with bonds having a gold
parity-and you know what the gold parity is now-which
bonds would sell like hot cakes, which would accelerate the
development of South Africa in no time, which would
awaken the people through education, which would
develop the political institutions of the country under the
administration of South Africa and the co-administrators,
believe me: that would be the land of promise-the
promised land-for threatened black South Africans. They
would flock into Namibia-or
South West Africa-and

84. But I think South Africa should learn from the lessons
of recent history-what
has happened in Asia; what has
happened in Africa; the conflict; the turmoil; the tribulations; the bIood, not now but a decade from now.
85. 11 is easy now to smuggle arms. Ask me. We used to
smuggle arms from the Mediterranean to Syria in 1925. It is
very easy. If they catch you, they kill you; if they do not
catch you,so much the better.
9

relicvc Lllc pressure and perhaps dissipate some of South
Africa’s fears that it is going to be deluged with blacks. And
the bhks WOLJICI gain dignity; they would have their own
independent land to go to. It will accommodate 20 to 30
million; it would be viable, poljticaliy as well as ecdnomi.
tally. And at least we will have made not only a dent; we
will have ChVCd
that flintrock standing in the way of
finding a solution.
,
8I I Self-determination has to be exercised; and it cannot
be exercised without an awakening. And an awakening
cannot be realizcd without education and a minimal
economic viability. Shall we, year in, year out, have this
perennial question before us, with resolutions signifying
nothing, consensuses
to preservethe feelingsof others, the
lowest denominator of agreementon abortive stepsto bring
solace to Africans-who have minds like every other people
in any continent? That is unfair, and an insult to the
intelligcncc of any man. Therefore, 1 do hope, before you
adopt any resolutions, you will ponder what I have said,
speakingfrom my humbleexperience.
92. I do appeal to our colleaguefrom South Africa not to
remain in the rut of saying, “We are doing everything we
can”. Wehave heard that clichCbefore. Let them break new
ground,
93. Perhaps others have better ideas than those 1 have
suggcslcd today. Let us come up with something novel,
with sonicthing creative, lest indeed we hccome the
I;lughing-slackof the world community.
94. Mr. KOSI’IUSKO-MORlZE’f (France) [itrlrrpwtolior?
jhtur f~t~vtc~/r/:I fcl[ somewhatconceived by the statement
of the Ambassadorof South Africa, sincehe was clarifying
an answer I had given to AmbassadorFarah when I said
tliat, for us, sclf~letcrrl,ination had to be carried out within
a national framework. I should like to say that the
statements of fiJnbiIs%tdOr
Terence and of Ambassador
Baroody-with the latter’s immense erudition and cloquence-free me from the need to go into detail, becauseI
fully sharetheir feeling on the subject.
95. Mr. von Hirschberg told us today that in South West
Africa there exist various tribes-Ovarnbos, Hereros-and
that it was necessaryto take these ethnic groups into
account as well as the differences between them. Quite
clearly, it is alwaysnecessaryto take such differences into
account; it is necessaryalways to respect traditions and
cultures. That is quite clear. Nevertheless,this does not
mean that self-determination must be exercised within a
tribal framework. Differencescan be respected;but unity is
never tantamount to uniformity.

with the Agnis, the BrtWJkS,
the Apolloniens and others;
more than 60 ethnic groups, whose link was the language of
Lhe~colonizer, which was a means of communication and a
factor of unity.
98. If the tribes had had their way in Cameroon, that
country would have been splintered between North and
South, between the Pculsand the Paicns in the North, the
Bamilekesand the Doualasin the South.
99. And what about the Congo? I have travcllcd the
and breadth of that country: it has at least four
national languages,not counting the innumerabledialects.
Well, the whole history of Africa--and I have in mind its
recent history-has preciselyconsistedin overcoming these
differences. In their wisdom, the African States strove to
achieveindependencewithin the frameworkleft behind by
culonization-an artificial framework, no doubt, a framework that created many injustices,but onewhich none the
lessmade it possibleto set up Statesand, on the basisof
those States, to developa national consciousness
where it
did not formerly exist.
length

100. This is the history of recent years.Even today, there
is not one singleAfrican State in which top priority is not
given to the struggleagainst tribalism, to the effort to
overcome ethnical differences, to create greater cohesion.
In addition, the Statesof Africa havedecided to enter the
era of independenocwithin the boundariesleft behind by
colonization, in order to preserveAfrica from internecine
StJUggleS
and in view of the fact that a movementfor unily,
representedby the OrgAnization of African Unity, made it
possihl~ to correct some differences and, beyond all
frontiers, to f&cl, a feefiflgnf strong fraternal ties.
101. Weare of the view that the samewill prove to be true
of Namibia, whatever differences may now exist between
the tribes; it is within this national framework that they
will be able to expressthemselves.Even if at the present
time there is no widespread national feeling, it will
inevitably develop on the basisof the future State and its
independence.
102. For this reasonwe believe that the sameprocedure
should be followed in Namibia as in the territories which
Franceadministeredin the past.
.
103. Let us hear the voice of the Namibians.Let usallow
them to be heard, loyally, sincerely, without any pressure
whatever, and Jet us seewhat happens,So far as we are
concerned,we are preparedto take up the challenge.

96. AmbassadorBaroody spoke at length of the examples
of Europe, America and Asia. I shallmerely refer to Africa.
If selfdetermination had been exercised by the African
. countries within a tribal framework, we would have not
independence,not African States,but a whole congeries,as
there is no country in Africa which does not have an
infinite number of tribes, of different ethnic groups.

104. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): The statement made this
afternoon by the representativeof South Africa cameasno
surpriseto my delegation.His Government’sposition had
already been stated clearly in the statementto this Council
on 6 October /1589th tneetitzg]. This afternoon he simply
elaborated upon it, and in so doing he showed how
differently South Africa views self-determinationin so far
asit relatesto the non-white people of southernAfrica-in
particular, of South Africa and South WestAfrica.

97. Take the example of Senegal,with the Sereres, the
ouolofs, the 13ambarns,
ihe Foulhes; take the Ivory Coast,

105. One must relate his statement to the situation of
South Africa, To the South African, if you are white you
IO

bCCclJIlC a rnCfldHX
Of 0111’ unique political
unit. In South Africa, alJtU1naficdlyin order lo maintain
the privilcgcs iilld power of the white community- one
black is told thilt JIG is differenf from at,~tJ~cr, LJlat t11~q
belong to tribes and as such each ShO\Jld dCVClop separalcly,
And
from
the evidence
produced in this Council in the
course of tl~is debate we have seen that Soulh Aftica has
cmharkcd upon a policy calculated lo keep the peoples of
Namibia in tribal rcscrvcs, to compel them to develop
within the tribal framework. Such a pIicy
is astonishing, I
am store, to all of us hcrc...particularly in this age of nuclear
and tcctiriological progress, in an age in which communications bctwccn nations 1housands of rnilcs apart can no
longer bc rncasurcd in terms of time or distance. Ycl we
h;wc
f~uiid
from
the
evidence given to 1his council
that
in
Namibia the black pcoplc ;JrC put in rcxrvcs
and arc unable
to cornmunicatc \rtitll we ilMthCr
or1 il political ICVCt.
automatically

106. J should like to have heard from !hC reprcsentativc of
South Africa
what kind of conditions his Government has
instituted that would allow a free exchange of’ political
ideas,
the
en~ouragcrncnt

CflcolJril~CruCnt
of politicrrl

of

polihl

co-opfxJtion,

he

contact between the different
tribal units South Africa continues lo maintain in Namibia.

107. The division of peoples, particularly when they seek
national unity, is nothing new. 1 rcmcmbcr that. in the days
when my own country w:ls on the IJircsltold of indcpendCnCC.

tooscly

B Ilil~i~~KdiStic
tninshlctl.
wenl

n;lGorlttootl

SOJlg WilS
:is follows:

Lrilwt rivalry ;mO tx~son;~t pain arc outmoded

and tlcslructivc: Irut it suits
PCOl’lC,

to

l:Ol~~~~~~SC~~ WlliCh,
Very
“ln scmtlirlg
for 0111

cordon

separately nlakc Ifxm
bccausclhat is the only

each

[tic white m;1rl 1o divide our
trihc

;Ig:liJlst

Ihc

other

ant1

ctrmpctr for power. 11 suits him
way he will remainin power.”

108. The representative
of Soul11Africa sajd that Bishop
Aualn spoke only for himself. Now, 1 am surprisedthat he
shouldhave madesuch a statement. When I referred to the
remarksof Bishop Auale 1 emphnsizedthe fact that they
were contained in a joint communication addressedto
PrimeMinister Vorstcr hirnsclf, and in order to indicate the
people whom Bishop Auala representedI shall read one
smallextract from that letter:

South Africa, but I just wanted to cmphasizethat to us
sclfdclcnnin;ltiun is a sacrosanct term. We all believe in it,
in fact th WIIO~C United Nations is founded upon it. In this
case,as in many otJ~crs,SoutJ) Africa is in a minority of
one.
110. One cannot think of Namibia without thinkjng of the
application of the evil Upffficid laws, One cannot think of
Namibia without thinking of the adverse,unjust political
conditions which arc being imposed upon the people. With
all due respect to my great friend from Saudi Arabia, my
delegation cannot accept the ‘Wall Street approach” to
Namibia, that befarc you crJn have political determination,
before YOU can have social progress,you must first of all
have economic progress.Under such circumstancesit would
meanthat the Territory would continue indefinitely under
foreign domination.
I I I. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): No matter how
this debate evolves and no matter in what direction WC
discussself-determination, it is unavoidable that analogies
should arise, In international relations, international law
and lawmaking, judgcments by analogy are a basis and
foundalion. It is only natural and human that we should
tllink andjudge by analogy.
112. In the very brilliant statement of the Foreign
Minister of Liberia today, commenting upon the stand of
the United
Kingdom ddcgation
in the Council vis-ihis
Ihe
powersof the General Assembly and the Security Council,
JIGbrought in, and righlly so, the questionof Palestine.I do
not CICIJ~ 111~’
f;lct tlr;it this instancehasexisted in my mind
righl froni
t hc hepinning. PerhapsI may speakpersonally in
saying
tlwt
2 fiiw
days
ago
I discussedthe sameanalogy
with Sir Coljn Crowe, I3ut now that it hascome into the
open, 1have pcrmittcd myself to come forward to make the
record clear.

113. I acknowledge the validity of analogies,but onIy up
to a point, becauseif analogiesarc not set clearly in their
historical and real context then they can be misleading.
Where does the analogy occur between the caseof South
WestAfrica and Palestine,and where doesit not occur? It
occurs in the following: that in both casesthe first
Mandatory Power was the United Kingdom;in both cases
the United Kingdom brought the problem to the United
Nations, to the General Assembly: Palestinein 1947 and
“After the decisionof the International Court at The
Haguewasmadeknown on 21 June 1971,severalleaders later the problem of South West Africa. But the analogy
perhapsends here because,while the United Kingdom, in
and officials of our Lutheran CJlurchcswereindividually
bringing the problem of Palestine to the United Nations,
approachedby representativesof the authorities with a
view to making known their views. This indicatesto us explicitly and implicitly recognized the riglIt of the General
Assembly to pronounce itself successorto the League of
that public institutions are interested in hearing the
Nations on the problem of Palestinein,1947, it doesnot do
opinions of the Churchesin this conncxion. Therefore,
so
at the present time. But allow me to make the record
we would like to make use of the opportunity of
clear
and to seewhere the analogy doesnot occur.
informing Your Honour of the opinion of the Church
Boardsof the EvangelicalLutheran Churchin South West
114. Allow me to quote someof the articlesof the British
Africa and the Evangelical Lutheran Ovambokavango Mandate over Palestine and to see how the mandatory
ChurcJl which reprcscntsthe majority of the indigenous Power, Great Britain, did not abide by its obligationsunder
population of South WestAfrica.“a
the Mandate. As is well known, Palestine,like TransJordan,
Lebanon, Syria and Iraq, was under a Mandate, the ‘A”
109. My delegation will at our next meeting speak in
Mandate. According to Article 22 of the Covenantof the
greater detail on the statement of the representativeOf
Leagueof Nations:
I‘ * . . there sllould be applied the principle that the
weil-beingand development.of suchpeoplesform a sacred
11

trust of civilization and that securities for the performance of this trust should bc embodied in this Covenant.“9

121. In bringing the Palestine question to the General
’ Assembly the United Kingdom acknowledgedtwo things
which it is denying now: first, that the United Nations is a
successorto the Leagueof Nations and, second,that the
United Nations therefore has the right to pronounce itself
as a successorto the Leagueof Nations. But the analogy
ends here; for the sameState or States that accepted the
partition resolutionacceptedonly parts of that resolution.

115. According to this ArticIe Palestine was a sacred trust
in the hands and in the power of the mandatory State,
Great Britain. Article 5 of the Mandate over Palestine
stipulated :
“The Mandatory shall be responsible for seeing that no
Palestine territory shall be ceded or leased to, or in any
way placed under the control of the Government of any
foreign Power.“r 0

122. Let us recall that at the time of the partition the
number of Arabs in Palestine was 1,200,000, and the
number of Jews600,000. Arab property, according lo the
report of the mandatory Power which I quoted during the
debate on Jerusalem,wasexactly 93.6 per cent, as against
Jewishownershipof 6.4 per cent. If we take into consideration that Jewishcolonisation between 1918 and 1947 was
able to own only 6.4 per cent of the total areaof Palestine,
it meansthat by peacefulmeansthe Zionist organisations
of the world would have needed at least IO centuries to
acquire the whole of Palestine.But they went aheadwith
the rule of law. .

116. Article 7 of the Mandate stated:
“The Administration of Palestine shall be responsible
for enacting a nationality law. There shall be included in
this law provisions framed so as to facilitate the acquisition of Palestinian citizenship by Jews who take up their
permanent residence in Palestine.“r 1
I 17, If we remember that when this article of the Mandate
over Palestine was formulated the Arab population of
Palestine constituted 99 per cent of the total, it dots not
take much effort to draw the correct conclusions as to how
the mandatory Power behaved concerning this sacred trust
towards a mandated people and a mandated Territory
called Palestine.

123. Let us look at someof the provisionsof the partition
resolution /resoluriot~
181 (ll)J
to which the Foreign
Minister of Liberia referred. According to Part I, Future
constitution and govcmment of Palestine,A. Termination
of Mandate, Partition and Independence,1: “The Mandate
for Palestineshallterminate as soon as possiblebut in any
casenot later than I August 1948.” Thus, 1 August
1948
wx set asthe date on which both the Arab State and the
JewishStatewere to beestablished.

I IP. Witlr regard to the jurisdictiorr of the InternationaI
Court of Justice,there wasalso:I provision in the Mandate,
Article 26, which stated:

124. Israel declared its independenceon 15 May 1948.
wh;tt about the States which had recognisedIsrael,
thereby denying the rights of the Arabs before I August
1948..that is, immediatelyfollowing the dexlaration of the
State of Israel?

“The Mandatory agreesthat if any dispute whatever
shouldarisebetweenthe Mandatory and another Member
of the Leagueof Nationsrekrtingto the interpretation or
the application of the provisionsof the mandate, such
dispute, if it cannot be settledby negotiation, shall be
submitted to the Permanent Court of International
Justice . . .“.I 2
~

And

125. There are many provisionsin the partition resolution
to which one can refer. For instance,specialpowerswere
given to the Security Council to take the necessary
measuresasprovided for in the plan for its implementation.
A committee was set up by the Security Council to
supervisethe implementation of the partition. Why was
that committee of the Security Council prevented from
carrying out its mandateand thereby seeingto it that the
rights of the Arabswerepreserved?

119. When the mandatory Power, the United Kingdom,
submitted the problem of Palestineto the United Nations
in 1947, two Arab States, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, which
had beenmembersof the Leagueof Nations, invoked that
specific Article. Later, asMembersof the United Nations,
in accordancewith Article 36 of the Charter, Iraq and Syria
joined Saudi Arabia and Egypt in demanding that the
matter be referred to the International Court of Justicefor
adjudication. The matter was settled by a vote. The vote
was 21 in favour of bringing the question to the lnternational Court of Justiceand 20 against.Thus, by a majority
of one, the future of Palestinewasdecided.

126. The analogy is correct when we say that at the heart
of the problem there is a question of selfdetermination,
namely,the right of peoplesto govern themselves.
127. I begyour indulgence,Mr. President,andthat of the
membersof the Council in mentioning thesefacts because
we are speakingof eventsthat took placeat leasta quarter
of a century ago. A generation has come and gone. And
human rightsareindivisible. Wecannotaffirm humanrights
where one peopleis concerned,deny.them to another and
ignore them altogetherwhen it comesto a third peopleor a
third party. Regrettably, this is done. Many of those who
now verv sincerelyshedtears over the violation of human
rights, when it comes to the rights of certain others
complerelyforget about them.

120. The crux of the matter is that legal questionswhich
touch upon the very heart of the rights of people are
decidednot by adequate,valid, legalconsiderations,but by
political votes.
9 Qffcia]
Records of the
Assembly, vol. 1 I annex8.
10 Ibid., vol. 1, :lnncx7.
11 Ibid.
12 Ibid.

First

Special

Sessiotl

of the Getwal

12

128. But 23 years have elapsed and this is very significant
for our debate on South West Africa or Namibia. Nature
accepts error up to a point, after which it has to correct
itself; and we are all engaged, or committed-1 would prefer
to use the French word eng~@--to all humanity in these
problems of human rights. That is why we cannot look at
one side, bring analogies, and forget the other side. But
after 23 years the United Nations corrected itself.
129. In resolution 2672 C (XXV) the General Assembly,
by a two-thirds majority, adopted the following provisions:
“The General Assembly,

“Recugnizing that the problem of the Palestinian Arab
rcfunces has arisen from the denial of their inalicnablc
r&h& under the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,

‘I . . .
“1. Racognizes that the people of Palestine are entitled to equal rights and selfdetermination,
in accord.
ante with the Charter of the United Nations;“.
130. That resolution, adopted on the twenty-fifth anniver.
S~V of the United Nations, wasvery significant-although a
similar resolution had already been adopted; I refer to
resolution 2535 B (XXIV), adopted on 10 December 1969,
131, With regard to tl~t: right of self-determination, if the
Ambassador of France. with hjs learning and experience,
recogriizes 111~ wide erudition of our dear brother and
colleague Ambassador Baroody, how can I not do so’?
Therefore, I go along. But I beg to disagree with Ambassador Baroody on one point: the right to selfdetermjnatjon
is a natural right that exists in man with his own birth. It is
a birthright; a natural right, It is not a positive right, except
in a legal sense. That is why, whether it be the Charter of
the IJnited Nations in Article 1, paragraph 2, or the
covenants on human rights which I quoted yesterday
/15Y3rd tnecting], or any other document dealing with
human rights and selfdetermination, we are not in any way
giving to peoples something they did not already possess.
We arc only confirming through covenants and declarations
what the people already had but were denied the right to
cxercjse. There b a great difference between the two.
Therefore, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
all the covenants derived therefrom did not give the right to
self-determination to any people. They only confirmed,
acknowledged and recognized that which already existed as
a natural right.
132. To run away from prablems and to accept half-solutions-and the’problem of Palestine and that of Namibia are
casesjn point-only brings us back to where we started, to
the very point from which we set out. And unfortunately it
returns us to that point of departure in a tragic mannerafter bloodshed, after wars and after man’s inhumanity to
man I

preoccupied tomorrow and the day after tommorow-there
is one basic element wfrich must not be forgotten, namely,
that ‘the world, and in particular the United Nations now,is
dealing with the legacy of colonialism, whether it be in
Africa or in Asia. That legacy can be summarized in the fact
that the colonizers left the people not as the people wanted
to be left-and by that I mean ontoIogically, metaphysically, economically and from every other point of viewbut as the colonizers themselves wanted their legacy to be.
Hence, we have the problems with which we are dealing
now. In Asia, for instance, the colonizers divided that
which by nature, by history, by legacy, and by common
destiny wasone and is destined to be one in the future.
134. The PRESIDENT Jinierpreta&w from Spanish): I
call on the representative of Saudi Arabia.
135. Mr. BAROODY [Saudi Arabia): Certain remarks that
were made relative to my statement this afternoon,
especially by my good friend Ambassador Farah of Somalia
and my friend Ambassador Tomeh of Syria, call for a reply,
and my reply will be to clarify and reaffirm what I meant.
136. First of all, I would remind both those reprcsentatives that I was suggesting that the entire economic
development of Namibia, or South West Africa, should be
carried out under lhe auspices of the Trusteeship Council.
Although South Africa would be the administering Power, I
have said time and again that there would be co-administrators and ohservers.
137. I am amazed that my two brothers have taken
exception to the economic argument l adduced to the
effect that a State should be economically viable before it
becomes politically independent. I would refer them to the
deliberations on human rights which took place for several
years in the late 1940s and early l95Os, in which it was
made clear that political, economic and social rights are
interdependent and interconnected. It has been stated time
and again that if one enjoys, let us say, political rights and
has the right to vote, but has no job or bread to eat, the
political rights will be inane, empty. We cannot divorce
political and social rights from economic rights.
138. Then I should like to draw attention to what
happened in the Territories of New Guinea and the Pacific
Islands. Those Territories could not have been developed by
Australia and the United States without their having
siphoned millions upon millions of dollars into them for
education and for health services in order to prepare the
people of those Territories for self-determination. It is in
that context that I was referring to the importance of the
economic factor. Had Australia and the United States not
poured such huge funds into those Territories, would they
be eligible for independence, would they have awakened,
would they have been adequately prepared to exercise
self-determination?
139. I should like to remind in particular my good friend
Ambassador Farah of the Arab proverb which says: ‘LYou
cannot fry eggs in air; you must have oil or butter.” And
here the economjc development is the butter in which to
fry the political egg.

133. Finally, we ought to be aware of the fact that in all
these J~rohlems with which we have been preoccupied from
mid-September until today-and with which we will be
13

140. Assuming that a territory is not economically viable,
what do we find? Time and again-and we do not have to
delve into history--we
find the territory by force of
circumstances becoming a client of a rich State that can
proffer assistance, because the territory cannot fund the
State.
141. I have known States in the area which tried to
borrow money in Switzerland to pay their diplomats. When
they could no! pay? something happened: conflicts,
upheavals. But J am not going to mention those States. We
are not talking now about the dignity of man and the
honour of man. Does .L hungry man have any dignity or
honour? Does an ignorant man know anything about
dignity or honour’! We cannot divorce ourselves from our
bodies, which need nourishment, shelter and clothing. Shall
we remain poetical? I used to write poetry in my younger
days, but in another context, in the field of romance. When
we come here to the facts of life, I have to buy my suit and
my shirt, and pay my rent. If J have no job, how can I
aspire to exercise my self-determination, that inherent
natural right?
142. These are words, and words are symbols, and
symbols of ideas that may differ. For instance, Mr. Presi.
dent, you and I might have different ideas about a table. We
may quarrel till doomsday because in your formative years
the table in your mind was round, and in mine it was
rectangular. And we still may argue about what is a table.
Wha: do we mean by our natural dignity if we are in want,
in penury? TJlere is no dignity. There is an Arab proverb
which says: “He who asks for yornething does it in a
subdued manner, even if he asks directions for a street; how
much more so if he wants to eat.”
143. My good friend Ambassador Farah took exception to
the Wall Street approach. I did not suggest that any
proposed bonds based on a gold parity should be under-

,
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

SU.S.

written by brokers in WaU Street. For his information, I
believe it is not possible to do so, because this country
forbids dealing in bonds based on gold, So do not be afraid
that it is going to be Wall Street. Let us remember that
socialist countries-and I believe that yours is one, and I
respect your socialist political system-also float’ bonds.
They borrow from their own people. There is nothing
wrong with floating bonds. And in the socialist States the
interest is 4 per cent; it was 3 per cent, but they raised it a
little because of inflation. There is nothing wrong in
floating bonds under the supervision of the Trusteeship
Council.
144. But for the grace of God and the availability of
funds, regardless of the currencies, no economic development can very well be effected. Again, J state what we all
know: that social progress depends on economic development. J need hardly stress the fact that political rights
cannot
be enjoyed unless there is oil or butter with which
to fry the eggs.
145. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): J have listened with keen
interest to the statement made by the representative of
Saudi Arabia. I should like to point out that my delegation
believes that social, economic and political development
and progress in Namibia must march side by side, My
delegation cannot accept.that political power must presuppose social development, and that social development
must presuppose economic development.
146. The PRESJDENT (intcrprrtalim frim Spatkh):
As
there are no more speakers inscribed. J shall adjourn the
mecling until tomorrow at 3.30 p.m., when we will resume
our debate on the question of Namibia. It is possible that at
that meeting a draft resolution will be introduced on the
item.
The meeting rose at 6.5 pm.

14

1 .OO (or equivnlcnt

,_-__...-in other

currencies)

35507-Al&?ust

1973”-2,050

’
