R.-solutions adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee
independent, Trust, Non-Self-Governing or under any
other limitation of sovereignty,
Having regard to the mission which has been given
by the General Assembly to the Commission on Human
Rights with a view to the drafting of an International
Covenant on Human Rights which will also be applicable to r-;.on-Self-Governing Territories, 13
l. Invites the Members responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories to include,
in the information to be transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral in 1951 under Article 73 e of the Charter, a
summary of the extent to which the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is implemented in the NonSelf-Governing Territories under their administration;
2. Requests the Special Committee on Information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter to include
in its report to the General Assembly at its sixth session such recommendations as it may deem desirable
relating to the application in Non-Self-Governing Territories of the principles contained in the universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.
447 (V). Comparable statistical information relating to the suhject,1 treated under Article
73 e of the Charter

The Genera/, Assembly,
Having regard to paragraph 6 of resolution 143 (II)
adopted by the General Assembly on 3 November 1947
and paragraph 3 of resolution 218 (III) adopted by the
General Assembly on 3 K ovember 1948 and relating to
the use of comparable statistical information,
Desirous of arriving at correct conclusions from the
use of such information,
1. Invites the Secretary-General, in making use of
such information, to obtain the consent of the l\lemlwr
State concerned and to take into account all elements
necessary for scientific and objective comparison;

2. Invites the Secretary-General to bear in mind that
an objective comparison can be made only if the comparable information is representative of the whole region
concerned.
320th plenary meeting.
12 December 1950.
448 (V).

Development of self-government in
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Considering that resolution 222 (III) adopted by the
~eneral Assembly on 3 November 1948, while welcoming any development of self-government in Non-SelfGoverning Territories, considers that it is essential that
the l!nit~d Natio~~ be informed of any change in the
constitutional pos1t10n and status of any such Territory
as a resu]t of. which the responsible government concerned thmks it unnecessary to transmit information in
13
14

See resolution 422 (V), page 43.
See document A/1302/Rev.1.

55

respect of that Territory under Article 73 e of the
Charter,
Noting the communication 14 elated 29 June 1950
from th~ Government of the .Netherlands in which it is
stated that the N etherlancls will no longer present a
report pursuant to Article 73 e on Indonesia with the
exception of West New Guinea,
N otinq that the full independence of the Republic of
I nclonesia has been followed by the admission of that
State to membership in the United :-.Jations,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the communication
of the Government of the Nether lands with reference
to the cessation of the transmission of information on
Indonesia;
2. Requests the Special Committee on Information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter to examine such information as may be transmitted in future
to the Secretary-General in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 222 (Ill), and to report thereon to
the General Assembly.
320th plenary mCl'ting,
12 Decemher 1950.

449 ( V).

Question of South West Africa

A
Tlzr G,·neral .-1ssnnhly.
Considering that the International Conrt of Justice,
duh· consulted by the General Assembly pursuant to
resolution 338 (IV) of (1 December J<)49. reached the
conclusion 1 ·• that the Territorv of South \Vest Africa
is a Territon· under the intern;tional Mandate assumed
by the L'.nio·n of South ,\frica on 17 Ikcemlwr 1920,
Co11sid crinq that the l nternational Court oi Justice
i~ of the opinion that the Pnion of South Africa con-

timws to have the international obligations laid clown
in Article 22 (1f the Con·nant of the League of Nations
and in the l\fandate for South \Vest Africa.
Consid cring that the International Court of Justice is
of the opinion that the functions of supervision over the
;idministration of the Territory of South West Africa
by the l:nion of South Africa should be exercised by the
United Kations, to which the annual reports as well as
the petitions from the inhabitants of the Territory are
tn he submitted,

Considering that, in accordance with the opinion of
the International Court of Justice, the Union of South
:\frica is under an obligation to accept the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court as provided hy Article 37 of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice, bv
Article 80, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United
:-.Jations and by Article 7 of the Mandate for South
\Vest Africa,
Considering that the International Court of Justice is
of the opinion that the Union of South Africa acting
alone is not competent to modify the international status
of the Territory of South West Africa, and that the
15 See International Status of South West Africa, Adviso,-y
Opinion: I.C.J. Reports 1950. page 128.
