"The Council will remain actively seized of the
matter."

"The members of the Council condemn these attacks
on the safety and security of United Nations personnel and
demand that all parties concerned take all necessary
measures to prevent their recurrence. The members of the
Council consider the abduction and detention of United
Nations peace-keeping personnel as totally unacceptable
and demand the immediate and unconditional release of
the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia
and United Nations Protection Force personnel concerned."

At its 3150th meeting, on 18 December 1992, the Council
invited the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
"The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina".
Resolution 798 (1992)

or 18 December 1992
The Security Council,

At its 3146th meeting, on 9 December 1992, the Council
invited the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
"1he situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina: letter dated 7
December 1992 from the Permanent Representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/24916)". 17

Recalling its resolutions 770 (1992) and 771 (1992) of 13
August 1992 as well as its other relevant resolutions,
Appalled by reports of the massive, organized and systematic detention and rape of women, in particular Muslim women,
in Bosnia and Herzegovina,

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier
with the members of the Security Council, the President made
the following statement on behalf of the Council:94

Demanding that all the detention camps and, in particular,
camps for women be immediately closed,

"The Security Council is alarmed by the most recent
reports that Serb militia in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have renewed their offensive in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in particular against the city of Sarajevo,
resulting in further loss oflife and material damage as well
as in endangering the security of United Nations Protection Force and international relief workers, thus threatening international peace and security.

Taking note of the initiative taken by the European Council
on the rapid dispatch of a delegation to investigate the facts
received until now,95

"The Council is particularly alarmed by reports that
the Serb militia in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are forcing the inhabitants of Sarajevo to evacuate the city.
The Council warns that actions aimed at impeding the
distribution of humanitarian assistance and at forcing the
inhabitants of Sarajevo to leave the city, including the
possibility of 'ethnic cleansing', would have grave consequences for the overall situation in that country.

3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide such
necessary means of support as are available to him in the area
to enable the European Community delegation to have free and
secure access to the places of detention;

"1he Council strongly condemns these attacks as
violations of its relevant resolutions and of previous
commitments, in particular with regard to the cessation of
hostilities, the ban on military flights in the airspace of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the safety of humanitarian assistance to the civilian population and the restoration of power and water supplies.

5. Invites the Secretary-C'rtmeral to report to the Security
Council within fifteen days of the adoption of the present
resolution on measures taken to support the delegation;

"The Council demands the immediate cessation of
these attacks and of all actions aimed at impeding the
distribution of humanitarian assistance and at forcing the
inhabitants of Sarajevo to leave the city.

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina

1.

&presses its support for the initiative of the European

Council;
2.

Strongly condemns these acts of unspeakable brutality;

4. Requests the member States of the European Community to inform the Secretary-General of the work of the
delegation;

6.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adop~d unanimously al the 3150th
meeting.

In a letter dated 10 September 1992,96 addressed to the

President of the Security Council for the attention of the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General referred to
paragraph 11 of his report of 10 September 199297 on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he had proposed
that the Council should give the United Nations Protection
Force authority to provide protection to convoys of persons
released from the detention camps in Bosnia and Herzegovina,

"If such attacks and actions continue, the Council will

consider, as soon as possible, further measures against
those who commit or support them to ensure the security
of the Force and of international relief workers, the ability
of the Force to fulfil its mandate and compliance with the
relevant resolutions of the Council.
32
