UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
?IN I,&.Aqy

THIRTY-FIRST

DEC2 is ':%I4

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/12083 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l923/Rev.

SIPV. 1923

\

,

~
-1
‘i?.
i

’

:.

,
;.’

.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

:,e
:.
.:.

I

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor-.
mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

1923rd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 28 May 1976, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Louis de GUIRINGAUD

(France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agend41923/Rev.~)

1. Adoption of the agenda , -,.
2. The situation in ‘the Middle East:
Report of the SecretarytGeneral on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(S/12083 and Add. 1)
The meeting

was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (S/12083
and Add.1)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
I draw the attention of the Council members to the
two documents before them. There is, first, the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the
period from 25 November 1975 to 24 May 1976
[Sjl2083 and Add.11. In addition, we have a draft
resolution presented by Benin, Guyana, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania and the United Republic of
Tanzania, [S/12088], which was considered in the
course of the consultations which were held this
morning.

2. Before I put the draft resolution to the vote,
I would inform the Council that the Secretary-General
has expressed a desire to speak at this stage. If there
are no objections, I shall now call upon the SecretaryGeneral.
The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have already
had the opportunity to inform the members of the
Council, during the informal consultations this

3.

morning, about my visit to Damascus. Permit me,
therefore, simply to make the following points in
relation to that trip.
4. As may be recalled, when I spoke to the Council
at the end of the Council’s debate in January [2879th
meeting], I referred, in my brief statement, to certain
deadlines that might confront the international community. Obviously, one such deadline was the renewal
of UNDOF’s mandate this May. As you are aware,
following the January debate I took some steps with a
view to trying to reactivate the negotiating process.
I shall, of course, continue those efforts.
5. In the course of the consultations with the parties
concerned on the question of the prolongation of the
mandate of UNDOF, I sent a message to President
Hafez Al-Assad, asking him to give his consent to
the renewal of the mandate for a further period of
six months. Before giving me his answer, the President
asked me to make a visit to Damascus in order to
discuss the matter personally with him. After careful
consideration of. the issues involved, and fully
conscious of my duty as Secretary-General, I accepted
his invitation. I limited the trip to Damascus because
I had already received the consent of Israel to the
prolongation of the mandate.
6. In Damascus, where I arrived on 26 May, I had
extensive talks with President Assad and Foreign
Minister Khaddam during which we had a wide-ranging
discussion of the Middle East situation, including the
crisis in Lebanon. The President expressed his concern
about the fact that no progress had been made in
regard to a global solution of the Middle East problem
and emphasized that he could not permit UNDOF to
become a permanent institution. He stated once again
to me the position of his Government on the essential
elements for a global solution of the Middle East
problem. The President expressed his support for my
own efforts in this regard and indicated that he was
aware that more time was needed to advance the cause
of peace.
7. I had a second meeting with President Assad on
the morning of 27 May, when the primary focus was
the Syrian response to my appeal for the continuation
of the UNDOF mandate. Reiterating his willingness
to afford the United Nations time for further peace
efforts, the President declared that he would consent
to the renewal of the mandate for a further six-month
period.

8. The Government of Israel informed me, after my
departure from New York en route to Damascus, that
the consent given to me previously for the prolongation
of UNDOF’s mandate was conditional on a similar
agreement by Syria without political conditions. The
assent of the Government of Israel to the continuation
of UNDOF was confirmed on 27 May.

regarded as placebos, ia facades behind which those
policies make an investment in aggression and occupation can seek permanent refuge. On the contrary, the
fanfare which accompanied the establishment of those
forces reinforced expectations that after a period of
some 25 years of denied rights and postponed solutions,
there would be concerted and determined efforts to
have installed in the Middle East that regime of peace
which had hitherto proved so elusive. And, thirdly,
it is incumbent upon 6s to remember that it was
against such expectations that the functions of the
forces-and we are today concerned with UNDOFwere elaborated.
,c
‘:
14. I believe that we are entitled to ask at least two
questions in this context at this stage-and we shall
pose those questions with the acknowledgement,
-which I presume is unanimously shared by the members of this Council-that the expectations of which
I spoke earlier have not been fulfilled. First, useful
as the role of UNDOF:has been, is there not a real
danger that its true role is being undermined, perhaps
subverted? Secondly, is there not a pressing need for
the Council, in a rare but desired display of unanimity
in the discharge of its prime responsibility under the
Charter for peace and security, to assert its role
-unmistakably in the search for an over-all settlement?

9. Now that both Syria and Israel have agreed to the
prolongation of the mandate, I am confident that the
Council will take the necessary action to enable
UNDOF to continue its vital task of assisting in the
maintenance of quiet in the area and of providing an
atmosphere conducive to further peace efforts.
lg.;“1 feel obliged once again to express my concern
at the continued lack of progress towards a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. As I have stated
in my report, the situation in the Middle East as a
whole remains tense and unstable and will become
increasingly dangerous unless such progress can be
made. For my part, I intend to continue my efforts
to advance the cause of peace, and I hope for the full
co-operation of all the parties concerned in this
endeavour.
11. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I thank the Secretary-General for his statement, and
I think I am certainly conveyin the feelings of all the
members of the Council when Igexpress gratitude and
appreciation for the efforts he has personally exerted
in order to achieve a satisfactory settlement of the
question now before us.

15. It seems to my delegation that we have a unique
opportunity to vindicate the trust which has been
placed in the Council. UNDOF has continued, as
the Secretary-General observed in his report, to contribute to the maintenance of the cease-fire called for
by the Council in its resolution 338 (1973) and to carry
out the tasks entrusted to it. Yet UNDOF’s establishment was seen as part of a process towards peace in
the Middle East, not as an end in itself. For a time it
appeared that the negotiating process was evolving in
a manner which would without undue delay realize
widely held aspirations to a settlement of theproblems
besetting that area for such a long time. The Geneva
Peace Conference, convened under the auspices of
the United Nations, nourished such hopes. Indeed, the
Council reflected not only its own feelings but those
of the overwhelming majority of the international
community when, in its resolution 344 (1973), it
expressed the hope that “the Peace Conference will
make speedy”dnd
I stress “speedy”--“progress
towards the establishment of a just and durable peace
in the Middle East”. And there were also efforts,
serious and determined efforts, by Member States
and by the Secretary-General himself, which led to
some partial steps being taken in that direction. But
the absence of substantial progress and the potential
for violent conflict which inhere in such a situation
are today widely acknowledged.

12. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Once again this
Council meets to consider the renewal of the mandate
of a peace-keeping force in the Middle East. On this
occasion, the mandate is that of United Nations forces
stationed in the Golan Heights. Thus, since the war of
liberation of October 1973-that is, over a period of
nearly three years-this Council has held discussions
on no less than 10 occasions on the mandates or the
extension of the mandates of United Nations forces
stationed in the Sinai and in the Golan Heights. This
realization, coupled with slow movement towards
lasting peace in the Middle East, or,.worse still, the
maintenance of the status quo, makes it, in the view
of my delegation, not inappropriate that we remind
ourselves of certain essential factors.
13. In the first. place, we should remember the
circumstances which led to the creation of UNDOF.
The war which preceded it was fuelled by a climate
which, quite frankly, this Council helped in part to
create by its lack of positive action to break a stalemate which had become institutionalized, a situation
of no war, no peace. Secondly, we should remember
the expectations of some, if not all, of the interested
parties and the overwhelming majority of the intemational community at that time that the creation of
the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) and
UNDOF was no mere palliative. Those forces were not

16. In that connexion my delegation notes that some
of the impediments encountered stem from the denial of
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, that
important element which was missing from resolution 242 (1967). Over the last two years, however, the
2

General Assembly and the Council have taken long
overdue steps in an effort to rectify past errors in this
regard. The Palestinian people, authentically
represented by the Palestine Liberation Organization,
now
have an opportunity
to present their case before us.
Real progress can best be made when we respond
positively, in accordance with natural justice, to the
logic of the Palestinian position., The report of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian
People appointed by the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session will shortly be before
the Council. Let us resolve now to use constructively
the opportunity which our consideration of that report
will. provide, for any effort to achieve an over-ail
settlement which ignores the central reality of the
rights of the Palestinian people is bound to run into
. adverse headwinds.

themselves,
commitment
hostilities.

who have
to maintain

proved steadfast in their
peace and avert renewed

20. My delegation wishes to express its sincere
appreciation of the unstinting efforts of the SecretaryGeneral. More specifically,
we wish to commend
him on his recent correct decision to travel to Damascus. My delegation believes that, apart from the
obvious success of the visit, his decision has served
to counter the entrenchment of the attitude by Israel
and some of its supporters that the extension of the
mandate should be undertaken
routinely.
We are
indebted to the Secretary-General
for his actions.
Once more, by personal initiative he has demonstrated
his deep concern for the maintenance of peace in the
Middle East, and his commitment
to the cause of
achieving an early settlement to this grave problem.

17. UNDOF
is not a force to be stationed permanently on Syrian soil. It is, as I said earlier, part of a
process which should lead to lasting peace. Yet we
find that attitudes are being displayed which seek to
invest in the periodic renewal of UNDOF’s
mandate
a quality of routineness. My delegation categorically
rejects such notions. It has always been at pains to put
the functions of the Force within the proper perspective. The Force aids in creating a climate of peace
and freedom from tension in the region which would
favour the holding of comprehensive negotiations for
an over-all peace settlement in the Middle East. The
Force was certainly not meant to be a substitute for
a peace settlement. Nor was it intended to lead to a
freezing process whereby a situation caused by aggression would, because of its unchanging character,
become acceptable with,the passage of time. We call
upon Israel to share that perception if its genuine
desire is peace for itself and its neighbours.

21. My delegation wishes also to pay a tribute to the
Government and people of Syria, and in particular to
President Assad, for the admirable readiness with
which they have agreed to a new mandate. Theirs is
the experience of the loss of part of their land through
aggression. Yet, in the face of the continuing intolerable situation, they have shown great restraint and
patience. While we welcome the selfless act of Syria
in accepting a new mandate, we recognize that it is
unjust for the international
community to expect that
Syria should demonstrate
such self-sacrifice indefinitely, if rigidity and the refusal to recognize the
illegality of occupation continue to characterize the
response of Israel.
22. When I spoke in the Council two days ago on the
situation in the occupied territories [1922nd meeting],
I emphasized the urgent need to recapture the impetus
and retake the momentum for achieving a final solution
to the Middle East question. It is the hope of my
delegation that the six-month breathing space that is
offered through the renewal of UNDOF’s
mandate
will be used to begin anew the process of negotiation
which will signal the end of the deadlock now faced
and the advancement of the prospects for peace in
that troubled region.

18. We have carefully read the latest report of the
Secretary-General
on the work of UNDOF.
We note
that the cease-fire between Israel and Syria,has been
maintained and that the Force has suffered no casualties in successfully carrying out its mandate over the
last six months. We are reassured by this most recent
confirmation
of the laudable services that the Force
is performing in the interests of the maintenance of
international
peace. However,
my delegation
is
constrained to observe that the problem of freedom
of movement of the different contingents that make
up the Force still persists. It is important that the
work of the Force should not be hampered by the
determined
erection of obstacles, which is not in
accordance with the terms of the Protocol to the
Agreement
on Disengagement
[s/11302/A&.1
of
30 May 19741. My delegation therefore hopes that the
occupying Power will co-operate fully with UJUDOF
in ensuring that this problem is speedily resolved, on
the basis of the provisions of the Protocol.

23. Consequent upon the consent of the Government
of Syria to the extension of UNDOF’s
mandate for a
further period of six months, a number of members
of the Council-Benin,
Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
the United Republic of Tanzania and my own country,
Guyana-have
submitted the draft resolution contained in document S/12088.
24. -The terms of the draft resolution follow the
pattern of previous resolutions on this issue. It begins
by a reference to the report of the Secretary-General
and notes the efforts made to establish a durable and
just peace in the Middle East-and we include importantly here those efforts of the Secretary-Generaland the developments
in the situation in the area.
In the draft resolution concern is naturally expressed
over the prevailing state of tension.

19. My delegation would like also to express its
appreciation to those countries that have so generously
contributed
troops to the Force and to the troops
3

.

25. Those points need to be emphasized, for already
within the last few months this Council has had cause
to discuss extensively and on many occasions the
factors which have contributed to the frustration of
peace efforts and to the deterioration of the situation
in the Arab territories illegally occupied by Israel.

tion ‘338 (1973), which contains provisions’ for a
comprehensive political settlement of the problem of
the Middle East on the basis of the principles of the
United Nations Charter and of the decisions of the
United Nations on removing the consequences of the
Israeli aggression. The Council has extended the
mandate of the Force three times now. In its resolutions
on the extension of the mandate of UNDOF the Council
has called on the interested parties “to implement
immediately
Security Council resolution 338 (1973)“.
However, those appeals of the Council have been
stubbornly ignored by Israel and its protectors and
continue to be a voice crying in the wilderness.

26. According to the draft resolution the Council
would decide to call for the immediate implementation
of resolution 338 (1973); to renew the mandate of
UNDOF for yet another period of six months; and to
request the Secretary-General
to submit at the end of
that period a report on developments in the situation
and the measures taken to implement resolution 338
(1973).

31. -Member States have spoken quite often of the
ineffectiveness of the Organization
because of the
non-implementation
of its decisions. But it is important
not just to say that; it is also important to name and
condemn those who undermine the effectiveness of
the United Nations and refuse to implement
its
decisions.

27. But similarity
in language between this draft
resolution and past resolutions on the subject must
not be taken as reflecting an automatic approach. The
urgency of the situation and the expectations of the
international
community
demand that the circumstances in which this draft is being submitted be fully
understood. The sponsors of this draft expect that
the Council will live up to its responsibilities
under
the Charter and take such action as is necessary in
the months ahead to accelerate the search for an overall solution. It is with that aspiration that, on behalf
of the sponsors, I formally introduce draft resolution
S/12088.

32. The recent discussion of the question of the
Middle East in the Council has shown once again that
Israel and the United States refuse to implement the
decisions of the Council and the General Assembly
on the establishment of a just and stable peace in the
Middle East on the basis of the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967;
the exercise of the legitimate national rights of the Arab
people of Palestine, including its inalienable right to
a State of its own, and respect for the right of all
the States in that region to independent existence and
development.

28. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I now propose to put to the vote the draft resolution
introduced by Guyana on behalf of the delegations of
Benin, Guyana, Pakistan, Panama, Romania and the
United Republic
of Tanzania,
which appears, in
document S/12088. If no delegation wishes to make
any comments at this stage, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

33. For many years now the armed forces of Israel
have been occupying vast areas of the Arab countries.
The Government
of Israel continues its policy of
annexation and transfer to its citizens of the territories
of the Arab States which it has seized. The Israeli
authorities are evicting the Arab population from its
homeland and are creating Israeli settlements on
those territories. This aggressive expansionist policy
of Israel is the main cause of the continuation
in
the Middle East of a situation of prolonged and
potentially explosive crisis.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft
none.’

resolution

was adopted

by 13 votes

to

Two members (China and the Libyan Arab Republic)
did not participate
in the voting.

29. Mr. LAI Ya-Ii (China) (translation from Chinese):
The Chinese delegation has always held a position
of principle regarding the United Nations forces that
was different from the Council’s. Accordingly,
it did
not participate in the vote on draft resolution S/12088.

34. As was shown by the discussion in the Council
on the question of the situation in the occupied Arab
territories,
which concluded a few days ago, the
Government
of Israel has no intention of giving up
its policy of territorial expansion to the detriment of
its Arab neighbours. Rather it has proceeded to create
new Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab tenitories, and in so doing it is relying on the support of
its overseas protectors for its policy of seizure and
annexation of Arab territories. This was again clearly
brought out during the Council’s consideration
and
approval on 26 May 1976 of the agreed statement
read out by the President [1922nd meeting]. That
statement was very weak and quite lenient to the Israeli
aggressors. None the less the protectors of Israel

30. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian):
Unfortunately,
the Council must again consider the question of the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF)
on the
Golan Heights. As is well known, ‘that Force was
created under Council resolution 350 (1974) as a shortterm measure, with the sole purpose of assisting in
the speedy and immediate implementation
of resolu-

4

dissociated themselves entirely from that declaration
because of the appeal to Israel it contained to discontinue its policy of establishing Israeli settlements in
the occupied Arab territories.

account of the legitimate
rights of all the parties
directly concerned. The statement of the Soviet
Government not only outlines the principles for a just
and comprehensive settlement but also indicates how
they should be applied. It contains a proposal for the
resumption of the work of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. It would be a two-stage
Conference, with the indispensable participation
of
representatives
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization in both stages of its work.

35. This policy of the Government of Israel, and the
encouragement
it receives from its Zionist backers,
can only lead to an exacerbation of the situation in
the Middle East. The recent events in that region,
and in particular the tragic events which have been
occurring over several months in Lebanon, indicate
an intensification
of the efforts of imperialism
and
Zionism to increase tension in the Middle East, and
to rob the Arab States and split them asunder. All
this is being done in order to promote the designs of
the imperialists, who wish to extend their control over
the strategically
important
Middle, East region and
over its colossal oil resources.

39. The Council has now, for the fourth time,
extended the mandate of UNDOF
for another sixmonth period. The Government
of Syria has again*
displayed good will and agreed to a new extension
of the presence of these troops on its territory. This
is a gesture of good will which shows the earnest
desire of the Syrian Government for peace, and it
should we appreciated at its true value by the Council.
At the same time, the Council should intensify its
efforts to arrive at a comprehensive
political ‘settlement on the basis of the three elements I have
referred to, which stem from the decisions already
taken by the United Nations on the Middle East
question.

36. The Soviet delegation already had occasion, at
the Council meeting on 10 May [1918rh meeting],
fully to set forth the Soviet Government’s
assessment
of the present situation in the Middle East and to
outline the position of the Soviet Union .on the question
of the settlement of the Middle East conflict. That
position, as already indicated, was set forth in detail
in the Soviet Government’s
statement on the Middle
East of 28 April [S/22063]. Therefore, there is no
need for me to restate this position in detail. I merely
wish to stress that any further postponement
of a
solution of the Middle East problem can only lead to
increased tension in that region, which is fraught with
danger not only to the Middle East but to the whole
world.

40. In considering the issue now before the Council
it is important to stress particularly the considerable
danger to the cause of peace posed by the illusions
harboured by Israel and its protectors regarding the
extension of the .mandate of the United Nations forces
in the Middle East, which they take for something that
is quite automatic.
However, the Council cannot
indefinitely extend the time-limit
for the presence of
the United Nations force in the Middle East, since
these extensions have in fact been used by the Israeli
aggressor and by its protectors to freeze the existing
situation in the Middle East and to preserve for the
aggressor the fruits of its aggression, as well as to
consolidate Israel’s hold over the Arab territories it has
seized and wishes to keep for itself. The United
Nations cannot be an accomplice of the aggressor in
this, nor will the Arab countries, the overwhelming
majority of Member States or the United Nations as
a whole, ever agree to this. Neither will the Member
States agree to bear indefinitely
the burdensome
expenses of maintaining
the United Nations forces
in the Middle East, which by their presence are in
fact protecting
and consolidating
the aggressor’s
territorial acquisitions. The United Nations forces have
been created and must be used for one single purpose:
to facilitate the speediest possible establishment of a
just and stable peace in the Middle East in conformity
with the basic decisions of the Council and General
Assembly.

37. The Soviet Union is determined in its stand in
favour of a radical political settlement of the Middle
East conflict, and feels that this is someting that
can be achieved. Discussions of the Middle East situation in recent years, and the relevant decisions of the
General Assembly and the Council, have brought out a
just and realistic basis on which such a settlement
could and should be achieved. As was pointed out in
the statement of the Government of the Soviet Union
on the Middle East to which I have already referred,
this basis consists of three organically interconnected
elements: first, the withdrawal of the Israeli troops
from all the Arab territories which were occupied as
a result of Israel’s 1967 aggression; second, the
satisfaction of the legitimate national aspirations of the
Arab people of Palestine, including their inalienable
right to establish their own State; third, international
guarantees of the security and inviolability
of the
frontiers of all the Middle Eastern States, and their
right to independent existence and development.
The
deiega_tion of the USSR believes it important to recall
this as the Council is now discussing one of the aspects
of the Middle East problem.

41. The Security Council, the interested parties, and
first and foremost Israel and its protectors, must pay
the closest attention to the very serious warning
contained in the latest report of the Secretary-General
on UNDOF, in which he states:

38. It is the profound conviction of the Soviet Union
that these basic interconnected
tasks which form the
basis for a settlement in the Middle East take due
5

“While
the Israel-Syria
sector is quiet at the
present time, the situation in the Middle East as a
whole remains tense and unstable. Unless further
progress can be achieved towards a just and durable
peace, the situation in the Middle East will become
increasingly dangerous.‘* [S/12083/Add. I, para. 21

for the freedom and independence of peoples. The
aim is to consolidate
in international
practice
the principles of equality, respect for sovereignty and
territorial.
integrity,
non-intervention
in domestic
affairs, non-use of force, and the right of peoples
freely to decide their own fate. However, as has
already been pointed out, there are still certain forces
in the world which do not wish to renounce the
psychology of the cold war and which sometimes pay
lip service to detente, but in practice take actions
which are quite different, pursuing their own known
and selfish ends. This is the case with the forces of
Zionism and imperialism
that are operating in the
Middle East and trying to establish their control over
this vast region.

The Council cannot ignore this extremely important
and serious warning of the Secretary-General.
Unfortunately, there are forces which are doing everything
they can to impede the attainment
of a just and
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East. They are
endeavouring to create further tensions in that region
and to divide the Arab States and peoples. They aim
at increasing confrontation between those States. They
are conducting a systematic campaign against the
process of detente in international
relations, and
against the principles and agreements that are to be
found in the historic document signed by the leaders
of 35 States, the Final Act of the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe. The aggressor
and the forces protecting it do not need peace in the
Middle East which is not in their interest. It would be
contrary to their expansionist
designs. They need
tension because this would facilitate their continued
expansion and the retention of the fruits of their aggression against the Arab countries.

44. The Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole are called upon to play a very important
part in helping towards the attainment of a just and
stable peace in the Middle East and in applying the
principles on which detente is based.
45. We are convinced also that the Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which is to meet this August in Colombo, will
adopt decisions that will facilitate a radical settlement
in the Middle East within the framework of the Geneva
Peace Conference with the participation of representatives of the -Palestine Liberation Grganization and on
the basis of the relevant decisions of the United
Nations. By its decisions, the Conference in Colombo
will be able to make an important contribution
to the
cause of achieving a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, to the further strengthening of intemational detente and to the spread of that process to all
regions of the world including the Middle East, by
removing
the consequences of Israeli aggression
against the Arab countries and peoples.

42. The relaxation of international
tensions has a
very favourable impact on the political climate of the
world. The maintenance,
development and strengthening of detente is in keeping with the vital interests
of all peoples. There is no other way. Even the most
determined opponents of detente are not in a position
to propose any reasonable alternative to it. As was
stated by Comrade Brezhnev at the Twenty-fifth
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
“The main thing now is to translate all the principles and understandings reached in Helsinki into
practical deeds. This is exactly what the Soviet
Union is doing and will continue to do.”

46. Importance must also be attached to the problem
of complementing
political detente by the relaxation
of military tensions; we attach a great deal of importance to halting the arms race and the steep rise in
military budgets, and to adopting measures in the field
of disarmament
which will include the convening of
a world disarmament conference. At various meetings,
the non-aligned countries have often spoken out in
favour of convening such a conference.

The Final Act forms a single whole. Any attempt to
over-emphasize certain provisions of the Final Act at
the expense of others would certainly upset the agreement. The Act must be implemented
in its entirety
and in all its parts and should not be construed in a
limited or narrow way, as has sometimes been done
by representatives of some Westerncountries
in their
efforts to undermine detente.

47. The delegation of the Soviet Union expresses the
hope that at the Conference in Colombo the nonaligned countries will make a sizable contribution
to
the just struggle of peoples for peace and security for
all. The great aim is “making lasting peace the natural
way of life for all the... peoples”,
as Comrade
Brezhnev said in his report to the Twenty-fifth
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
in Moscow. And today, 28 May, in his statement in
the Kremlin on the occasion of the signing by the
Soviet Union and the United States of the treaty on
underground nuclear explosions, Comrade Brezhnev
put the emphasis on the following:

43. As was also clearly shown at the Twenty-Fifth
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
the Soviet Union regards the struggle for peace, for
the strengthening of international
security, for the
establishment of the principles of peaceful coexistence
and the development of comprehensive and mutually
beneficial co-operation
as the most important
task
in its foreign policy. As everyone knows, the Twentyfifth Congress adopted a programme to intensify its
efforts for peace and international
co-operation and
.

6

we commend the Syrian Government
for its statesmanlike decision to allow the mandate of UNDOF to
be renewed for a further six-month period and equally
welcome the concurrence of the Government of Israel
in the renewal of the Force. While the presence of
UNDOF on the Golan Heights is not an end in itself,
positive steps between the parties involved would be
much less likely if the Force were to be withdrawn.
I should like to interpret the continuation
of the
presence of UNDOF
forces for another six months
as a sign that the parties intend to pursue the road to
peace.
-

“In co-operation
with other countries, we are
prepared to move vigorously
through a broad
spectrum of measures that will lead to a curbing of
the arms race and to disarmament.
There is no
loftier or more humane goal than the all-out strengthening of international
peace and security and the
sure elimination
of the threat of war from relations
among States”.
48. The delegation of the Soviet Union voted in
favour of the resolution extending the mandate of
UNDOF on the Golan Heights, in the belief that that
extension will be used to seek a just and stable peace
in the Middle East, and in the hope that in order to
achieve this the international machinery that has been
created for the purpose, the Geneva Peace Conference,
will be effectively used. The time has come for a
radical settlement in the Middle East; it is time to
have done with palliatives.

54. Secondly, this meeting provides an opportunity
to comment on the conduct and effectiveness of the
Force itself. UNDOF
is a continuing credit to the
United Nations, to the officers and men who serve
with UNDOF, and to those in the Secretariat who are
responsible for UNDOF’s
operation. The cease-fire
between Israel and Syria has been well maintained.
There have been no serious incidents and no loss of
life during the period covered by today’s report. On
behalf of my Government,
I should like to commend
all those associated with UNDOF for the contribution
they have made and are making to the pursuit of
peace.

49. As far as the report of the Secretary-General
is
concerned, the delegation of the Soviet Union has
noted with satisfaction the commitment
by the Secretariat that is expressed in it to maintain the expenses
for the upkeep of UNDOF
within the limits of the
appropriations
that have already been approved. The
Soviet delegation believes that the time has come to
reduce the strength of the Force in the Middle East
and consequently the expenses of their upkeep. The
Secretariat must prepare a set of practical measures to
achieve this.

55. Finally, last but by no means least, I should like
to express to the Secretary-General the deep appreciation of my Government for his efforts over the past
few days-indeed,
over the past months and years-to
improve the possibilities for peace in the Middle East.

50. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
Mr. President, first may I say, as the waning hours of
your presidency approach, that we certainly congratulate you for the extraordinary and outstanding leadership that you have shown in this month of your
presidency and that we are deeply in your debt for
your diligence and determination
in handling a’ very
difficult month and some very difficult tasks. We
have noted that there have been many achievements
under your leadership,
not the least of which,
incidentally, is that you guided us so well that we were
nearly on time most of the time.

56. Mr. SALIM
(United
Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I wish at the very outset to pay a
tribute to you for the effective, skilful and impartial
way you have guided the deliberations of the Council
since you assumed its presidency at the beginning of
this month. Only two days ago, the Council was able
to authorize you to make a statement relating to the
situation in the occupied territories. That statement
was a product of prolonged consultations and negotiation which you handled with exceptional skill, firmness
combined with flexibility
and, above all, with the
utmost patience. Those of us who have been privileged
to know you over the years and, in particular, to have
had the real pleasure and satisfaction of working with
you in the Council since last year, were not at all
surprised by the outstanding calibre of leadership that
you have displayed. We have come to know you as a
diplomat of exceptional talents and capabilities and a
statesman of great integrity. We have also come to
value you as a friend and colleague who has spared no
effort in promoting understanding and dialogue among
all the sections that our great Organization comprises.

51. Having had the opportunity to comment on other
aspects of the situation in the Middle East both in the
March Council debate and in the debate which closed
just a couple of days ago, I shall confine my remarks
to the proposition that is immediately
before us.
52. This is the first time that I have participated in
Council deliberations on the renewal of the mandate of
a peace-keeping force in the Middle East. Let me say
that I do so today with the greatest pleasure, and for
two reasons.

57. Allow me also to express our great satisfaction
at the outstanding way in which Ambassador Huang
Hua of the People’s Republic of China provided the
leadership of the Council in the month of April.

53. First of all, the United States believes that the
continued maintenance of the peace-keeping forces in
the Middle East is an essential element in maintaining
a stable environment
which allows efforts towards
an over-all peace settlement to proceed. Consequently,

58. Since this is the first time I have spoken since
our colleague and friend Ambassador Malik rejoined
7

us after recuperating from the accident of which both
he and Mrs. Malik were victims, let me say how happy
and thankful we are at his recovery as well as in that
of Mrs. Malik.

of territory by force and thus the total withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all the territories it has occupied
since June 1967; secondly, the recognition
of the
national rights of the Palestinians and of their right to
create an independent state of their own; and thirdly,
the right of all States in the area to an independent
existence within secure and recognized boundaries.

59. I also join my colleagues who have done so in
previous meetings of the Council in extending a warm
welcome to the new Permanent Representatives
of
Japan and Panama. I wish to assure both Ambassadors Abe and Illueca of our strong desire to continue
the active co-operation and collaboration
which I and
my delegation enjoyed with Ambassadors Saito and
Boyd.

62. These are principles which were as valid then as
they are now. They cry out for immediate recognition
and implementation.
And as we today extend the
mandate of UNDOF it is all the more relevant that w.e
remind ourselves of the Council’s solemn responsibility
to act firmly and decisively in that direction if there
is to be a de-escalation of tension and an escalation
of the efforts towards peace and justice for all the
peoples of the Middle East-the
Arab States, the
Palestinian Arabs and the Jewish people.

60. In sponsoring and voting for the draft resolution
by which the mandate of UNDOF
has just been
extended for a period of another six months, my
delegation is very conscious that this decision provides
for the international community another breathing spell
which must be fully exploited if the rapidly escalating
tensions in the Middle East are not to result in yet
another serious conflagration. For we entirely share the
very pertinent
and candid observations
of the
Secretary-General
when he asserts in his report:

63. Some cynics may wonder what all this has to do
with what they may consider to be a routine exercise
of renewing the UNDOF mandate. The answer is as
simple as it is unequivocal:
everything.
There is
nothing routine about the extension of the mandate.
The Agreement on Disengagement was not intended to
be an end in itself but the beginning of a process, a
first step towards peace and a just solution in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). My
delegation has reportedly stated in the Council and
wishes to stress once again that the idea of automatic
renewal of the mandate-be
it on the Golan Heights or
in Sinai-is
abnormal, unacceptable and dangerous.
The United Nations forces are intended to create
momentum towards peace and justice and not to be
instruments for the preservation of the status quo.

“ . . . the situation in the Middle East as a whole
remains tense and unstable. Unless further progress
can be achieved towards a just and durable peace,
the situation
in the Middle
East will become
increasingly dangerous.” [S/12083/Add.l,
para. 2.1
The Secretary-General
was neither over-dramatizing
nor exaggerating
the situation.
He was simply
informing this Council of the facts of the situation.
It does not require experts on the subject to recognize
this.

64. There is another reason why we need to emphasize the urgency of the Council’s action in search
of a just and durable settlement. In the last three
months the occupying
authorities
seem to have
interpreted the Council’s inaction as giving them carte
blanche to continue with the consolidation
of the
occupation, to suppress the rising tide of Palestinian
resistance, and to take measures which are not only
in violation of General Assembly and Council resolutions but are indeed clearly calculated to promote the
annexation of the occupied territories.

61. Since last November when the Council extended
UNDOF’s
mandate while at the same time providing
for a thorough consideration
of the Middle East
problem, including the Palestinian question [resolution 381 (1975)1-a
question which the SecretaryGeneral rightly pointed out in his press conference
of 9 April 1976 in Geneva was the key to the solution
of the Middle East problem-we
have witnessed a
further deterioration of the situation. Strenuous efforts
by this Council in January to arrive at a decision which
would have provided a sound and realistic basis for a
just and durable peace in the area were regrettably
frustrated.
If the broad agreement which clearly
emerged among the members of the Council in the
January deliberations
incorporating the salient points
that mere prerequisites for a solution had not been
blocked by one permanent member of the Council,
perhaps a new and positive chapter would have begun
in the area. It is important
to recapitulate
those
salient points if only to underscore the urgent need
for action in order to avoid a catastrophe. The overwhelming majority of the Council had asserted that for
a just and lasting peace to be achieved in the area,
the following principles needed to be scrupulously
adhered to and implemented:
first, the non-acquisition

65. Both in March and in the last three weeks the
Council’s
debates, culminating
in the President’s
statement of 26 May [1922nd meeting, para. 2.1,
have dealt at length with the extremely serious conditions prevailing in the occupied Arab territories.
I do not therefore propose to discuss in any detail
matters of which the Council is perfectly aware.
Suffice it to say that my Government
is seriously
concerned at the continued
strong-arm measures,
including the killing of innocent young Palestinians,
adopted by the occupying Power. We are equally
concerned at the cynicism and contempt with which
the Government of Israel treats the legitimate concerns
and demands of the international
community
in
8

proceeding with the creation of new fairs, accomplis,
including the systematic measures aimed at changing
the demographic composition
of the occupied territories, and, in particular,. the creation of new settlements in complete violation of the fourth Geneva
Conventiot?.
We also share the international
sense
of outrage at the ruthless measures adopted by the
Israeli authorities to curb the patriotic resistance of
the Palestinian Arabs.

I cannot conclude this statement without paying a
tribute to the patience, perseverance and statesmanship demonstrated
by the Government
of Syria in
agreeing to the extension of the mandate in response
to the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General
as well as to those of many others both within and
outside the Council. We believe the Syrian decision
will greatly facilitate a productive and calm discussion
of the important report of the Committee.

66. On an occasion such as this it is fitting once
again to remind the Israeli authorities that they must
recognize that they cannot have both peace and
occupation. For as long as they continue to cling to
their illegal occupation of the Arab territories there will
be resistance, and this resistance will inevitably mount
in both intensity and dimension. Israel would be well
advised to pay heed to the sombre and calm warning
given by the representative
of Egypt when, in his
statement before the Council on 4 May, he declared
“ . . . there can be no question of any kind of Arab
coexistence
with occupation”.
[1916th meefing,
para. 261.

69. Finally, I wish to join the Secretary-General
and
those who have preceded me in paying a well-deserved
tribute to Major-General
Hannes Philipp and ‘the
officers and men of UNDOF for effectively discharging
their duties. Our appreciation is no less due to the
contributing Governments, as indeed all those military
and civilian personnel in the service of the United
Nations peace-keeping effort in the area.
70. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): First of
all I should like to express our appreciation and thanks
to the Secretary-General
for his sincere efforts, his
determination
and his optimistic
approach, as well
as his accurate report to the Council in connexion with
the item under discussion.

67. The Council must be the first to recognize that
renewal of the mandate cannot be a permanent
phenomenon. We have a clear responsibility
to make
use of the time the extension has allowed us vigorously
to pursue the goals of peace and justice in the area.
In this connexion, my delegation is extremely encouraged and inspired by the commendable
efforts and
timely initiatives taken by the Secretary-General.
His
dispatch to the Middle East of his personal representative, UnderSecretary-General
Guyer, his continued
contacts with the Co-Chairmen
of the Geneva Conference, as well as his initiatives
vis-a-vis all the
parties concerned, merit our support and appreciation.
We must in particular single out his latest initiative,
which sent’him to Damascus to engage in discussions
with President Assad and Foreign Minister Khaddam
and.which resulted in the concurrence of the Govemment of Syria in the extension of the mandate. This
initiative was not only timely but indeed indispensable
to the cause of peace, for I must emphasize, even at
the risk of being repetitious, that the UNDOF is in
Syrian territory and the wishes and consent of the
Syrian Government are paramount if the Force is to
continue. In paying a tribute to the Secretary-General
for all his untiring efforts, I should like, furthermore,
to observe that in tackling this problem he has once
again demonstrated
the type of far-sighted, selfless
and effective leadership that we in the Council, and
indeed the whole United Nations, have come to
expect of our distinguished Secretary-General.

71. I should like to reiterate the position of the Libyan
Arab Republic with regard to the cretaion of UNDOF
and the prolongation
of its mandate. Our position is
clear and well known. The Libyan delegation has on
many occasions affirmed its attitude concerning resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), on which the presence
of UNDOF
is based. In fact, the position of my
delegation
concerning
these resolutions
has been
reiterated many times in the General Assembly and
also in the Council. We are convinced that those
resolutions
have been overtaken
by events and
developments
both inside and outside the United
Nations. They are irrelevant as a framework for any
just and lasting solution to the Palestine problem and to
the Middle East question. General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237 (XXIX), reaffirming the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people; General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX), proposing the means
designed to enable the Palestinian people to exercise
their national rights; and General Assembly resolution 3379 (XXX), condemning
Zionism as a racist
movement, reflect the profound changes and developments in the attitude of the United Nations and of
international public opinion and call for a review of this
entire question and the method of dealing with it.
For that reason the delegation of the Libyan Arab
Republic has not participated
in the debate on the
present item or in the vote on the draft resolution
in document S/12088.

68. The Council must act to enhance such initiatives.
We have to take firm measures in pursuit of peace
and justice in the Middle East. In this respect it is
relevant to bear in mind that we shall have another
opportunity
to do so when, next month, the Council
considers the report of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.

72. Finally, Mr. President, since this meeting of the
Council will probably be the last meeting this month
and since the next meeting will be presided over
by another member of the Council, I should like to
extend to you the sincere congratulations and appreciation of the Libyan delegation for your distinguished
9

‘leadership and sincere efforts as President
Council during the month of May.

.of the

resumption of the negotiation
by the Council.

73. Mr. DATCU
(Romania)
(interpretation
from
French): The Romanian
delegation
has carefully
studied the report submitted by the Secretary-General
on UNDOF and notes that that Force has carried out
the tasks assigned to it. We note also the paragraphs
of the report which indicate that UNDOF
has continued to enjoy the co-operation of the parties concerned.

process, as requested

77. We belieye that the responsibilities
of the’united
Nations, and above all of the Security Council, in the
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East cannot
amount to a mere recording of the decisions taken
elsewhere. Our Organization must take a more active
role and must be the focal point of the process
designed to restore peace in that region of the world.
78. Romania has always supported the constructive
measures to establish and maintain an atmosphere
conducive to the continuation of efforts to bring about
peace in the Middle East. Romania is convinced that
UNDOF’s
activities are part of such constructive
measures, and it therefore encouraged the parties
concerned to agree to the maintenance of the Force.
It was in that spirit that Romania co-sponsored the
draft resolution relating to the extension of UNDOF’s
mandate for a further six-month period. That draft
resolution was eloquently introduced by the representative of Guyana.

74. The Romanian delegation wishes to congratulate
all the members of UNDOF,
who, by carrying out
their task with devotion, have made a concrete contribution-a
limited contribution,
to be sure, but an
important one-to the strengthening of the role of the
United Nations as an instrument to prevent conflicts
and build peace among nations. We wish also to
express our whole-hearted gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, for the effective way in which he has directed
UNDOF’s
operations. We thank him, too, for his
tireless efforts to bring about the extension of .the
Force’s mandate and for the clear and detailed
statement he made at the beginning of this meeting.

79. We wish to pay a tribute to the Syrian Govemment for the political wisdom and patience it has shown
in agreeing to a new extension of UNDOF’s
mandate.
We are aware of the fact that the Force is on Syrian
territory and that that country’s agreement is very
important
to any decision concerning
UNDOF’s
activities.

75. It is true that the situation in the Force’s
operational
zone has remained
calm, militarily
speaking, during the past six months and that there
have been no significant violations of the cease-fire.
But the apparent calm in that part of the zone of
conflict and the absence of incidents do not mean
that peace has been restored-far
from it. As the
Secretary-General
stresses in his report:

80. We regard the agreement to extend UNDOF’s
mandate as an expression of the will of the parties
concerned to contribute
to the efforts towards a
political settlement of the conflict. The new extension
must be fully used by the parties to the conflict to deal
decisively and courageously with the problems of
substance that constitute obstacles to a long overdue
peace.

6‘ . . . the situation in the Middle East as a whole
remains tense and unstable. Unless further progress
can be achieved towards a just and durable peace,
the situation in the Middle
East will become
increasingly dangerous.**

81. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, since this is the first time that I have spoken in
the Council during this month, let me begin by saying
how delighted we are that this meeting of the Council
is taking place under your presidency. You have
already amply demonstrated
your diplomatic
skill.
I believe the whole Council shares my delegation’s
confidence in your ability to preside over our business
with distinction.
In the week of the inauguration
of
an historic new air service by Air France and British
Airways from our two capitals to Washington, it gives
me particular pleasure to offer you our congratulations
in the spirit of this new “entente Concordiafe”
that
we are now embarked upon.

[S/12083/Add. I, para. 21
76. That is why the Romanian delegation is convinced that there is a need to act resolutely in order
to continue and indeed accelerate the process leading
to a political settlement of the problems in the Middle
East. To that end, efforts must be redoubled to resume
the negotiations in accordance with the decision taken
by the Council in its resolution
338 (1973). The
resumption of the work of the Geneva Peace Conference could be an important stage in the process
leading to the resotaration of peace if all the parties
concerned, including the Arab people of Palestine,
were represented there and if the efforts of the participants were focused on the implementation
of all
the relevant
United
Nations
resolutions.
-The
Romanian
delegation
is pleased to note that the
Secretary-General
has taken an active part in the
efforts to ensure progress in the implementation
of
resolution 338 (1973) and that he intends, as he has
just confirmed here, to pursue his efforts towards the

82. ‘Next, I should like to congratulate Ambassador
Huang Hua for the great diplomatic skill with which
he conducted our business during the month of April.
83. It is also a great pleasure to welcome Ambassador
Abe of Japan and Ambassador Illueca of Panama.
IO

84. Finally, like others who have spoken before me,
let me say how pleased I am to welcome my friend
and neighbour at this table, Ambassador Malik, back
among us. I was glad to see that his unfortunate
accident had done nothing to diminish his speaking
powers nor, indeed, his zest for an argument. He
would not, I know, expect the words he uttered
today to pass unremarked,
unheeded or, indeed,
unanswered.
_ .-..
85. My~-distinguished
Soviet colleague talked about
paying “lip service to detente”.
I thought for a
moment he was describig his own speech. As the
British Foreign Secretary has recently made clear, in
our view, the proof of the pudding is in the eating.
We look to the Soviet Union to help us to make
detente a practical reality, not just a matter of words.
All the parts of the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference need to be made real, not merely those parts
for which the Soviet Union has the most enthusiasm.
Words are fine enough; but, as Ambassador Malik
will recollect from his time in the United Kingdom,
in my country we have a saying which goes: “Fine
words butter no parsnips.*’ We hear what they have to
say about detente and about human rights and about
disarmament;
we are now waiting to see what they
propose doing about them.
86. My delegation was very pleased to vote in favour
of the draft resolution which we have just adopted
renewing the mandate of UNDOF
for a further six
months. The task which the Force has been performing
is an extremely important one and continues to remain
essential at the present time. As I have made clear on
similar occasions in the Council in the past, the
purpose of the Force is, in our view, first, to help
to maintain
quiet in the Israel-Syria
sector and,
secondly, to provide an atmosphere conducive to
carrying forward the efforts towards peace. The
Force is in no way, nor should it be allowed to become,
a substitute for peace, but it is an essential instrument
through which peace can be achieved. We very much
hope that the time provided by the extension of the
mandate will be used to good effect.
87. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
express on behalf of my Government
our thanks to
the Secretary-General
for his continuing
efforts to
keep the negotiating process going and, in particular,
for the part that he has personally played in facilitating
the passage of the resolution we have adopted today.
Next, I should Iike to thank the Secretary-General’s
staff and all those concerned here in New York and
in the Middle East for the operation of the Force,
and for the efficient and untiring way in which they
have carried out their tasks. Finally, I should like
once again to pay a tribute to the offtcers and men of
the Force itself. It is all too easy sometimes, as we
sit in our comfortable chairs in the Council, to forget
the difficult and sometimes arduous duties which they
are carrying out on the ground on behalf of us all and
in the cause of peace in the Middle East.

88. The PRESIDEN’l?
(inrerpretution from French):
I thank the representative of the United Kingdom for
the kind words he addressed to me. I should like to
assure Ambassador Richard that I’ am convinced that
the success of the Concorde, about which I have no
doubts, will strengthen concord between our two
countries.
89. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden) (interpretation
from
French): First of all may I express to you, Mr. President, the congratulations
of the Swedish delegation
on the masterly way in which you have conducted the
work of the Council this month.
[The speaker continued

in English.]

90. Next, I should like to ask the Chinese delegation
to convey the thanks of my delegation to Ambassador
Huang Hua, who guided us through our work last
month with such consummate skill.
91. I sincerely welcome our new colleagues of Japan
and Panama.
92. It is with great relief and satisfaction that Sweden
greets the fact that it has been possible to extend
the mandate of UNDOF.
My delegation wants to
express the great and sincere appreciation
of the
Swedish Government to the Secretary-General for his
untiring efforts in the search for peace in the Middle
East in general and, in particular, for his activity
aimed at obtaining the necessary and full support for
the prolongation of UNDOF’s
mandate.
93. To our surprise, critical voices have been raised
against the Secretary-General
in that context. We
consider that criticism entirely unwarranted. We fully
support the Secretary-General’s
own judgement
of
what services he could render in the prevailing situation and we note that his activity has proved to be of
crucial importance in obtaining an extension of the
mandate. In fact, we owe him a debt of gratitude.
94.

As the Secretary-General

points out in his report:

“the presence of UNDOF continues to be essential,
not only to maintain quiet in the Israel-Syria sector,
but also to provide an atmosphere conducive to
further peace efforts.” [S/12083/Add. I, para. 41.
The very existence of UNDOF and the way in which
the Force, including the Commander,
officers and
men, as well as those in the Secretariat who are
responsible for UNDOF,
carry out their mandate
demonstrate the indispensability
of the United Nations
peace-keeping forces in the area.
95. But the presence of these forces is not an end in
itself. The forces cannot create a lasting peace.
Sweden, through its experience as a country which
makes its contribution in soldiers, observers and funds
to all United Nations peace-keeping enterprises-in

fact, as the only State contributing
troops in the
Middle East among the present member of the Council-is very keenly aware of this. But a peace-keeping
force such as UNDOF nevertheless plays a crucial role
in the complicated institutional and procedural broader
framework within which the efforts towards a peace
process are pursued.

presidency. Your term of office has been marked,
throughout
this entire month, by positive results,
thanks to your faultless and perceptive guidance.
102. My delegation and I have been pleased to offer
you our support, although that support, it is true,
had not until now been given offtcial expression. We
are similarly pleased with the success of the constant
efforts made by you, the representative
of France,
a nation with which Italy has fraternal and historic
bonds. Our Governments
and countries have been
hard at work in a common effort, together with our
partners in the Community,
to build a new Europe
for the well-being of our peoples and for all peoples
of the international community.

96. UNDOF,
as well as UNEF and other peacekeeping forces, must certainly not be kept one day
beyond the time when they can play a useful role in
the peace machinery. But it is equally important that
as long as they are needed they be kept in place,
and that their strength be maintained
at the level
required for the fulfilment of their mandate.
97. Expressions of impatience and of concern for the
costs have been heard. The costs constitute a fraction
of a fraction of the size of the armaments expenditures
of the major military Powers in the worid, and they
are totally insignificant
in comparison
with what
renewed hostilities in the area would mean, primarily
in terms of human suffering and loss of human lives,
but also in terms of material costs. The fact that the
situation in the area is calm for the time being can in
part be attributed
to the presence of the United
Nations forces. This being the case, we cannot agree
with the argument that the quiet situation in itself is
a motive for reduction, especially as the underlying
causes of the crisis have not yet been eliminated.

103. Allow me also to mention my high esteem for
you personally, Mr. President, and to recall the bonds
of trust, friendship and high esteem that exist between
us. And may I take this occasion to extend to you my
sincerest congratulations
and those of my delegation.
[The speaker continued

104. I should like also to convey to your predecessor,
the representative of China, Ambassador Huang Hua,
who presided over the Council in the monthsof April,
our sincere congratulations
and gratitude. We highly
appreciated
the talent, wisdom, equanimity
and
efficiency with which he conducted our deliberations
on the delicate matters of which the Council was
seized last month.

98. The extension of the UNDOF
mandate, while
in itself not creating. peace, will give the parties more
time to take steps towards peace in a relatively quiet
atmosphere.
99. Through historical developments,
the United
Nations has been entrusted with a great responsibility
in regard to the situation in the Middle East. To meet
its responsibility
the Organization
has taken a great
number of measures in the field of peace-keeping,
supervision,
observation
and mediation.
With the
framework of the United Nations, important initiatives
of political and diplomatic
character have also been
taken. This massive effort on behalf of the intemational community
has constituted
one important
element in containing developments that might otherwise have dragged the area into a new, devastating
war.
100. Only to contain potentially dangerous developments is not enough, however: a momentum towards
peace must be recreated. In the view of my Govemment, the United Nations must continue its efforts to
make contributions towards this end and towards the
solution of the persistent Middle East crisis.

in English.]

105. I further wish to extend a warm “welcome
back” to the new representative of Japan, Ambassador
Abe, a well-known, highly esteemed figure in our world
Organization, and an old friend with whom I have the
rare privilege of speaking in my mother tongue. We
are sure that he will make the same great contribution
to our work as did his predecessor. Personally, I am
looking forward to a close association and co-operation which I am sure will be as fruitful as that we
had in the past.
106. I wish to extend a no less heartfelt welcome to
‘the new Permanent Representative of Panama. I am
fully confident that our relations with Ambassador
Illueca will be as good, friendly and constructive as
those we enjoyed with his predecessor and successor,
Ambassador
Boyd, a long-time
friend, to whom
I convey my best wishes for the discharge of his
present highter responsibilities.
107. Finally, I wish to welcome back a good old
friend and highly respected colleague, Ambassador
Malik. We are gratified and glad that he has been
able to resume his functions in the Council after a
long absence due to a serious and most unfortunate
accident. I am sincerely pleased to see him here
looking younger and more vigorous than ever, and
I ask him to renew. our congratulations
and best
wishes to Madame Maiik for an equally complete
recovery.

101. Mr. VINCI (Italy) (interpretationfrom
French):
Mr. President, speaking for the first time this month,
I take great pleasure in conveying to you, Ambassador
Louis de Guiringaud, the representative of France, my
gratification
and satisfaction at working under your
12

108. My delegation voted in favour of the six-Power
draft resolution contained in document S/12088. The
reasons are quite clear. First of all, we fully share the
view of the Secretary-General
as expressed in the
report he submitted to the Council, that the presence
of UNDOF is still essential not only to maintain quiet
in the Israel-Syria
sector, but also to promote an
atmosphere conducive to further negotiating efforts.
Therefore we fully support the decision taken by the
Council to extend the mandate of the Force for
another period of six months. We should like to
express our warm, sincere appreciation
to the
Secretary-General,
who has once again shown his
unconditional
dedication to the cause of peace and to
the United Nations by acting promptly and using his
personal influence in order to bring about today’s
positive decision. Our congratulations
go also to the
two Governments
mainly concerned for their wise
decision.

recalling the recent visit to Italy of President Anwar
Sadat, described as the most encouraging sign the
clear option of Egypt in favour of negotiations.
He
further noted that in Israel, too, the forces favourable
to a more realistic approach were gaining ground.
Mr. Rumor concluded by advocating further efforts
towards a general acceptance of and respect for the
principles contained in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, which provide, together with basic guidelines and a framework, the most promising basis for
fruitful negotiations.
112. The continued escalation of controversy and
tension in the Middle East is, in our view, the product
of the present stalemate, and I cannot fail to note with
deep concern that the hoped-for negotiations strongly
advocated by the Council on behalf of the world
community in fact continue to meet with obstruction.
Under these circumstances, we appeal once more to
all sides to co-operate by all means in the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General
and others for a
speedy resumption
of the negotiating
process in
accordance with the pertinent
resolutions
of the
Council.

109. In further explaining the position of my delegation on the issue at stake, I would simply recall the
statements made by the Italian delegation on the occasion of previous renewals of the UNDOF mandate.
In my last statement, on 30 November 1975 I1856th
meeting],
I reiterated a few points which, in our
opinion, retain all their importance.
Taking up that
statement, I wish to acknowledge once again the
commendable
manner in which UNDOF has carried
out its functions and pay a tribute to the high order
of service provided by the Force and its Commanding
Officer. However, as I pointed out in November last,
we should not indulge in the belief that the Force in
itself has the power to perpetuate the present calm
in the Israel-Syria sector. As the Secretary-General
wisely remarks, this calm is ultimately
dependent
upon the general situation in the Middle East area-a
situation,
unfortunately,
becoming
increasingly
dangerous.

113. Mr. ABE (Japan): My delegation voted in favour
of the draft resolution contained in document S/12088,
by which the mandate of UNDOF is extended for a
further period of six months. My delegation sees that
present international
circumstances
necessitate the
continued stationing of UNDOF for that duration to
help to maintain peace in that area.
114. The fact that both‘ parties directly concerned
have agreed to the extension of the mandate of UNDOF
is a hopeful sign for a general settlement, in the sense
that both are disposed towards seeking a settlement by
peaceful means rather than by force.
115. We have noted with satisfaction the SecretaryGeneral’s observation
in his report that, with the
co-operation of the parties, UNDOF has been able to
carry out the tasks entrusted to it and that the situation
in the UNDOF area of operations has remained calm
with no incidents of a serious nature. On this occasion, I wish to express our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, as well as to all members of UNDOF,
for
their continued success in fulfilling the duties assigned
to them.

110. In particular, the Italian Government believes
that at this stage ofthe Middle East crisis a consensus
should be reached among all the parties concerned
on some main points which appear to us as the necessary prerequisites for a final, just and lasting settlement, namely: the withdrawal by Israel from all the
territories occupied in June 1967; the right of all States
in the area to sovereignty, political independence and
territorial
integrity
within secure borders to be
internationally
recognized and guaranteed; and the
recognition of the national rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to establish their own
independent State.

116. Nonetheless, the situation in the Middle East as
a whole remains t&se and unstable. We are in full
agreement with the Secretary-General’s
view as stated
in his report that:

111. This last point was underlined by the Foreign
Minister of Italy, Mr. Mariano Rumor, when speaking
on 19 May in Oslo at the last session at the ministerial
level of the Council of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
He stated that the Palestinian question
had become one of the central factors to be reckoned
with in the search for a peaceful solution in the Middle
East. On that very same occasion, Mr. Rumor, while

“Unless
further progress can be achieved
towards a just and durable peace, the situation
in the Middle East will become increasingly dangerous”. [SII2083/Add.l,
para. 2.1
117. -My delegation cannot fail to reiterate the deep
regret of the Government of Japan at the fact that the
13

negotiating process for a peaceful solution of the
Middle East problem is at a standstill. Various efforts
to advance the implementation of resolution 338 (1973)
have continued in several levels, and we hope that they
will continue towards that end. As he said in his report,
the Secretary-General himself has been actively
involved in those efforts. My delegation wishes to
encourage the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to promote the resumption of the negotiating
process. We believe that the extra time gained by
the extension of UNDOF’s mandate must not be
wasted. My delegation strongly hopes that all the
parties concerned will make renewed efforts to bring
about a resumption of the negotiations, thus bringing
nearer a just and durable settlement.
[The speaker continued

deep concern at the situation in the Middle East, where
the continued illegal occupation by Israel of Arab
territory threatens to plunge the Middle East into yet
another conflict and the world into an even more acute
economic and political crisis.
123. The precarious cease-fire which exists between
Israel and its Arab neighbours must not be allowed to
be frozen and taken as a substitute for real peace.
Further, peace can only be established if Israel
withdraws from all the Arab territories it has.occupied
since 1967, including the Golan Heights, and when the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinians are
recognized and implemented. Naturally, the security
and legitimate interests of all the States and peopIes
of the region should be guaranteed.

in French.]

124. While there is general agreement among the
members of the Council on the urgent need to have
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East and even
on the elements of a solution, unfortunately the
Council has remained unable to take effective and
purposeful action towards implementing its own
resolutions on the matter, notably its resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). At the renewal of the mandate
of UNDOF in November last, the Council had quite
rightly decided to continue the debate on the Middle
East problem including the Palestinian question. At the
heart of the debate lies the question of Palestine to
which the Council will revert in June.

118. Mr. President, in conclusion and since this is
one of the last days of the month of your presidency,
I want to express to you, Sir, the deepest gratitude
of my delegation for having guided our debate so
brilliantly and indeed impeccably. And may I be
allowed to add my thanks to all those who were-good
enough to address very kind words of welcome to me.
119. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): We are glad that the
mandate of UNDOF has been extended with the
approval of the parties concerned. The members of this
Force have rendered a valuable service, and the quiet
on the Golan Heights bears testimony to their dedication to their duty and the effectiveness of their
operations.

125. My delegation would like to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his very important
and fruitful journey of peace to Damascus. We entirely
agree with the warning given by him in the addendum
to his report and in his statement that the situation in
the Middle East as a whole remains tense and unstable
and that, unless further progress can be achieved
towards a just and durable peace, the situation in the
Middle East will become increasingly dangerous.

120. We note with appreciation from the report of the
Secretary-General that UNDOF has been able, with the
co-operation of the parties, to carry out the tasks
entrusted to it. It is also a matter of satisfaction that
the general discipline, understanding and bearing of
all members of UNDOF have been of a high order.
We note with particular satisfaction the fact that, in
contrast to the preceding periods, the Force suffered
no fatal casualties and that no injuries or loss of lie
resulted from the three small-arms fue incidents.

126. It is the view of the delegation of Pakistan
that the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF, on which
the Council members have agreed, must be viewed in
the larger perspective. The Government of Syria has
indeed shown great wisdom and its devotion to peace
in agreeing to the extension of the mandate of UNDOF.

121. The Secretary-General’s report also states that
UNDOF has continued to carry out its task within
the area of separation in a manner which neither
hampers the Syrian administration nor derogates from
Syrian sovereignty. This portion of the report points
to a satisfactory situation which is based on an
unsatisfactory premise. The fact that a sovereign and
independent State has to have, within its borders, a
non-national military force is cause for regret and
evidence of the existence of an abnormal situation.
We recognize the necessity of maintaining the ceasefire on the Golan Heights, as indeed on the other
fronts, and we commend UNDOF for its role in
maintaining the cease-tire so admirably. The fact
remains that cease-fire is not peace.

127. My delegation joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution extending the mandate of UNDOF in the
belief that decision would help in maintaining quiet on
the Golan Heights. The purpose of our action should
be to pursue more vigorously our efforts in this Council
and elsewhere towards peace in the Middle East.
It is our considered view that the Council should
remain seized of the situation and that it should
review it constantly for it is only thus that it can help
in creating the necessery conditions for a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

122. The Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Zulfikar
Ali Bhutto, in a recent statement expressed Pakistan’s

French):

128. Mr.
14

PAQUI (Benin) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, thanks to your outstanding

tact we have again adopted a resolution whereby the,
mandate
of the United
Nations
Disengagement
observers Force on the Golan Heights has been
renewed. This positive result we have just achieved
is certainly due to your ability, but also, and mainly,
to the efforts exerted by the Secretary-General
to
persuade the Syrian Government to give its agreement
to that renewal. My delegation would like to address
to Mr. Waldheim the expression of its sincere gratitude
for the happy result of his delicate and for various
mission to the Middle East.

above.all by those who are responsible for the situation and who have every interest in seeing the situation prolonged.
132. Finally, my delegation believes that the present
situation can only be regarded as provisional.
We
should therefore like to make an appeal to the parties
concerned, particularly Israel, to embark on a process
which would necessarily lead to a just and durable
peace as desired by the whole international
community. As we shall very soon have to revert to the
question of the Middle East, my delegation will have
another opportunity to speak at length on this problem.
That is all that my delegation wishes to say for the
present.

129. By adopting that resolution, the Council has
now extended the mandate of UNDOF for the fourth
time. However, all the members here will understand
that this is a situation which should not become a
ritual, because, whether one wants it or not, that
Force happens to be on Syrian territory. If its mandate
is renewed more or less automatically,
there is the
danger of perpetuating
a situation which is neither
peace nor war, a situation which is necessarily favourable to Israel and unfavourable to Syria.

133.

Mr. RfOS (Panama) (interpretation
from Spunwishes to inform those
delegations which have warmly welcomed the new
Ambassador of Panama, Mr. Illueca, that I shall have
great pleasure in conveying to him their words of
welcome. Ambassador Illueca is a veteran in the United
Nations, and at a future meeting he will personally
thank the representatives for the kind words they have
addressed to him. I also wish to inform my good friend
Ambassador Vinci of Italy that his good wishes for
the Foreign Minister of my country, Mr. Boyd, will
faithfully be transmitted to him. I am grateful for those
words.
ish): First of all my delegation

130. The fact that the Secretary-General
has been
successful in obtaining the agreement of Syria shows,
if that were necessary, the need to transfer the search
for a solution of the crisis in the Middle East to the
level of the United Nations itself. The Security Council
consequently
should not avoid facing the responsibilities which it now has in the Middle East. It must
make Israel understand that the present situation
cannot be perpetuated. It is high time to engage during
this new period in a serious search in order to achieve
appreciable progress towards establishing a just and
durable peace in the Middle East. It goes without saying
that during this period the super-Powers,
whose
responsibility
in all these matters is so clear, should
undertake all possible measures in order to convince
the parties to the conflict that they must make every
effort to search for ways and means to establish that
peace which is so greatly desired by the international
community.
In other words, it is high time for the
Co-Chairmen
of the Geneva Peace Conference to
forget their rivalry and, in the interests of the peoples
of the Middle East and of the United Nations itself,
to take every initiative
urgently to convene the
celebrated Geneva Peace Conference, in which the
Palestinian Liberation Organization muSt necessarily
participate,
whether in the way proposed originally
by the delegation of the Soviet Union or in some
other way.

134. The delegation of Panama is pleased indeed that
this afternoon the Council has adopted the draft resolution in document S/12088, so brilliantly introduced by
the representative of Guyana.
135. Admittedly,
the adoption of that text was made
possible by your intelligent
efforts, Mr. President,
and especially by the hard, diligent work of the
Secretary-General.
It was thanks to his direct efforts
with the Government
of Syria that we were able to
achieve the results we have seen today. Today’s
action by the Council is based on the report of the
Secretary-General
on UNDOF,
which is referred to
the first preambular paragraph of the resolution.
136. We unreservedly acknowledge that the political
success of the Secretary-General,
a corollary of which
is today’s resolution, has made it possible for us to
bring the situation in the Middle East to a new stage.
It is now possible for a new programme to be adopted
for the practical implementation
of resolution 338
(1973).

131. The essential thing, in the view of my delegation, is that we should achieve a definitive settlement of the crisis as soon as possible. In any case,
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the position of my Government with regard
to the financing of UNDOF.
Even though my delegation was a sponsor of that draft resolution and of
course voted in favour of it, my Government nonetheless feels that the expenditure necessary to maintain
the Force should be borne by the super-Powers and

137. Syria responded positively to the efforts of the
Secretary-General
and of a few friendly nations. It is
the sole sovereign of the territory concerned, and it
consented to the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF.
It should also be recognized that Israel also consented
to the extension. In itself, that is a positive indication
which the international
community hopes will lead to
further action to implement the Council’s resolutions.
We say this because the extension of UNDOF’s
15

mandate should not be viewed as an alternative to
peace negotiations.
That point is made in resolution 338 (1973). It requires that the parties to the
conflict implement
resolution 242 (1967) in all its
aspects.
138. We firmly believe that both the creation of
UNDOF and the successive extensions of its mandate
should not be allowed to lead to a freezing of an
abnormal situation. Peace must be restored to the
long-suffering peoples of the Middle East, without any
exception. In this connexion, it should be recalled that
the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and
Syrian Forces signed on 31 May 1974 in Geneva was
a first step towards the final goal, which is a settlement
of the Middle East question by means of the complete
liberation of the occupied Arab territories that takes
into account the interests of all the inhabitants of the
area, including the Palestinian people, at the same time
respects the right of the countries of the area to an
independent existence.
139. We wish at the same time to stress that in his
report the Secretary-General
says “the situation in
the Middle
East remains tense and precarious.”
[S/12083/,4&.1,
paru. 2.1. He also has expressed his
considered opinion that

the very fact of its continued occupation of extensive
Arab territory,
that country assumes particular
responsibilities.
It is therefore for Israel to manifest
more clearly the will to negotiate and, if we may
so hope, to make the necessary gestures that would
help to reduce tension and to create that minimum
of trust without which no progress is possible.”
[1809th meeting, para. 108.1
141. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
French): As there are no other speakers on the r&+olu-’
tion we have just adopted, I should like, before calling
on representatives who wish to speak in exercise of
the right of reply, to make a brief statement as
representative of FRANCE.
142. First, I wish to express my delegation’s gratitude
to the Secretary-General.
Once again he has demonstrated his lofty sense of the responsibilities
of his
high offtce. In response to the wishes of the President
of Syria, he did not hesitate to make a very brief and
certainly very trying trip to Damascus in order to
enable us to carry out our work successfully. His
fatigue must, however, have been alleviated by the
knowledge that he had successfully concluded the
mission for which he made the trip. It is only fitting
that we should pay a tribute to Mr. Waldheim for his
exceptional devotion and express our gratitude to him.

“the presence of UNDOF
continues to be indispensable, not only in order to maintain quiet in the
Israeli-Syrian
sector but also to create an atmosphere favourable to further peace efforts” [ibid.,
para. 41.
..

143. I wish also to welcome the wisdom displayed
by the Governments
concerned in agreeing to the
extension of the mandate of UNDOF.
In doing so,
they fulfilled the Council’s hopes; that was demonstrated by the unanimous vote of the members who
took part in it.

We are also very pleased that the Secretary-General
says he will continue his “efforts towards the resumption of the negotiating process called for by the Security
Council”
[ibid., put-a. 31. In those words of the
Secretary-General
may be found the key to a settlement of the problem. Never can it be agreed that the
presence of foreign military forces in a country is a
factor promoting peace. On the contrary, it should
always be considered a sign of imbalance and conflict
and a threat to tranquillity.

144. While we believe that the presence of the Force
remains essential to maintain calm and to create an
atmosphere conducive to peace efforts, we are fully
aware also that that presence cannot in itself be an
active element in the search for peace. It removes the
most immediate
dangers; but it does not touch the
heart of the problem. It is an.expedient-an
invaluable
expedient-but
it is not a solution.

140. Two years have passed since UNDOF
was
created, and a six-month
extension must not be
regarded as automatic action which is inherent in the
disengagement.
We are opposed to such an understanding. It follows that the resumption
of the
negotiating process called for by the Security Council
and very wisely mentioned by the Secretary-General
should lead to the reconvening of the Geneva Conference. At the 1809th meeting of the Council, you,
Mr. President, as representative of France, in supporting the resumption of the work of the Geneva
Conference, expressed certain ideas which I regard as
particularly relevant today and which I should like to
repeat in concluding this brief statement. You said:

145. In other words, our satisfaction at having been
able to ensure the maintenance’ of an instrument that
we regard as useful in the present circumstances can
hardly relieve our concern at the lack of progress on
the path to a settlement. An analysis of the present
situation prompted us to regard &as desirable-as,
indeed, the Secretary-General
asked us to do-the
renewal of the mandate of UNDOF.
But that same
analysis shows us how legitimate is the impatience at
the slowness of the dynamic process towards peace
that we had hoped we were initiating two and a half
years ago.
146. Since the last extension of the Force’s mandate,
efforts have been made to keep that dynamic process
going. The Council has played a significant part, in
particular by holding last January, on Syria’s initiative,

i‘ . . . we should like to express the hope that Israel
will at last adopt a more constructive attitude. By
16

a very important debate in which it considered all
aspects of the question. A result of that debate was
the adoption of significant positions which, while not
having enabled us as yet to reflect them in a generally
acceptable text, has nevertheless
contributed
to
making clear, within the lines already laid down by
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the outlines of
a future settlement which will have to be taken into
account in the forthcoming
efforts. ,Similarly,
during
the past few months the Council has focused on
certain particularly disturbing aspects of the situation
in the region. A keen awareness of the danger posed
by the absence of effective progress towards a settlement has been very apparent here. At the same time,
the Secretary-General
has taken the initiative
of
contacting all the parties in an attempt to get the
negotiations ,under way once again.

personally. I get the very definite impression that
recently Ambassador Richard has arrogated to himself
the role of the main spokesman of anti-Sovietism
in
the United Nations. Recently he spoke in a tendentious way and made what I would call even a
slanderous statement about the USSR in the Commission on Human Rights. Unfortunately,
at that
time I could not answer him personally, but I asked
our representative to do so, and he discharged that
duty very competently.
However, I see the Ambassador continues to follow the same line in the Security
Council too. I can assure him officially that the Soviet
Union very steadfastly supports the implementation
of
all the provisions and principles reflected in the Final
Act of the Helsinki Conference and does not, as some
Western leaders do, single out some individual items,
start an outcry on their account and forget about all
the other provisions contained therein. Let me refer
to a recent statement on this point made by Comrade
Brezhnev at our Party’s Twenty-fifth Congress. He
stated that the Soviet Union had carried out, did
carry out and would continue to carry out all the provisions of the Act, and it hoped that the other participants would do likewise.

147. Thus, a momentum has been created which we
must maintain and propel in the direction we believe
must lead to peace. That direction is clear to us.
On the one hand, there must be a withdrawal from the
Arab territories occupied as aresuit of the 1967 conflict.
On the other hand, the right of all the States in the
region to live within secure, recognized and guaranteed
borders must be affirmed, and, finally, the right of the
Palestinian people to an independent country must be
recognized .

152. Now, with regard to human rights and democracy, I can assure my neighbour on the left that the
truly socialist democracy-which
ensures equal rights
and equal opportunities to all Soviet citizens, without
any exceptions and without discrimination
of any
kind-has
existed in the Soviet Union from the very
moment of the Great Socialist Revolution of October
1917 when the workers and peasants of our country
overthrew the Tsarist regime, the power of the landlords and capitalists and evicted international foreign
capital, including British capital, and instituted the
true, genuine power of the people. From that time on
we have been hated by the British capitalists and rightwing circles. That is an historical fact, and we have
had proof of it today. That is why we categorically
reject Mr. Richard’s tendentious allegations about our
country.

148. It is in that light that the decision we have taken
today must be viewed. Obviously,
it was not our
intention to maintain the status quo. Rather, our
intention was to ensure that the current efforts in the
search for a settlement are not confronted in the
present circumstances by new obstacles. Hence, what
we had to do was to preserve the possibilities
of
offering all the parties the means of seeking together
and in a responsible way the means for a settlement
that will redress the injustices and finally bring about
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
149. Speaking once again as PRESIDENT,
I now call
on the representative of the Soviet Union to speak
in exercise of his right of reply.

153. In connexion with democracy, I think it is
appropriate for us to recall the following words spoken
by Comrade Brezhnev at the Party’s Twenty-fifth
Congress:

150. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian):
I have asked to be
allowed to speak so as to express my gratitude to all
my colleagues on the Council and the representatives
of those States Members who at recent meetings and
at today’s meeting have addressed such kind words to
me on the restoration of my health and because I have
now resumed my activities, in discharging my duties
as Permanent Representative
of the USSR to the
United Nations and as my country’s representative
in the Security Council. I want to express my thanks to
them all, including my colleague on the left, Ambassador Richard.

.

“Today, we know not only from theory but also
from long years of practice that genuine democracy
is impossible without socialism and that socialism
is impossible
without a steady development
of
democracy. We see the improvement of our socialist
democracy as consisting above all in a steady effort
to ensure ever fuller participation
by the working
people in running all the affairs of society, in further
devoloping the democratic principles of our State
system, in creating the conditions for the all-round
flourishing of the individual.”

151. At the same time I want to clarify something
and dispel the doubts he has cast by his not very
friendly remarks about the Soviet Union and me

In his report he also described the power of the
modem monopolistic
system and said the following:
17

imperialism will stop at nothing, discarding all
semblance of any kind of democracy, if a serious
threat arises to the domination of monopoly capital
and its agents. It is prepared to trample upon the
sovereignty of States and upon all legality, to say
nothing of humanism. Slander, duping the public,
econ0mi.c blockade, sabotage, bringing about
hunger and dislocation, bribes and threats, terrorism,
assassination of political leaders and fascist-style
pogroms-such is the armoury of present-day
counter-revolution, which always operates in
conjunction with international imperialist reaction.
3ut al1 thi.s is ultimately doomed to faiIure. The
cause of freedom and progress is unconquerable.”
‘I

. . .

He also stressed the following:
“The politico-ideological crisis of bourgeois
society is more acute. It afflicts the institutions of
power and bourgeois- political parties, and undermines elementary ethical standards. Corruption is
increasingly open, even in the top echelons of the
State machinery. The decline of intellectual culture
continues, and the crime rate is rising.”
And in order to conceal all this, slanders are being
spread about the Soviet Union on matters of human
rights.
154. I have already had the opportunity to point out
here that the Soviet Union comprises 120 different
ethnic groups and nationalities which all enjoy equal
rights and opportunities. Those who slander the
Soviet Union in that field are prisoners of Zionism,
for Zionism is spreading hostility, lies and hatred
against the Soviet Union b.ecause it has introduced
regulations governing the emigration of Jews from the
Soviet Union. But emigration or no-n-emigration from
the Soviet Union, or from any other country, is not a
threat to peace, as is the violation of human rights in
South Africa, Southern Rhodesia and Northern
Ireland. I would therefore recommend to my neighbour
on the left that he turn his attention to human rights
in South Africa, Southern Rhodesia and Northern
Ireland, and that he not poke his pro-Zionist nose
into our Soviet orchard. We are perfectly able to take
care of our own affairs.

156. We are now awaiting the reaction of Ambassador
Richard .and that of his colleagues and allies, to all
these questions that have been raised-and in particular, his reaction to the question of the implementation of the numerous decisions that have been adopted
by the General Assembly in order to strengthen peace
and security. I cannot give you a complete list of them
from memory but they include the following, There
is the question of reducing military budgets by
10 per cent, the non-use of force in international
relations, the permanent banning of nuclear weapons,
the convening of a world disarmament conference,
the conclusion of an agreement banning nuclearweapons tests in all environments, and many other
similar items. These are not only questions of which
the Soviet Union and its Government and people are
particularly fond: they are the questions to which the
overwhelming majority of Member States are attached. We are very happy and very proud. that our
initiatives in all these areas have been supported by
the non-aligned and the developing countries. These
are matters on which we and they have taken up the
same position: we love peace and so do they; we
need peace and so do they, in order to give people
better lives and achieve development.
157. I can only conclude from Mr. Richard’s statement that he does not much care about peace or
security, or detente, ar any of the the other things
I mentioned in my statement. Well, that is hisbusiness.
At least we can agree to disagree on these points.

-158. In my statement I also emphasized that the time
has come to take steps to settle the Middle East
problem once and for all. I referred to the statement
by the Soviet Government [S/12063] setting out the
basis for a settlement, comprising three organically
interconnected elements: first, withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all Arab territories occupied as a result
of Israel’s 1967aggression; second, satisfaction of the
legitimate natianal demands of the Arab people of
Palestine, including their inalienable right to.establish
their own State; thirdly, international guarantees of the
security and inviolability of the frontiers of all Middle
Eastern States and their right to independentexistence
and development.
159. I spoke of this in my statement on the situation
155. He said that the only things I liked to talk about in the occupied territories and again in my statement
were peace, security, detente, the equality of all today. Yet Mr. Richard had nothing to say about any
peoples, non-interference in the domestic affairs of of this. I should therefore like to know whether he
other countries, and respect for the sovereignty of shares this approach. Does.he agree that these three
States. Of course I do like to talk about these things elements must underlie a settlement in the Middle
because they are all close to the heart of the Soviet East? We are waiting for his answer, and werhope that
Government and of the Soviet pe,opie. Why? Because Mr. Richard, his Government, his Foreign Secretary
in the course of our history, and especially after the and his country will take all the necessary steps to
Great October Revolution, we have suffered a great implement the provisions and principles embodied
in the Final Act which was signed by 35 Heads of
deal as a result of foreign interference in our internal
.&airs, starting with the ,interference of the. late Sir State in Helsinki and the resolutions of the General
Assembly I mentioned, in order to strengthen peace
Winston Churchill and ending up with HitIer’s invasion. That is why we love peace, security, the equality and security. That would mean full implementation
of all the agreements that are reflected ini the Final
of peoples and non-interference in the domestic affairs
Act.
of other States so much.
18

160. Let us now agree Mr. Richard, to implement
by joint efforts all the principle~:and provisions of that
Act; and let us not try to conceal, by references
to only one problem-the problem of human rights-a
reluctance to implement several very important provisions, all of which are aimed at strengthening peace
and security.

human rights and with freedom of expression and
movement than the United Kingdom. It reminded
me, as he said it, of a story I read about the great
Duke of Wellington, who was once walking down
Piccadilly in London: a man came up to him and said,
“Excuse me, it is Mr. Robinson, isn’t it?” And the
Duke of Wellington looked at him and said, “Sir, if
you will believe that you will believe anything!”

161. The PRESIDENT (inrerfiteration from French):
I call on the representative of the United Kingdom
to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
5*
162. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I feel I must
apologize to the Council and those patient representatives of Member States who .have been sitting and
listening to this debate. I thought that in view of the
fact that the representative of the Soviet Union spent
about half of his first 25 minutes dealing with the question of detente in Helsinki, I was at least to be allowed
a few words. I apologize, because it provoked another
12minutes from the representative of the Soviet Union.
I apologize particularly to those of our colleagues who
are from the Arab world, because I had understood
the Security Council was here this afternoon to discuss
renewal of UNDOF’s mandate.

164. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call upon the representative of the Soviet Union:;to
‘.
speak in exercise of his right of reply.
165. Mr.. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Once again, this
time by referring to an anecdote which has nothing to
do with the question under discussion, Ambassador
Richard has succeeded in evading my questions about
his own attitude towards peace, security, the implementation of the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference
and the basis for a settlement of the Middle East
problem. I just wanted to point out that fact.
The meeting

rose at 6.10 p.m.
Notes

163. I would sayjust one thing, if I might, in answer
to the representative of the Soviet Union. He attempted
to prove that his country was more concerned with

I See resolution 390 (1976).
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.

19

*

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PURLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMRiENT SE PROCURER LES PURLTCATIONS DES NATTONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les tibmiries et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

H3Aaxm

HOJIYPHTL

NSAAHKa

OpragAmaqmi

3xnax u areri-rcvnax

bPrAHH3AqHH

OIi’bEJlUfHEHHMX

06-be~Rrrexamx

HastiR

a0 acex panorrax

rapa.

Barney
HanniL

xnm~no~
Cewwn

maramne
no npomsice

sum numme

COMO

CONSEGUIR PURLICACIONES

x3natmR,

xomio
HaBOAHTe

xynmb

HAHUH

n tcmimibrx

cnpasxn

no anpecy : Opranmamn
Hbso-XToprr
ma Xemeaa.

mara-

06 u3nannnx

B

OtPbemxenRbrx

DE LAS NACIONES UNTDAS

Las publicaciones de tas Naciones Unidas est&n en venta en hbrerfas y easas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su iibtero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in Uniad Nations, New York

00400

83-60801-September

198+-2,200
