VI.

Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
9. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to organize an international colloquium on the prohibition of apartheid, racism and
racial discrimination and the achievement of selfdetermination in international law, with special attention to the principies of non-discriminati?n and. selfdetermination as imperative norms of mternational
law;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary staff and resources to ensure the effective
implementation of the Programme for the Decade,
bearing in mind the provisions of the present resolution;
11. Decides to consider at its thirty-fourth session,
as a matter of high priority, the item entitled "lmplementation of the Programme for the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/100.

Results of the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 proclaiming the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to which
is annexed the Programme for the Decade,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,45 held at Geneva
from 14 to 25 August 1978,
Recalling the im~"rtance of the attainment of the
objectives of the Deca,le with a view to the strengthening of international peace and security,
Taking into account the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations whereby Member States undertake to take action separately and in co-operation with
the United Nations to ensure respect for and universal
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Convinced that the Conference, by the adoption of
the Declaration and the Programme of Action, 46 has
made a valuable and constructive contribution to the
achievement of the objectives of the Decade,
Resolved to take all appropriate measures to bring
about the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Inspired by the spirit presiding over the observance
of the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and of the International AntiApartheid Year to redouble efforts to put an end to
ali forms of racism and racial discrimination,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the World Conference to
Comtat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
45 A/33/262.
46 Report of the

147

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

World Confercncc to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 August 1978 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. II.

2. Endorses the Declaration and the Programme
of Action adopted by the Conference;
3. Proclaims that the elimination of ali forros of
racism and of prejudices and discrimination based on
race is a matter of high priority for the intemational
community and, accordingly, for the United Nations;
4. / nvites all Sta tes, the specialized agencies and
other organizations in the United Nations system, as
well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations particularly concerned with action against
racism and racial discrimination, to give priority to
the full implementation of the provisions of the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted by the
Conference;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure that the maximum publicity
is given to the final documents of the Conference in
view of the need to combar racism, racial discrimination and apartheid;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to take the
following measures in accordance with the Programme
of Action:
(a) To prepare several studies analysing the struggle against all forms of racial discrimination;
(b) To organize during the second half of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, at the level of each region of the
United Nations, regional seminars on action against
racism and racial discrimination;
(e) To study the possibility of establishing an
international fund on the basis of voluntary contributions with a view to assisting peoples and national
liberation movements in their struggle against racism
and apartheid;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
carry out an evaluation of the activities undertaken
in connexion with the Decade, in accordance with
paragraph 18 of the Programme for the Decade, taking
into account the results of the Conference set out in
the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted
by the Conference.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/101.

Status of the lnternational Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
3225 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3381 (XXX) of
10 November 1975, 31/79 of 13 December 1976 and
32/11 of 7 November 1977,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral47 on the status of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;48
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in
thc number of States which have ratified the Convention or acceded thereto;
47 A/33/147 and Corr.1.
4 8 Resolution 2106 A (XX),

annex.

143

General Assemhly-Thirty-thlrd Session

3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and implementation of its provisions are
necessary for the realization of the objectives of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination;
4. Requests States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to
study the possibility of making the declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance
with Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978

the Committee in order to give effect to article 7 of
the Convention,
N oting the decisions adopted and the recommendations made by the Committee at its seventeenth and
eighteenth sessions,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its seventeenth and eighteenth sessions;
2. Draws the attention once again of the relevant
United Nations bodies to the opinions and recommendations of the Committee relating to Trust and
Non-Self-Governing Territories and to all other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960 applies and stresses the
necessity of providing the Committee with sufficient
information in order to enable it to discharge fully
its responsibilities under article 15 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial
Discrimination;

33/102.

3. Supports the continued efforts of the Committee to focus attention on the just cause of peoples
struggling against oppression practised by the colonial
and racist régimes in southern Africa;

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 33/98 of 16 December 1978 on the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 32/13 of 7 November 1977 on the report
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and 33/101 of 16 December 1978 on the
status of the lnternational Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Having considered the report of the Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its
seventeenth and eighteenth sessions49 submitted under
article 9, paragraph 2, of the lnternational Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 50
Emphasizing the need for Member States to intensify,
at the national and international levels, their struggle
against acts or practices of racial discrimination and
the vestiges or manifestations of racist ideologies
wherever they exist,
Stressíng the importance of complying with the
undertaking of States parties to the Convention not
to engage in any act or practice of racial discrimination against any person, groups of persons or national
or ethnic minorities, and to ensure that all public
authorities and public institutions, national and local,
shall act in conformity with this obligation, in accordance with relevant provisions of the Convention,
Noting with appreciation the valuable work done by
the Committee, in particular its contribution to the
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, held at Geneva from 14 to 25 August
1978, and to the realization of the objectives of the
Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination, 51
Welcoming the co-operation of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization with
4 9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/33/18).
50 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
51 Resolution 3057 (XXVlll ), annex.

4. Welcomes the Committee's intention to resume
the consideration of the implementation of article 7
of the Convention at its nineteenth session with a
vicw to formulating general guidelines that might assist
the States parties to implement article 7 of the
Convention;
5. Reiterates its grave concern that sorne States
parties to the Convention, owing to reasons beyond
their control, are being prevented from fulfilling their
obligations under the Convention in parts of their
respective territories and endorses the relevant decision
of the Committee adopted at its eighteenth session;
6. Invites the States parties to the Convention to
co-operate with the Committee by submitting in due
time their reports under article 9 of the Convention,
taking into account the relevant recommendations and
requests of the Committee;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to have printed
and circulate to Member States the study on the work
of the Committee"~ prepared pursuant to Economic
and Social Council resolution 2057 (LXII) of 12 May
1977 and the pamphlet on the Convention prepared
by the Committee as its contribution to the World
Confcrence to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, with the suggestion that these documents be given
the widest possible dissemination;
8. Urges ali States which are not yet parties to
the Convention to ratify or accede to it and, pending
such ratification or accession, to be guided by the basic
provisions of the Convention in their internal and
foreign policies:
9. Invites the States parties to the Convention to
observe fully the provisions of the Convention and
other international instruments and agreements to
which they are parties concerning the elimination of
all forms of discrimination based on race, colour,
descent or national or ethnic origin.

86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
ó2 See

A/CONF.92/8.
