S/PV.8927

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8927th meeting

Monday, 13 December 2021, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry/Mr. Ousman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Dime-Labille
Ms. Bhat
Ms. Byrne Nason
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Aalia
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Prince
Mr. Zenati
Mr. Wickremasinghe
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Note by the Secretary-General on the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals (S/2021/694)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-39240 (E)
*2139240*

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

support shown by the Council in the text through its
various calls on States to cooperate with and render all
necessary assistance to the Mechanism.

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals
Note by the Secretary-General on the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (S/2021/694)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of members to document
S/2021/694, which contains a note by the SecretaryGeneral on the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
I now give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius: I wish a very good morning to all
Council members. I am most honoured to appear
before them to present the ninth progress report of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (see S/2021/694). It is a particular privilege to
be able to do so under the presidency of the Republic of
the Niger, for reasons I will explain during my address.
In June 2020, following its third review of the
progress of the work of the Mechanism, the Council
adopted resolution 2529 (2020). Since that time, we
at the Mechanism have kept the resolution present in
our minds as we go about our daily work, irrespective
of whether it is within Chambers, the Office of the
Prosecutor or the Registry. The document serves as a
tool by which we can gauge our performance, and we
constantly strive to fulfil the requests of the Security
Council contained therein. We also take heart from the
2/24

13/12/2021

I am pleased that, during the reporting period
and in the weeks since the submission of our report,
resolution 2529 (2020) has largely been implemented. I
can assure the Council that we will keep advancing this
process as we prepare for the next two-yearly review
by the Council in 2022. Already, we have been actively
engaged — indeed, fully immersed — in the related
evaluation of the Mechanism’s methods and work by
the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS).
Allow me to draw the Council’s attention to certain
aspects of the resolution. I would be remiss not to
start by mentioning paragraph 6, which echoes part
of resolution 1966 (2010) in emphasizing, inter alia,
that the Mechanism was established to be a “small,
temporary and efficient structure”. This language
could be said to constitute the very touchstone for
how the Council intended the Mechanism to operate
as a residual institution, and paragraph 6 requests the
Mechanism to be guided by these elements.
The strong progress set out in the report before the
Council evinces our unyielding commitment to realizing
the Security Council’s vision of the Mechanism in that
regard and to completing all functions as efficiently
and effectively as possible, while at the same time
bearing in mind the overriding principles of due
process and fundamental rights that must determine the
Mechanism’s conduct as an independent court of law.
Most notably, during the reporting period, the
Mechanism was able to deliver on time all three
judgments that had been projected June of this year,
namely, the appeal judgement in the Mladić case, as
well as trial judgments in the Prosecutor v. Jovica
Stanišić and Franko Simatović case and the Prosecutor
v. Anselme Nzabonimpa et al. contempt case. This
achievement is striking not only in the number of
judgments, but also because of the remarkable efforts
made by the Mechanism’s Judges, staff and defence
teams to conclude the proceedings on schedule, despite
obstacles that could have derailed the cases were it
not for their determination. At the same time, the
Mechanism can be very proud that its performance
compares favourably to the progress made by other
international criminal courts and tribunals during
the pandemic.
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

As a result, the core driver of the Mechanism’s
activities — its pending judicial caseload — has
further diminished and we have entered a new chapter
in our operations. Currently on the docket are appeal
proceedings in the latter two cases I have mentioned,
as well as the trial against Félicien Kabuga, which at
present remains in the pre-trial phase due to the health
situation of the accused. It should be noted that the
appeal case arising from the Nzabonimpa et al. trial
judgment is now called Fatuma et al., given that the
issues raised on appeal concern only four of the parties
to the trial.
While these cases and the Mechanism’s other
mandated functions will continue for the durations
indicated in the progress report, unless the Council
decides otherwise, the change in the active caseload is
significant. This is because reductions in staffing and
resources are a necessary consequence of the conclusion
of key activities, owing to the Mechanism’s nature as a
downsizing and temporary institution.
Resolution 2529 (2020) also incorporates the views
and recommendations of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, which, in line with paragraph
9, we have taken into account and thoroughly addressed
with a to further enhancing efficiency and effective and
transparent management. In particular, we have been
working hard towards the full implementation of the
outstanding recommendations of OIOS. A primary focus
in this respect was the adoption of an internal concept
note for the Mechanism’s scenario-based workforce
plan, reflecting the combined strategic thinking of the
three organs on the future of the Mechanism’s remaining
functions. Another example of enhanced management
is the ongoing collaboration between the principals and
organs concerning the Mechanism’s response to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, including
our efforts to ensure a safe, full return to the office.
Next, in paragraph 10, the Council sets out specific
reporting requirements. Its request to provide details
on staffing, workload-related costs and projections of
the duration of residual functions has been well and
truly answered in the report before the Council and
in the Mechanism’s two previous six-monthly reports.
As Council members can see, the Mechanism prepares
these documents with painstaking attention in an
effort to provide information that is both thorough
and relevant. Although this is time-consuming, the
Mechanism is comforted by the fact that the reporting
process ensures transparency. And the more transparent

S/PV. 8927

we are, the more accountable we are to our governing
body, while also being able to showcase the tangible
achievements of our Judges and staff.
With respect to paragraph 11, the Mechanism has
continued to do its utmost to safeguard the rights of
all persons detained on its authority, in accordance
with applicable international standards, including
those related to health care. This is exemplified by
the COVID-19 measures in place at the Mechanism’s
detention unit in The Hague, where all five of our
current detainees — namely, Messrs. Brdjanin, Kabuga,
Mladić, Simatović and Stanišić — are carefully
monitored, as well as the vigilance of the Trial Chamber
in determining matters related to Mr. Kabuga’s
health condition. Separately, in line with my own orders,
I have continued to receive updates from enforcement
States on the pandemic-related situation in prisons
where the Mechanism’s 48 convicted persons are
serving their sentences. On behalf of the Mechanism, I
express sincere gratitude to each of those States for so
conscientiously meeting their obligations in that area.
In discharging the mandate alluded to in
paragraph 12, as President, I have also devoted much
time and attention to applications for the pardon,
commutation of sentence or early release of persons
convicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. During the reporting period, I
disposed of three such matters and issued six ancillary
orders in relation to other pending applications in order
to ensure consultation with a wide range of stakeholders
and collection of the fullest information. In addition,
regarding a topic that I note is of specific interest to
the Security Council, the Mechanism’s approach
to conditional early release was further developed
during the reporting period. My work in relation to the
enforcement of sentences continues apace. Only the
week before last, I rendered a decision disposing of one
more early release application.
Finally, I move on to an issue that has long weighed
heavily not only on the Mechanism and its predecessor,
the ICTR, but also on the Security Council itself — a
situation that at times has seemed almost impossible
to resolve and is referenced in no less than 10 Council
decisions, as well as numerous reports. I refer to
paragraph 4 of resolution 2529 (2020), relating to the
nine acquitted or released persons living in a safe house
in Arusha. The Council emphasized the importance of
finding expeditious and durable solutions and called

21-392403/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

13/12/2021

on States to cooperate with, and render all necessary
assistance to, the Mechanism.

towards the optimal fulfilment of its mandate simply
cannot be doubted.

I am delighted to report that, thanks to the truly
exceptional efforts of the Mechanism’s Registrar,
Mr. Abubacarr Tambadou, who is with us today, and the
exemplary cooperation, Mr. President, of your country,
the Republic of the Niger, there has been a major
breakthrough. I wish to share with Council members
that on 15 November a milestone agreement between
the Government of the Republic of the Niger and the
United Nations on the relocation of persons acquitted
or released by the ICTR or the Mechanism was signed.
The agreement indicates that the Republic of the Niger
has accepted for relocation on its territory all nine
acquitted or released persons, and I can confirm that
the agreement was already implemented with respect
to eight of them. It is auspicious to announce that
development here today under the Niger’s presidency.

Council members have my word that we will proceed
with the same dedication in the coming reporting
periods. In turn, we will once again rely on the good
faith of Member States and other stakeholders, as well
as the valuable guidance of the Security Council, the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
the Office of Legal Affairs and the OIOS.

Allow me to express, on behalf of the entire
Mechanism, our deepest and most heartfelt gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and your Government for your
outstanding assistance and demonstrated commitment
to international justice. I also wish to commend and
praise Registrar Tambadou in the highest terms and to
acknowledge his crucial role in securing that outcome,
along with his many other accomplishments since
taking office in July of last year.
The Republic of the Niger’s willingness to
engage meaningfully with the Mechanism and, more
importantly, take action epitomizes the type of State
cooperation that will prove critical to the Mechanism’s
ability to fulfil other mandated functions — cooperation
that the Security Council itself has called for. While
paragraph 3 of the resolution urges intensified
cooperation and assistance to achieve the arrest and
surrender of the remaining ICTR fugitives, let us not
forget paragraph 2, wherein the Council more generally
urges States to cooperate fully with the Mechanism.
In that context, the Mechanism once more calls on the
Republic of Serbia to fulfil its international obligations
by arresting and transferring Petar Jojić and Vjerica
Radeta to the Mechanism.
The report before the Council provides ample
evidence of the Mechanism’s determination to keep
achieving results that defy the challenging times that we
are all experiencing. Moreover, when the progress made
is considered in the light of resolution 2529 (2020), the
Mechanism’s resolve to do everything within its power
4/24

In the meantime, and in conclusion, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, and your Government, as well as
all States and partners that continue to robustly support
the mission entrusted to the Mechanism.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Agius for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I am grateful for this opportunity
to address the Security Council about the activities of
the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Our written report
(see S/2021/694) provides details about our activities.
Today I would just like to mention a few highlights.
We are continuing our efforts to complete our
remaining trials and appeals, which remains our first
strategic priority.
In the Kabuga case, my Office achieved key pretrial
milestones during the reporting period. In accordance
with the Trial Chamber’s deadlines, our trial team filed
its pretrial brief, as well as other important pretrial
filings. My Office further responded to significant
additional litigation initiated by Kabuga’s family
members and associated third parties concerning
seized assets.
Through those and other steps, we continue to meet
all our pretrial obligations and take steps to promote
expeditious trial proceedings. My Office is ready for,
and looks forward to, the commencement of the trial at
the Arusha Branch when ordered by the Trial Chamber.
In addition, my Office completed two more trials
during the reporting period. At The Hague Branch, both
Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović were convicted
at trial for aiding and abetting the crimes of murder,
deportation, forcible transfer and persecution, as
crimes against humanity, and murder, as a war crime.
At the Arusha Branch, in the Nzabonimpa et al. case,
four of the accused were convicted at trial for contempt
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

of court. My Office proved that they had engaged in
a brazen effort to interfere with the administration of
justice by improperly influencing witnesses to recant
in a failed effort to overturn Ngirabatware’s genocide
conviction. Appeal proceedings are now ongoing.
In establishing the Mechanism, the Security Council
decided that it would be responsible for finalizing
ongoing cases handed over by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as
well as commencing new trials of ICTR fugitives who
are arrested. My Office is satisfied that the last ICTY
case is now at its final stage. With the nearing start of
the Kabuga trial, we look forward to this opportunity to
achieve more justice in the courtroom for the victims of
the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda.
In accordance with the Security Council’s mandate,
my Office further continues to actively search for the
remaining six fugitives indicted by the ICTR, which is
our second strategic priority.
Our most wanted fugitive, the last one to be tried
by the Mechanism, is Protais Mpiranya, the former
commander of the Presidential Guard. In addition
to Mpiranya, my Office is also actively working to
locate and account for five other fugitives indicted for
genocide, including Fulgence Kayishema, who was
previously located in South Africa.
While their alleged crimes were committed more
than 25 years ago, the need to bring Mpiranya and the
others to justice is more urgent today than ever before.
My Office continues to achieve significant progress
in our investigations into the whereabouts of the
remaining fugitives. Under the new leadership of our
tracking team, we are implementing analysis-driven
investigations using advanced tools. We have identified
relevant persons of interest and are actively pursuing
important leads.
The coming period will be of decisive importance.
Our current strategies are indeed approaching
critical junctures. If we are able to obtain the needed
intelligence and evidence, we expect to make further
significant progress in our work.
As I have repeatedly reported to the Security
Council, the success of our efforts depends on the full
and effective cooperation of Member States. Two key
countries in that regard at present are Zimbabwe and
South Africa.

S/PV. 8927

With respect to Zimbabwe, in early November
I undertook an official mission to Harare, where I
met with Vice-President Chiwenga and other senior
officials. The Zimbabwean authorities reaffirmed their
unreserved commitment to provide my Office with
full cooperation.
In that context, we discussed the positive results
achieved recently in our joint efforts, as well as key
outstanding issues. As a result of those discussions, I
submitted a set of concrete recommendations on how
to further improve our cooperation. I further reiterated
our pending requests for vital information from
Zimbabwean authorities. While I have not yet received
a response, I trust that in the coming period I will be
able to report that Zimbabwe is providing full and
effective cooperation.
Regarding South Africa, the Security Council is
well aware of the immense challenges my Office has
faced for the past three years in obtaining cooperation.
South Africa failed to arrest the fugitive Fulgence
Kayishema and failed to provide critical information.
I regret to report that the situation with South Africa is
among the most severe instances of non-cooperation my
Office has faced since the Mechanism’s establishment.
Nonetheless, my Office has continued to propose
constructive solutions to help South Africa finally get
its cooperation on the right track. Three months ago
we submitted an urgent request to establish a joint
investigation team authorized to work directly with my
Office on an operational level. I also visited Pretoria
last month to discuss the situation.
Unfortunately, I am unable to provide today a more
positive update, as South Africa continues to fail to
adhere to its international obligations. However, only
a few days ago, I received commitments that senior
ministers would raise and support our request at the
highest levels of Government. What is needed now is
the political will to finally give operational services the
green light to work with us.
My Office — and the victims of the genocide
against the Tutsi in Rwanda — urgently need the
Security Council’s support. All of us share the same
goal: to finally see the remaining fugitives accounted
for so that justice can be achieved and that critical
residual function brought to a close.
Recognizing that national courts are continuing
the work of the ICTR and the ICTY, the Security

21-392405/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Council mandated my Office to respond to requests for
assistance from domestic investigators and prosecutors
around the world. Accordingly, my Office’s third
strategic priority is to assist national jurisdictions
prosecuting international crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
As my Office has regularly reported, the workload
associated with that residual function is much greater
than anticipated. In 2013, for example, when I was at
the ICTY, we received approximately 100 requests for
assistance per year. In each of the past two years, we
received nearly 400 — a fourfold increase.
We are receiving not only a high volume of requests
for assistance but also requests of greater complexity
and significance.
During the reporting period, the Prosecutor
General of Rwanda requested my Office to even
further strengthen our support for his efforts to locate,
investigate and prosecute Rwandan nationals suspected
of genocide, particularly those living outside Rwanda.
We have now commenced an extensive review of our
evidence collection to identify suitable cases for which
we can provide the requested expert assistance to the
Prosecutor General’s Office.
Similarly, in the former Yugoslavia, the Montenegro
Special State Prosecutor’s Office requested our
support. In response, we prepared and handed over an
investigative dossier concerning more than 15 suspects.
Many of those suspects are implicated in grave
crimes of sexual violence, including sexual slavery,
rape, enforced prostitution and human trafficking for
sexual exploitation.
Similarly, the War Crimes Prosecutor’s Office of
Serbia continues to request my Office to provide a wide
range of support. In response, we have assisted Serbian
prosecutors with two important investigations of
senior-level suspects. We have also provided evidence
to our Serbian colleagues for two more mid-level
cases transferred from Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
tangible progress being made demonstrates the value of
intensified cooperation between our offices.
Those developments demonstrate, first, that
accountability efforts for crimes during the Rwandan
genocide and the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia
continue, as the Security Council expected. Secondly,
it is clear that evidence and other support from my
Office are vital to national prosecutors, confirming
6/24

13/12/2021

the wisdom of mandating my Office to respond to their
requests for assistance.
As a final remark, I am compelled to bring to the
Council’s urgent attention once again the continued
denial of crimes and the glorification of génocidaires
and war criminals. Murals of Ratko Mladić in
Belgrade and the publications of extremist Rwandan
diaspora groups have one sad thing in common. They
demonstrate that today, more than 25 years later, there
are still those who deny, relativize and minimize the
judicially established facts of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
That should be inconceivable. How can so many
still see Mladić as a hero of the Serbian people after his
conviction to life imprisonment in a court of law based
on immense evidence of his crimes? How can others
claim that men like Théoneste Bagosora were only
defending Rwanda when his criminal responsibility for
the genocide was proven beyond reasonable doubt?
Unfortunately, even today it seems that too often,
truth and justice do not receive the support they need
in words and actions. What message does it send when
the Croatian Government takes a political decision to
prevent its judiciary from investigating allegations of
crimes against Bosnian Serbs? How can politicians of
Bosnia and Herzegovina insist on respect for judgments
involving their victims but call prosecutions of their
commanders politically motivated? And what can be
the explanation when, in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
there is a lack of political support for legislation against
the denial of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes equally involving victims from every
ethnic group?
There are some who may say that truth and justice
are the source of social conflict. The reality is that
genocide denial and the glorification of war criminals
are used to prevent reconciliation, provoke hatred and
destabilize peace and security. They also condemn
present and future generations to bear the burdens of
the past. That is true of Rwanda and it is true of the
former Yugoslavia.
My Office will continue to stand with the victims
of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda and
the crimes committed during the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia by promoting the truth and opposing denial.
We fully trust that the Security Council will join us in
those efforts.
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

In conclusion, my Office is satisfied with its
continued progress towards completing the remaining
trials and appeals. Yet we still have significant work
ahead of us in our mandated residual functions. The
prosecution of the Kabuga case will be among our most
important activities in the coming period and we look
forward to the commencement of the trial.
Our search for the remaining fugitives indicted
by the ICTR continues to be a priority. The coming
period will be of decisive importance. In order for that
work to be successfully completed, it is critical that
the Security Council send an unmistakable message
to Member States that cooperation with my Office is
required. Without full and effective cooperation, we
will be unable to fulfil our mandate.
While national courts prosecute crimes committed
during the Rwandan genocide and the conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia, my Office is determined to
meet our mandate to fully respond to their requests
for assistance. The large number of requests that we
continue to receive demonstrates the importance of our
support and the need for further accountability.
We are grateful for the continued support of the
Council in all of our efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Brammertz for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor of the Mechanism, for their briefings on
the work of the Mechanism over the past months(see
S/2021/694). I also acknowledge the presence of
Mr. Abubacarr Tambadou, Registrar of the Mechanism,
and I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia in today’s meeting.
The work of the Mechanism in carrying
out the mandates given by the Security Council
contributes to reaffirming our collective commitment
to fighting impunity, delivering justice and
supporting reconciliation.
Despite the continued insurmountable challenges
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
principals and staff of the Mechanism have made

S/PV. 8927

meaningful progress in judicial activities, with three
judgments rendered in three important cases. The
Mechanism was able to maintain the continuity of
in-court hearings, held virtual plenary meetings and
implemented rigorous measures to maintain the health
and safety of its staff, witnesses, detainees, prisoners
and other persons under its authority, including by
ensuring vaccination roll-out.
We recall the Security Council’s emphasis on
the importance of finding expeditious and durable
solutions to the problem of the nine acquitted and
released persons residing in Arusha. In that regard, we
welcome the announcement just made by the President,
congratulate the Mechanism on that positive result
and commend the Government of the Niger for the
generosity and assistance extended to the Mechanism.
We hope that the relocation of those persons will allow
them to reintegrate fully into society and enable the
Mechanism to focus on other priority matters.
We welcome the President’s commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 2529 (2020), including
by providing a clear projection of timelines for the
completion of the Mechanism’s judicial activities
and other residual functions, strengthening close
collaboration among the main organs of the Mechanism,
ensuring geographic diversity and a gender balance of
staff, and boosting staff morale and performance.
We take note of the efforts to advance the judicial
proceedings in the remaining cases with a clear timeline,
which would facilitate the Mechanism to subsequently
move towards a new, leaner phase in its core judicial
activity. Securing the assistance of States in the
enforcement of sentences is of paramount importance
in alleviating the residual burden on the Mechanism
and should continue to be prioritized.
Looking forward, we encourage the Mechanism to
continue implementing effective steps to adhere to its
schedule of completion, realizing the Security Council’s
vision of a small, temporary and efficient structure,
whose functions and size will diminish over time.
As several fugitives remain at large, despite efforts
by the Office of the Prosecutor to locate and arrest
them, States’ cooperation with the Mechanism remains
crucial for enabling the fulfilment of its mandates.
It is also the responsibility and obligation of States,
in accordance with Security Council’s resolutions,
to assist and cooperate with the Mechanism, where
needed, including in the search for fugitives at large.

21-392407/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

13/12/2021

We welcome the enhanced efforts of the Prosecutor
and his team to strengthen direct communication with
relevant States, identify challenges that might hinder
cooperation and work out feasible approaches.

the horizon. Year after year, the Mechanism’s financial
appetite only grows bigger. This year, $90 million
have been spent despite the fact that only one case is
currently being tried in the first instance.

As a matter of principle, it is the State that bears
the primary responsibility for fighting and preventing
heinous crimes. Building national capacity and assisting
States to exercise their responsibility should be our
top priority. We therefore welcome the assistance and
capacity-building provided to national authorities by
the Office of Prosecutor.

That gives rise to a legitimate question — why
are we spending so much money to maintain that
court? National courts are cheaper and in our opinion
many times more effective. The quality standards of
national courts also compare quite favourably with the
unfortunate legacy of the ICTY and the Mechanism.

I wish to conclude by expressing our deep
appreciation for the invaluable support provided by
the Secretariat and the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs, both to the Mechanism and to the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, which Viet
Nam has the honour to chair. I thank all members of
the Informal Working Group for their cooperation and
underline the need for the Council to remain united,
constructive and cooperative in its support in order for
the Mechanism to fulfil its mandates and maintain its
integrity. I wish the incoming Chair of the Informal
Working Group great success.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I welcome Mr. Agius and Mr. Brammertz to
today’s meeting. We have read their written reports (see
S/2021/694) and listened carefully to their briefings.
What can we say? Unfortunately, the situation is
unsatisfactory. Justice is being administered selectively
and human rights standards and humanitarian principles
are being systematically ignored. There is no sign that
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals is winding down. New pretexts are constantly
emerging to extend its activities.
We would like to elaborate on certain points. Let
us begin with the main point — the Mechanism is a
temporary structure and was created as such. It is
incorrect to consider it to be a full-fledged international
tribunal. Nevertheless, we have not seen any concrete
steps to bring the Mechanism’s activities to a close.
We only hear promises of work in that direction. Like
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the Mechanism is systematically prolonging all
its trials and thereby artificially extending its existence.
The Mechanism’s mandate stipulates that its should
have a limited size and a fixed lifespan. It was created
primarily to fulfil technical functions. Nevertheless,
the finish line is receding further and further beyond
8/24

Incidentally, the fairness and objectivity of the
ICTY are well illustrated by the trial of the Kosovo
Albanian leaders brought before a tribunal created
on the initiative of the European Union (EU). Those
leaders are currently on trial for war crimes, trafficking
in organs and human beings and other atrocities. Yet a
hile ago the ICTY had no claims against those odious
individuals. That is all one needs to know about the
impartiality of the ICTY. Our only wish is for the EU
tribunal to work more actively, because, thanks to the
ICTY, those war criminals have remained at large
too long.
Turning to the work of the Mechanism, I note that
it is a unique combination of bias and delay. By way
of example, in the trial of Ratko Mladić, the conduct
of even one independent medical examination was
presented as an intractable problem. In the case of
Félicien Kabuga, by contrast, several such examinations
have been carried out at the court’s own initiative. Until
they are completed, the accused will be held in custody
in the Hague, before being transferred to Arusha, so
how much time is this investigation going to take? We
still do not know.
We also note with concern the increasing number
of cases of contempt of court. In this regard, we see
an attempt to artificially extend the lifespan of the
Mechanism. We are decisively against this practice.
This is a class of case that can certainly be heard by
national courts
Given the Security Council’s review of the activities
of the Residual Mechanism framework, we call on its
leaders not only to finally put together a plan for how
the Court will be brought to a close, but also to firmly
keep to that plan.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China wishes to thank President Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their recent reports on the International
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. During
the reporting period, under the leadership of President
Agius, the Mechanism overcame the difficulties of
the coronavirus disease pandemic and took forward
its judicial activities in orderly manner, in particular
by adjudicating three cases in accordance with the
projected timetable. The Office of the Prosecutor
has also continued its efforts aimed at tracking down
fugitives and actively moving forward on the trials and
appeals. China appreciates and supports these measures.
In accordance with resolutions of the Security
Council, the Mechanism should be a small, efficient and
temporary institution whose functions and size should
be gradually reduced over time. China hopes that the
Mechanism will conduct its activities in accordance
with the mandate set forth in Council resolutions,
respecting in particular the projected timetable set
out in its work plan and completing the judicial
proceedings for outstanding cases in a timely, efficient
manner. In this process, the Mechanism should allocate
financial resources rationally, focusing on ensuring
the fulfilment of judicial activities. As the number of
outstanding cases decreases, the Mechanism should
reduce its expenditures accordingly.
Practical and effective cooperation between the
Mechanism and the countries concerned is of great
significance for it to complete its mandate and make
progress in its work. China hopes that the Mechanism
will enhance mutual trust in its communication
with relevant parties, address the parties’ legitimate
concerns, learn from the success stories of the
International Criminal Tribunals and work together to
combat impunity.
In addition, China looks forward to the Mechanism’s
further implementation of the recommendations
made by the Council’s Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals and the Office of Internal
Oversight Services to improve its working methods,
enhance its work efficiency, ensure the orderly progress
of investigations, prosecutions, and trials of highprofile cases, and facilitate the reasonable resolution of
issues related to the resettlement of the acquitted and
released persons.
In closing, I wish to take this opportunity to thank
Viet Nam, Chair of the Council’s informal Working
Group on international Tribunals and the Office for
Legal Affairs for their efforts aimed at coordination
between the Council and the Residual Mechanism.

S/PV. 8927

Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Judge Carmel
Agius and Prosecutors Serge Brammertz for the
detailed progress reports submitted to the Council,
as transmitted by the Secretary-General in document
S/2021/694, and for their informative briefings today.
Estonia commends the important work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals in ensuring accountability for the most
serious crimes under international law. We positively
note the progress made by the Mechanism in carrying
out its judicial activities during the reporting period,
including the delivery of three judgments during the
month of June. We note the two cases entering stages
of appeal and ongoing judicial activity in the Kabuga
case, and we are also mindful of the implementation of
the wide range of further residual functions with which
the Mechanism has been entrusted.
The Mechanism relies on cooperation from States
in conducting its work. Estonia remains concerned
about the challenges in securing effective cooperation
from national authorities in apprehending the remaining
fugitives. We strongly urge States, especially those
African States where fugitives are suspected of
being at large, to intensify their cooperation with the
Mechanism in order to arrest and surrender all of the
remaining fugitives.
Moreover, Estonia continues to deeply regret that
Serbia is persistently disregarding its obligations under
international law to comply with the Mechanism’s
orders. We call on Serbia to fulfil its obligation to execute
the arrest warrants for Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta.
International criminal justice and the fight
against impunity continue to rely heavily on collective
effort. The international community and the Security
Council must work together to ensure justice for the
countless victims and survivors. At the same time,
domestic jurisdictions also need to assume their role.
We welcome the efforts of the Mechanism aimed
at providing assistance to national jurisdictions in
prosecuting international crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and we call on States
to increase their efforts in this regard.
Estonia remains deeply concerned about the
ongoing denial of the genocides and the glorification
of convicted war criminals, which is unacceptable and
must stop.

21-392409/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

As this is Estonia’s last meeting with the Mechanism
during its membership in the Security Council, allow
me to extend our gratitude to the Mission of Viet Nam
for facilitating our discussions on Mechanism-related
issues as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
Finally, allow me to once more express Estonia’s
deep gratitude to the President and Prosecutor of
the Mechanism and their staff for their outstanding
work. We take note that the periodic evaluation of the
Mechanism is under way and wish the Mechanism
success in the 2022 review process and in the day-today work with our common aim of ensuring justice
for victims.
Ms. Nyakoe (Kenya): I thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Prosecutor, for their briefings. I welcome the presence
of representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia in this meeting.
Kenya supports the work of the Mechanism
as important to advancing accountability for war
crimes and genocide. We reaffirm our support for
the Mechanism’s mandate, as renewed by resolution
2529 (2020). We were reminded of its importance last
week, on 9 December, when the world marked the
International Day of Commemoration and Dignity
of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the
Prevention of This Crime.
We acknowledge the progress achieved by the
Mechanism in its judicial functions during the reporting
period. The delivery of judgments in three key cases
and the conclusion of one case under the constrained
precautionary pandemic working arrangements are
commendable. We note that the judicial workload of the
Mechanism has been significantly reduced by the work
undertaken since the last briefing (see S/PV.8790). We
therefore urge speedy completion of the remaining cases
to help survivors and families of victims find closure
and create an environment conducive to reconciliation.
The Mechanism was created as a small, temporary
and efficient structure. It has shown its value but
can never replace or mirror the mandate of national
authorities. It is important that States do their utmost
to strengthen their judiciaries as a critical pillar in
nation-building, development and conflict prevention.
We urge the Secretary-General and other relevant,
multilateral and regional actors to pursue every
10/24

13/12/2021

avenue to assist States that need capacity-building in
this regard.
The best prevention against genocide is to limit
political cultures that weaponize social, cultural,
ethnic and religious differences and present political
competition as reflective of these identities. We urge
States to build tools into their national laws, electoral
processes and legal mechanisms that inclusively
manage diversity.
States also need to cooperate with the Mechanism
to apprehend the remaining fugitives pursuant to its
improved tracking capability.
Still regarding cooperation, Kenya commends
the Government of the Niger for accepting all nine
acquitted or released persons who were in the
Mechanism’s custody. We also acknowledge the efforts
of the Mechanism in resolving that long-standing issue.
We look forward to the conclusion of the evaluation
of the methods and work of the Mechanism by the
Office of Internal Oversight Services, in line with
resolution 2529 (2020), to inform the Council’s review
of the Mechanism’s progress of work in 2022. We also
look forward to the report on the implementation of the
recommendations from the previous evaluation.
Finally, Kenya thanks Viet Nam for successfully
steering the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals during its tenure.
Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank President Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings, which highlight how
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals continues to play a crucial role in ending
impunity and implementing international justice.
I would like to highlight that the Mechanism has
made significant progress this year, in particular by
rendering three notable judgments. First, it affirmed
Ratko Mladić’s convictions for the violations of
the customs of war, crimes against humanity and
the genocide at Srebrenica. Secondly, in contempt
proceedings connected with the case of Ngirabatware,
it reached convictions in relation to witness interference
and violating court orders. Thirdly, and finally, the Trial
Chamber found Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović
responsible for violations of the laws or customs of war
and crimes against humanity. They were sentenced to
12 years of imprisonment each. Through its tireless
work, the Mechanism continues to show that impunity
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

is not, and will not be, allowed to prevail. The United
Kingdom is also pleased to see that following the timely
delivery of those judgments, the Mechanism has a clear
plan for winding down its activities.
We remain grateful for the Mechanism’s ongoing
efforts to progress the case of Félicien Kabuga. We
note that the Mechanism is still considering his fitness
to stand trial. We will continue to closely follow
developments in the case, and we should be grateful
for timely updates as they become available. We also
continue to follow the case of Protais Mpiran, the former
commander of the Presidential Guard in Rwanda, who
is believed to be, or to have been, in Zimbabwe. We
continue to call on the Government of Zimbabwe to
work with the Mechanism to support its investigations.
We call on all Member States to assist the
Mechanism. In that respect, we commend the acceptance
by the Government of the Niger of the nine acquitted
or released persons. However, regional judicial
cooperation in parts of the Western Balkans continues
to remain inadequate. That has direct implications for
achieving justice for victims. We would like to mention
the Mechanism’s referral of Serbia to the Security
Council for its failure to arrest and transfer Petar Jojić
and Vjerica Radeta. That continued non-compliance is
serious and follows years of requests, considerations
and discussion. We urge Serbia to comply with the
Mechanism’s order.
Last week, we observed the United Nations
International Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the
Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention
of This Crime. However, the glorification of war
criminals and the denial of genocide continue. That is
unacceptable, and it increases the suffering of victims.
We see that in many areas, including the continued
presence in Belgrade of a mural of Ratko Mladić, a
man, as we observed, who is convicted of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. Reconciliation
is difficult. We must accept and acknowledge the truth
of the past to move forward. Glorifying the perpetrators
and instigators of such heinous acts takes us further
away from reconciliation and hinders the achievement
of a positive future. The United Kingdom will continue
to condemn such denial and glorification in all its forms
and calls on all Member States to do the same.
As the Council has seen, through its actions the
United Kingdom remains committed to the Mechanism.
We reaffirm our willingness to assist it wherever possible

S/PV. 8927

in fulfilling its mandate and implementing its vision of
being a small, temporary but effective organization.
Ms. Bhat (India): At the outset, let me thank
President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
briefings and for their assessment of the work of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. Allow me to commend President Agius
for his stewardship of the process and for ensuring
that the Mechanism remains on track and continues
to deliver. We welcome the appointment of Judge
Fatimata Sanou Touré of Burkina Faso in place of the
deceased Judge Kam. We would also like to place on
record our appreciation for the long and able judicial
services rendered by Judge Meron, who chose to retire
on 17 November.
We welcome the progress made by the Mechanism
during the reporting period, both in The Hague and in
Arusha, including efforts aimed at ensuring business
continuity, to the extent possible, under the current
extraordinary circumstances. We have taken note that
the Mechanism has made efforts to return to in-person
meetings since mid-September. We hope that those
efforts will positively help in adhering to the timelines
laid down for case completion.
India reiterates its support for the Mechanism and
commends its contribution to the fight against impunity
and the preservation of the legacies of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We have taken note of
the commencement of appeal proceedings in both the
Stanišić and Simatović case and the Nzabonimpa et
al. case and pretrial proceedings in the Prosecutor v.
Félicien Kabuga case and the Jojić and Radeta case.
We acknowledge the progress made on other
judicial matters during the reporting period, such as the
variation of protective measures and the supervision of
enforcement of sentences. We also note the work of
the Prosecutor’s Office in its other residual functions.
The Mechanism should continue to make headway in
its remaining residual functions, including protecting
victims and witnesses, tracking the remaining fugitives
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
extending assistance to national jurisdictions and
managing the archives of the ad hoc Tribunals and
the Mechanism. We reiterate the importance of the
Mechanism’s implementation of its mandate strictly in
accordance with the principles of justice, impartiality
and fairness.

21-3924011/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

It is our collective responsibility to seek justice
for victims. That is a humanitarian issue that needs
to be addressed with urgency and sensitivity. We
welcome the efforts of the Mechanism to further raise
the international community’s awareness regarding
this issue. We take note of the announcement that the
President just made, and we appreciate the progress
being made with the help of the Government of the
Niger on the relocation of nine acquitted persons
from Arusha.
In conclusion, we encourage the Mechanism to take
the necessary measures to keep the trial and appeal
schedules on track and assist, within its mandate, in
the capacity-building of national judicial authorities.
Finally, I would like to thank the Government of Viet
Nam for efficiently steering the work of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to thank President
Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their
comprehensive briefings this morning. We are pleased
to welcome them both back to the Chamber among us
today. We commend and acknowledge the leadership
that they have shown in guiding the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals through
this difficult period, marked by the pandemic, with
significant progress made in judicial proceedings over
the reporting period.
In particular, we note the decisions in the Mladić
case and the judgments in the Stanišić and Simatović
and the Nzabonimpa cases during the reporting period.
We welcome also the ongoing work to harmonize
approaches between the Mechanism’s two branches.
I want to welcome President Agius’ announcement
today that, after many years and his own significant
efforts, it has been possible to find a lasting solution
for those acquitted and released residing in the Arusha
safe house. In particular, I must commend the Niger for
facilitating those persons’ safe relocation.
States have an obligation to cooperate with the
Mechanism in its investigations and prosecutions.
However, despite the many instances of positive
cooperation with the Mechanism demonstrated by
Member States such as the Niger and by regional
organizations, as well as the provision of assistance by
the Mechanism to national jurisdictions, the Security
Council’s call on States to intensify their cooperation
with and provide all necessary assistance to the
12/24

13/12/2021

Mechanism to achieve the arrest and surrender of all
remaining fugitives remains outstanding.
In particular, Ireland remains deeply concerned
that following the Mechanism’s referral of Serbia to
the Council, due to non-cooperation in the surrender
and arrest of Mr. Jojić and Ms. Radeta, no action has
been taken by Serbia. We call on Serbia and all States
to fulfil their obligations under international law,
cooperate fully with the Mechanism and assist in its
efforts to arrest and surrender the remaining fugitives.
Those who commit atrocity crimes must be brought to
justice. Ending impunity is imperative to sustaining
peace and stability in the region.
Last Thursday, the United Nations marked the
International Day of Commemoration and Dignity of
the Victims of the Crime of Genocide. Ireland strongly
supports the Mechanism’s role as a preventative
tool against future acts of violence. The Mechanism
contributes to prevention by ensuring justice for those
crimes within its remit and establishing facts, but also
through its commitment to promoting education and
remembrance in the fight against genocide ideology.
The Prosecutor’s reports (see S/2021/694) underline
that genocide ideology continues to present risks to
international peace and security. We repeat our firm
view that the denials of genocide and the glorification
of convicted war criminals must be consistently
challenged and condemned.
Ireland remains steadfast in its commitment to
international criminal justice, ensuring accountability
and achieving justice for victims and survivors. Never
forgetting the victims and survivors in Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia, we will continue to support the
work of the Mechanism and its role in ensuring that
perpetrators of atrocity crimes are held to account.
Mrs. Dime-Labille (France) (spoke in French):
I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their report (see S/2021/694) and briefings. I also
thank Judge Meron, at a time when he has decided to
dedicate himself to other duties, for his contribution to
international criminal justice over the past decades.
France reiterates its full support for the Mechanism
and its work in the fight against impunity and the
preservation of the legacy of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The year 2021 has been decisive. Under difficult
circumstances, the Mechanism was able to continue its
work and make concrete progress, which testifies to its
relevance and effectiveness. The Security Council must
support its work.
The three decisions of June 2021 were long-awaited.
The decisions to be taken in 2022 are even more so. I
refer to the appeals in the Stanišić and Simatović cases,
as well as Nzabonimpa et al. I refer also to the trial
in the Kabuga case, which will be another important
milestone for the victims and for national reconciliation
in Rwanda. In order to conclude those trials, as well
as the other pending proceedings, the Mechanism must
have adequate financing and qualified personnel.
France once again urges all States to cooperate
fully with the Mechanism, in accordance with their
international obligations, and to support its activities.
We take this opportunity to thank the Niger for the
decision to fully cooperate with the Mechanism and
admit nine people who were under the jurisdiction
of the Mechanism. On the other hand, we regret that
a number of partners still refuse to cooperate despite
the repeated calls by the President of the Mechanism,
the Prosecutor and many Member States relayed
through the Council. It is essential that the last
fugitives indicted by the ICTR be brought to justice.
The death of the alleged perpetrators of the most serious
crimes cannot be considered justice for the victims.
With regard to the cases referred to national courts,
France reaffirms its full commitment to bring the
Bucyibaruta case to an end within a reasonable time
frame. The trial of this case is scheduled to take place
in the Court of Assizes between 9 May and 1 July 2022.
France’s objective is to ensure that no crime of genocide
goes unpunished.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
the work of the Mechanism is not limited to judicial
activities. The protection of the more than 3,000
witnesses is of paramount importance and we commend
the work of the of the Kigali and Sarajevo branches in
that regard. Similarly, the work of remembrance is also
essential to reconciliation.
We remain deeply concerned about the denial
of crimes and the glorification of génocidaires and
war criminals condemned by international criminal
tribunals following the conclusion of impartial and
independent trials.

S/PV. 8927

Finally, I would like to thank Viet Nam for the
excellent work completed by the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
briefings on the ongoing work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to bring
perpetrators to justice for the atrocities committed in
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
The United States remains deeply grateful for the
commitment and hard work of the Mechanism’s judges,
attorneys and staff in Arusha and The Hague, as well
as in its field offices in Kigali and Sarajevo, despite
numerous challenges over the past year. We commend
their unwavering pursuit of justice for the victims in
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
We also join others in expressing the United
States’ deep appreciation for the long and distinguished
service of Judge Theodor Meron, who has retired
from the roster of Mechanism judges. Judge Meron’s
efforts to provide justice and accountability for victims
for some of humankind’s worst atrocities will always
be remembered.
The Mechanism has continued to make important
progress over the reporting period, despite the
persistent impact of significant coronavirus disease
restrictions. We commend its continued commitment
to fulfilling the goals the Security Council set out
for the Mechanism at the time its establishment as a
lean, temporary and efficient body. We appreciate the
ongoing efforts to expeditiously complete the remaining
trials and appeals, to locate and arrest the remaining
fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and to assist national jurisdictions
prosecuting international crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
The Mechanism has taken significant steps to
realize those collective objectives over the past year
and we are grateful for the years of work performed
by the Mechanism in carrying out justice. That work
has clearly manifested itself in several achievements,
including the decision affirming Ratko Mladić’s
conviction; the thorough work of the Mechanism in the
Stanišić and Simatović cases; and the four convictions
for witness interference in the Nzabonimpa et al.
contempt case. Taken together, those judicial actions
move us closer to securing justice for the victims of

21-3924013/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

those horrific crimes, their families and communities,
and their countries.
Still, we can and must do more to prevent future
atrocities and realize the ideals of justice, including by
securing the swift apprehension of the remaining six
Rwandan fugitives. We join others in calling on Member
States that may be harbouring them to cooperate with
the investigation. The United States continues to offer
a reward of up to $5 million for information that leads
to the arrest, transfer or conviction of the remaining
Rwandan fugitives.
In addition, the United States continues to
have serious concerns with respect to Serbia’s
non-cooperation on the arrest warrants for Jojić
and Radeta, who have been charged with witness
interference. Serbia has a legal obligation to cooperate
with the Mechanism and we call on it to execute the
arrest warrants without further delay. Contempt cases
are a critical aspect of the Mechanism’s work and are
equally deserving of our attention in order to uphold
the rule of law.
We also note that as long as some continue to
engage in the dangerous fiction of genocide denial, to
protect memorials that honour those responsible for
genocide and other crimes and to stoke ethnic division,
we risk the recurrence of those horrific crimes. A
critical part of the efforts to ensure non-recurrence
is the full recognition within domestic systems of
international convictions.
We welcome the Mechanism’s ongoing engagement
with the affected countries and we encourage
those national jurisdictions to vigorously pursue
accountability for atrocity crimes in order to move
beyond the dark and dangerous days of the past. We
further encourage those national jurisdictions to
explore opportunities for cooperation with one another
in order to make justice a reality.
Let me conclude by welcoming the news of the
announcement we heard today of the transfer agreement
between the Republic of Niger and the United Nations.
That is a significant positive step that the United States
welcomes and commends.
I also want to take a moment to commend the
Mechanism’s Registrar for his work, commitment and
dedication in that connection. The tireless work of the
Mechanism serves as an important reminder to us all
that we must recommit to protecting civilians during
14/24

13/12/2021

armed conflict and holding accountable those who
commit atrocities. Each of those steps moves us closer
to properly and fully honouring the victims’ memories.
Mr. Zenati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Judge Agius, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings and for
the most recent report (see S/2021/694) submitted in
accordance with resolution 1966 (2010).
I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend Viet Nam for its excellent chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
over the past two years.
At the outset, Tunisia emphasizes once again its
support for the Mechanism’s mandate for combating
impunity for the most serious crimes and deterring
their perpetrators. The revitalization of international
criminal justice through the Security Council’s
establishment of the two ad hoc Tribunals and the
Mechanism has ended a grim era of atrocities and
managed to extend peace in areas of conflict in former
Yugoslavia and Africa. It is necessary to protect those
gains by ensuring accountability and justice for the
victims through the Mechanism, with the support of by
the Security Council and the international community
at large.
That is especially important amid the growing
current concern about escalating tensions and
extremism, the spread of revisionist ideologies, the
glorification of war criminals and genocide denial.
Tunisia stresses that establishing the truth and keeping
remembrance alive, as well as providing stronger
guarantees for the non-recurrence of violations in
the future, constitute pillars of sustainable peace and
comprehensive reconciliation among countries and
affected communities. It is also necessary to enhance
early-warning efforts and promote accountability and
the rule of law if we are to take decisive and pre-emptive
action against those revisionist ideologies.
My country expresses its satisfaction with the
efforts of the President of the Mechanism to increase
the efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of the
Administration and the judicial workload, in accordance
with relevant recommendations and mandates and
in keeping with the Security Council’s vision of the
Mechanism as a small, temporary and efficient structure
whose functions and size will diminish over time.
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

We also support the proposal to streamline the
report submitted to the Council in order to facilitate
its supervisory functions with respect to the work of
the Mechanism. We welcome the progress made in the
Mechanism’s work as reflected in its issuance of three
judgments within established timelines during the
reporting period, despite the many ongoing challenges
and restrictions of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We take note of the challenges and complexities
related to the trial proceedings of Félicien Kabuga.
We reaffirm that once the standards of the rule of law
are met, the holding of Kabuga’s trial in Arusha would
be an important step towards achieving justice for the
victims and affected communities.
We also commend the Niger’s initiative to accept
the transfer of eight persons from Arusha pursuant
to resolution 2529 (2020) with a view to finding
lasting solutions to benefit the Mechanism and the
individuals concerned. We also commend the work of
the prosecution to enhance its capacity and create more
structured working methods, in line with its continued
international commitment to track fugitives, wherever
they are, or to determine their fate, as well as to
search for those missing and to empower and promote
national jurisdiction. We stress that the Mechanism
must continue to rely on States’ full and expeditious
cooperation and assistance so that the remaining six
fugitives do not escape justice.
In that regard, we welcome the Prosecutor’s visits
to the States concerned, as well as his purposeful
interaction with their authorities to advance the
operational coordination and cooperation requests and
ensure the arrest and surrender of the accused. We think
that the work of the Prosecutor would be more effective
if undertaken in tandem with regional and subregional
judicial cooperation and coordination. Requests for
cooperation should be extended in the context of
political dialogue and bilateral relations between the
States concerned.
In conclusion, we understand that international
justice is costly and protracted. We therefore urge
the Mechanism to continue to plan and streamline its
work in order to conduct its business within reasonable
timelines and to coordinate the work of its branches
and subsidiary bodies in an efficient, professional and
flexible manner in advance of the Council’s upcoming
review of the Mechanism next year, which would enable

S/PV. 8927

international justice to continue its steady progress
towards achieving its noble goals.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
would also like to thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their very comprehensive briefings
(see S/2021/694). Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
reaffirms its unwavering support for the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, which
remains an essential pillar of the international criminal
justice system. The Mechanism serves a critical
role in the fight against impunity for mass atrocity
crimes and continues to contribute significantly to
national reconciliation.
Furthermore, its effective and efficient work in
other practical aspects, such as witness support and
protection, the monitoring of cases referred to national
jurisdictions, the preservation of archives and the
provision of multifaceted assistance to Member States,
cannot be overstated.
We are pleased to note that the Mechanism was able
to deliver three judgments in June, keeping its caseload
on track. That is indeed a notable accomplishment and
certainly speaks to the tireless efforts and dedication
of the staff and judges of the Mechanism, despite
the challenges resulting from the ongoing global
pandemic. We applaud the Mechanism’s commitment
to operational continuity while still ensuring the health
and safety of staff, witnesses and persons in detention.
We also commend the Mechanism’s commitment
to meeting the Secretary-General’s gender parity goals
among staff, which is necessary to create and ensure
a more diverse and inclusive environment. We are,
however, dismayed that the number of women judges
now stands at only seven out of 25.
It is our hope that Member States will keep
the current composition of the roster in mind when
nominating future candidates.
The Security Council’s vision of “a small, temporary
and efficient structure, whose functions and size will
diminish over time” (resolution 2529 (2020), para. 6)
cannot be achieved without international cooperation.
In the absence of support and timely assistance from
Member States, the search for missing persons whose
families still do not know their fate, and the tracking
and apprehension of fugitives will be severely impeded.
Further, the enforcement of judgments will not be
guaranteed, and above all victims will be denied justice.

21-3924015/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Political will is greatly needed, as non-cooperation
undermines the administration of justice and the rule
of law.
In the context of international cooperation, we
welcome the announcement just made with regard to
the agreement between the Government of the Republic
of the Niger and the United Nations to facilitate the
relocation and resettlement of the nine acquitted and
released persons who have resided in Arusha, Tanzania
for some time. We wish to commend the Republic
of the Niger for its assistance and cooperation, and
we recognize and commend the efforts of Registrar
Abubacarr Tambadou, which have finally resolved this
matter and allowed these persons to resettle.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphatically
denounces all forms of genocide denial and the
glorification of convicted war criminals. Genocide
denial promotes dangerous ideologies, impedes the
fight against impunity and hinders reconciliation. It
further delegitimizes and shows wanton disregard
for the suffering of victims of horrendous crimes, for
which the facts have been incontrovertibly determined.
The recognition, education and remembrance of
painful periods in history are critical to preventing the
re-emergence of hateful rhetoric and to ensuring that
such crimes are never repeated.
We must remain committed to the pursuit of
international justice. Accordingly, we urge Member
States to intensify their cooperation with the Mechanism
in the quest for accountability and the strengthening of
the rules-based international system.
Mr. Aalia (Norway): I would like to thank Judge
Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their thorough
reports to the Security Council, transmitted by the
Secretary-General in document S/2021/694, and for
their briefings today. I also welcome the representatives
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia
to the Council.
Let me at the outset reaffirm Norway’s strong
support for the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, which diligently implements the
important mandate given to it by the Security Council.
Let me also stress that Security Council decisions
must be adhered to. Non-cooperation undermines the
Mechanism, undermines the Council and undermines
international law.
16/24

13/12/2021

The fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes is a central element of Norway’s foreign policy.
We were a staunch supporter of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) since their
establishment in the early 1990s, and now, we are a
staunch supporter of the Residual Mechanism.
Norway commends the Mechanism’s high level
of activity during the reporting period. We note
significant judicial activity and a series of visits and
meetings to advance the cases on which it is working,
including the delivery of judgments in the Stanišić
and Simatović re-trial and in the contempt case of
Nzabonimpa et al. We take note that both cases are now
in the appeals phase.
Furthermore, we note that pre-trial preparations
have been advancing in the case against Kabuga.
However, we do regret the lack of progress in the Jojić
and Radeta case, and once again strongly urge Serbia to
cooperate fully with the Mechanism. At the very least,
its lack of action more than two decades after the Balkan
wars sends the international community the wrong
message. The Mechanism is of course dependent on
the cooperation of Member States in order to fulfil the
mandate the Security Council has provided to ensure
accountability and justice for the victims. And we urge
Member States to fulfil their obligations in this regard.
As the successor of two International
Tribunals — for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda — the Mechanism must carry out and
eventually complete the work related to both situations.
We note the announcement of Judge Agius and applaud
the fact that there seems to be a good solution for the
long-lasting difficult situation of the persons who have
been in a safe house in Arusha. We also commend the
Niger’s very helpful role in this arrangement.
Norway also greatly appreciates the Office of the
Prosecutor’s work to account for the remaining fugitives
indicted by the ICTR. However, we are concerned by the
reported lack of timely and effective cooperation from
Member States, which is preventing the achievement
of successful results. We again urge all States to fully
cooperate with the Mechanism and arrest and surrender
all remaining fugitives. The Council should also
assume its responsibility by considering every possible
measure to facilitate the arrest and surrender of those
wanted by the Mechanism.
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

In closing, let me thank Judge Theodor Meron, who
recently stepped down from the Residual Mechanism,
for his long and committed service to the Mechanism
and to the International Criminal Tribunals before
that. I also want to convey, through President Agius,
a welcome to Judge Fatimata Sanou Touré of Burkina
Faso to the roster of judges.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Like the other delegations that have taken the
floor before me, I would like to thank Judge Carmel
Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their detailed
reports, as transmitted by the Secretary-General
in document S/2021/694. I welcome, of course, the
presence among us of the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia and Rwanda.
Mexico also welcomes the progress reported
in the ninth report of the Mechanism. Taking into
consideration the restrictions imposed by the pandemic,
as well as other unforeseen circumstances, such as
the death of a judge, reaching rulings in three cases
is a very significant achievement. The commitment of
the judges, the Prosecutor’s Office, the Office of the
Registrar of the Mechanism and the overall team has
been crucial in making these results possible.
I highlight the confirmation of the judgment in
the Mladić case in June. The conclusion of this case
is proof that, when it comes to mass atrocities, there is
no room for impunity, despite the time and challenges
to arrest and subsequently try those responsible.
With that in mind — and recalling that just last week
we commemorated the seventy-third anniversary of
the adoption of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights — we must reaffirm our faith in accountability
as a fundamental pillar for reconciliation and rebuilding
the social fabric. All the resources we invest in this are
fully justified, but they will always be insufficient in
the face of the unspeakable suffering endured by the
victims and their families.
With regard to the other two judgments rendered
in the reporting period, we note the outcome in the
Nzabonimpa and Stanišić and Simatović cases, as well
as the ongoing appeals. Similarly, we note the progress
in the Félicien Kabuga case and will remain attentive
to the commencement of the trial. The progress that
has already been made is a very positive sign for the
victims of the genocide in Rwanda.

S/PV. 8927

With respect to contempt, like most Council
members, we express our deep concern about the
repeated failure to comply with the arrest and surrender
warrants issued in the Jojić and Radeta case.
We reiterate that cooperation is mandatory, so that
the failure to comply with the requirements of Security
Council resolution 1966 (2010) is unacceptable. One
cannot claim in one case that the situation in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia demands full compliance with
the Council’s rulings and at the same time ignore other
resolutions for which compliance forms part of the
reparations due to the entire international community
in general and to the victims in particular.
With regard to cooperation, we underline the
importance of redoubling efforts aimed at the location,
arrest and prosecution of the remaining fugitives. As
mentioned earlier, that is a priority if the Mechanism is
to be able to complete its residual functions and those
cases are not to go unpunished.
On a positive note, we welcome today’s
announcement of the agreement reached with the Niger
on the relocation of persons in Arusha. We thank the
Niger for its willingness to cooperate and its profound
sense of solidarity.
Finally, we stress that, 11 years after the adoption
of resolution 1966 (2010), the Mechanism continues
to fulfil its mandate. Therefore, Mexico will support
the efforts of the Fifth Committee to ensure that the
Mechanism’s budget is not unduly affected. The
provision of justice should not be subjected to criteria
of efficiency and savings motivated by narrow and
bureaucratic concerns.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
the Niger.
Allow me first to thank the President and the
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals for their briefings (see S/2021/694).
The Niger congratulates the Mechanism for all the
activities it has been able to carry out and the progress
made in the implementation of its mandate, despite the
restrictions due to the coronavirus disease pandemic.
I would also like to congratulate Ambassador Dinh
Quy Dang of Viet Nam, as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, for having
successfully led the Group’s work for the past two years.

21-3924017/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

13/12/2021

I would like to welcome the representatives of
Rwanda, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia
to our meeting today.

remembrance as key instruments in combating the
ideology of genocide in order to foster reconciliation
and peacebuilding.

My delegation also wishes to reiterate its
condolences to the President of the Mechanism
following the tragic death of Judge Gberdao Gustave
Kam of Burkina Faso, to whom we pay tribute for
his remarkable contribution to international criminal
justice. We wish his compatriot, Mrs. Fatimata Sanou
Touré, every success following her recent appointment
by the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

My delegation calls for capacity-building for the
officials of the States concerned in order to emphasize
the principle of complementarity and the assumption of
responsibility by national authorities.

The Mechanism’s efforts to deliver justice
are commendable and we call for their further
consolidation, ensuring respect for the rights of those
subject to trial, time limits and procedural guarantees.
My delegation also welcomes the regular inspections of
the two detention centres in Arusha and The Hague by
the International Committee of the Red Cross, which
is responsible for ensuring the proper application of
the rules governing the Mechanism and respect for
international standards.
The Niger is pleased to acknowledge that the
Mechanism is in a position to fully support its remaining
activities for the year of 2021 and calls on the Security
Council, in coordination with the General Assembly,
to allocate sufficient resources to enable it to fulfil
its mission.
It should be recalled that Council resolution 1966
(2010) urges States to cooperate with the Mechanism
in the execution of its arrest warrants so that the acts of
persons who have committed crimes of genocide do not
go unpunished. My delegation welcomes the signing on
15 November of an agreement between the Niger and
the United Nations on the transfer of persons released
or acquitted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda or the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

In conclusion, the Niger calls on the Mechanism
to continue its efforts to implement the remaining
recommendations made by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services in previous assessments. We express
our support for the President and the Prosecutor and
their teams for their continued commitment.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, please allow me to congratulate you, Sir, for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We wish you every success in performing
your duties during your presidency in the ongoing
specific circumstances caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic
I would also like to thank the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (IRMCT), Judge Carmel Agius, and the
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for their
respective reports (see S/2021/694) and for today’s
comprehensive briefings.

We also encourage all awareness-raising and
educational activities to make the legacy of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia known to the affected communities and to
younger generations in the region.

We are grateful that the Mechanism continued to
make progress in its work during the period between
the previous two Security Council sessions on this
topic (see S/PV.8790 and S/2020/602) and continues to
function in spite of the pandemic. We take note of the
continued progress made by the Mechanism in fulfilling
the remaining activities of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. We commend the IRMCT
for its efficiency in bringing all of its unfinished cases
to a close in spite of its reduced resources during
the pandemic.

The challenges related to the judicial proceedings
faced by the Mechanism, such as lack of cooperation
or denial of genocide, are a real challenge that we
must all address. The Niger condemns such attitudes
and encourages instead education and a culture of

The COVID-19 pandemic continued to have a
serious impact on the actions and activities of the
International Residual Mechanism, as well as those
of the judicial authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
between the previous two sessions of the Security

18/24

21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Council on the topic. We are aware of the challenges
that the pandemic has posed for the national prosecutors
of war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The work of
the Prosecutor’s Office and the work of the Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which deal primarily with the
unfinished and most complex cases of war crimes, was
particularly affected.
I hereby inform the Council that the judicial
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina are taking all
necessary measures to implement the revised strategy
for work on war crimes cases, as adopted in September
2020 by the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. One of the first and most important goals
of that strategy is to conclude all unresolved war crimes
cases as soon as possible. To that end, the judicial
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina are working to
resolve all open war crimes cases at different levels in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Let me stress that all potential perpetrators of
war crimes must be prosecuted for their personal
or command responsibility. In accordance with the
revised strategy, judicial authorities should unify court
practices in order to strengthen trust in the judicial
system and ensure the equality of all citizens before the
law. The strategy’s implementation will send a strong
message that impunity will not and must not be allowed.
The judicial authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will make every effort to prosecute all outstanding
and unresolved war crimes cases, especially those
with civilian victims, particularly children, women,
religious officials and elderly people. In 2021, the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
issued six indictments against nine persons. In the
same period, the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has confirmed five indictments, and one indictment is
still under the consideration. In the same period, the
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina has brought eight
judgments. Also, I would like to inform the Council that,
in the period between the two relevant meetings of the
Security Council, the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has forwarded to the Prosecutor’s Offices
at the entity level and to the Prosecutor’s Office of
Brcko district more than 170 different cases for further
investigation and prosecution. In that vein, I would
like to recall that, according to the official evidence
of the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
there are still 67 cases listed as Hague category list A,
with 173 suspect persons awaiting prosecution, and the
total number of prosecuted and unprosecuted persons

S/PV. 8927

under Hague category list A are 805 persons. The total
number of all unfinished investigation cases at the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina is 378,
against 3,833 perpetrators.
I would like to emphasize again that, as evidenced
in their reports throughout the relevant period of
operations, the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
with the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 and its
successor Mechanism has been stable and complete.
Representatives of the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, along with the representatives of
the Republic of Serbia, the Republic of Croatia and
Montenegro, participated at the regional conference
held in Belgrade on 20 and 21 September, with the
co-sponsorship of the Office of the Chief Prosecutor
of the IRMCT and the United Nations Development
Programme. The main goal of the conference was to
hold discussions on resolving all unresolved war crime
cases, improving cooperation between the countries,
mutual legal assistance and review of the obstacles to
fulfilling these goals.
We are grateful that the Office of the Prosecutor of
the IRMCT continues its engagement with the judicial
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and remains
committed to providing Bosnia and Herzegovina with
full support in assisting, transferring knowledge and
applying all lessons learned. We remain committed
to contributing actively to the Mechanism’s efforts to
accomplish its mission. We would also like to reiterate
our commitment to its work and to call on all Member
States to fulfil all obligations to ensure that the work of
the Mechanism continues uninterrupted.
We would like to express our gratitude for the
support of the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Development Programme in strengthening the
human and material resources of judicial institutions
prosecuting war crimes and engaged in general
capacity-building. I would like to inform the Council
that, at the end of last year, one courtroom in the Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina was adapted for hearings
with more than five suspects and their defenders, with
the help of foreign donors.
I would like to emphasize that Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains committed to investigating,

21-3924019/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

prosecuting and punishing all persons responsible for
war crimes, regardless of the offender’s nationality,
ethnicity, religion or political or other affiliation. We
would also like to emphasize that witness protection
is of the utmost importance in the conduct and
operations of all judicial institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is important for reconciliation and
progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina and throughout the
Western Balkans.
Cooperation between the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and those of neighbouring countries in the
exchange of information is also critical as we continue
to search for the more than 6,000 persons who remain
missing in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that vein, I would
like to recall that Bosnia and Herzegovina has signed
several bilateral agreements with the neighbouring
countries, the Republic of Croatia, Montenegro and
the Republic of Serbia, strengthening cooperation and
exchange of information and evidence. Also, I would
like to inform the Council that the meeting between
the Acting Chief Prosecutor at the Prosecutor’s Office
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Chief Prosecutor
of the Office of War Crimes of the Republic of Serbia
was held on 23 November. The central topics of the
meeting were cooperation and exchange of information
and evidence in war crime cases, as well as the transfer
of criminal prosecution cases in which the accused
persons are inaccessible to the judiciary as a result
of being located in the territory of the other States.
Also, the fight against impunity, especially in war
crime cases, has been emphasized as an imperative for
future cooperation in order to ensure the prosecution
of suspects and accused persons, regardless of their
nationality or location.
Cooperation with the judicial authorities of the
Republic of Croatia has to be improved in the sense
that the Croatian Government’s decision of 2015 not
to comply with requests for mutual legal assistance
in cases treated as crimes against humanity has to
be withdrawn.
Bosnia and Herzegovina states that there has
been no progress in the matter of Novak Đukić and
Milomir Savčić, who were standing trial in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and fled to Serbia.
I would also like to emphasize that the glorification
of war crimes and their perpetrators and the denial of
war crimes are unacceptable. Students in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are taught differently regarding events
20/24

13/12/2021

of the recent past, in which war criminals have been
glorified as heroes. We would also like to stress that
the cases of murals with the portrait of Ratko Mladić
in Belgrade will not contribute to reconciliation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the Western Balkans
region. The punishment of all persons responsible for
war crimes and the building of trust in the judicial
system are necessary for reconciliation as a significant
step of progress in our path towards membership in the
European Union, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s primary
foreign policy goal, which enjoys the broad consensual
support of all political parties in the country.
We are fully committed to continuing to strengthen
the rule of law, human rights and economic development.
We will continue to work to strengthen the justice
system in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Stability, progress,
mutual trust and cooperation cannot be achieved
without full justice.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Stevanovic (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to speak to the Council on behalf of the
Republic of Serbia and to present the most important
instances of its cooperation with the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
At the outset, I would like to recall the decision on
the application for early release of Mr. Sreten Lukić,
reached by President Carmel Agius on 7 October. We
believe that the decision has shown that the efforts
made by Serbia have been successful. Our Government
issued binding guarantees for the early release of
Mr. Lukić, itemized and in accordance with indicated
requirements. Furthermore, the final decision reached
by the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (ICTY)
was entered in the criminal records of Mr. Sreten
Lukić in Serbia. It is evident that Mr. Lukić, as well
as the others who requested early release, were closely
investigated by other institutions as well, primarily
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism and the
Association of Victims and Witnesses. I would like to
express our gratitude to President Agius and to present
our firm assurances that Serbia will comply with the
requirements listed in the aforementioned decision.
I would also like to point out that it is necessary to
respond as soon as possible to all requests submitted to
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

the Mechanism by the citizens of Serbia who meet the
requirements for early release.
In addition, I wish to emphasize the importance
of the meetings between the President and Minister
of Justice of Serbia with Chief Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz during the reporting period. Being in
close contact with Mr. Brammertz and taking into
consideration the extraordinary circumstances due to
the coronavirus disease pandemic, exceptional results
were achieved and almost all the requests that the
Office of the Prosecutor presented to the Government
of Serbia were responded to.
During the past six months, two judgments have
been rendered by the Mechanism, both in June: the
second-instance judgment in the case of Prosecutor v.
Ratko Mladić, and the first-instance judgment in the case
of Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović.
We would like to request that the humanitarian aspect
be taken into consideration when selecting a country
in which Mr. Mladić will serve his sentence. We are
talking about an elderly individual who suffers from
a number of serious health issues. We have seen that,
in certain countries, convicted persons are being
held in inadequate facilities, in spite of the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners — the Nelson Mandela Rules — and even
though formal requirements have been met before the
Mechanism for the convicted persons to be handed over
to those countries.
I would like to recall Serbia’s initiatives, which
so far have not been supported either by the Security
Council or by the Mechanism. One is our request that
the sentences passed by ICTY and the Mechanism
be served in Serbia. A large number of the convicted
persons who are currently serving their sentences are
either of Serbian nationality or citizens of Serbia. I
would like to repeat that Serbia is ready to assume the
obligations and responsibilities for the sentence-serving
of its citizens who were convicted by the Tribunal. We
accept international supervision and are therefore ready
to offer strong guarantees that the convicted persons
will not be released early without corresponding
decisions of the Mechanism, in cases in which they are
serving their sentence in Serbia.
Another unresolved issue is the fate of the archives
of the Tribunal. Serbia has submitted a large number
of documents to the Office of the ICTY Prosecutor,
defence attorneys and the Trial Chambers of the

S/PV. 8927

Tribunal. Our position is that documents that have been
submitted to the Office of the Prosecutor, but have not
been used as evidence during ICTY and Mechanism
proceedings, should be returned to source institutions.
That is extremely important not only because of the
responsibility to record the events that happened in the
former Yugoslavia in the 1990s, but also because of its
enormous volume. We are talking about millions of
pages, according to professional assessments.
I wish to address two specific current issues. The
first concerns the harassment of convicted persons and
witnesses; specifically, two of our citizens who are
serving prison sentences are facing harassment by the
representatives of the so-called Republic of Kosovo. I
am referring to attempts to interrogate Mr. Pavković
and to extradite Mr. Đorđević. I take this opportunity
to plead with the Security Council not to allow those
acts to happen. The doctrine non bis in idem is one of
the fundamental postulates of the civilized society, and
as such can be found in article 7 of the Statue of the
Mechanism. We find it unacceptable that they should
be tried twice for the same crime, especially by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina.
The second issue is related to threats and
intimidation of the witnesses in the Jojić and Radeta
case. On 3 September, a single Judge reached a decision
on the preservation of evidence by special deposition for
the purposes of future legal proceedings. The Amicus
Curiae Prosecutor was obliged to file an ex parte
submission, including a list of witnesses whose evidence
she seeks to preserve, prior witness statements and a
summary of topics for which the proposed witnesses
are expected to provide evidence. In September, a team
of three individuals arrived in Belgrade, authorized by
the Mechanism to assist the Amicus Curiae Prosecutor.
However, on 21 October, one of the witnesses
made a request for urgent assistance to our Ministry of
Justice. The witness provided a detailed description of
an incident that took place on 29 September, involving
the aforementioned individuals. The witness stated
that he was exposed to threats, blackmail and verbal
assaults and that he was ordered to testify against Jojić
and Radeta.
Allow me to recall that, back in 2018, a single
Judge ordered that the case against Jojić and Radeta be
referred to the judicial authorities of Serbia for trial.
The Amicus Curiae Prosecutor appealed the decision,
based on the issue of witness protection and the

21-3924021/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

witnesses’ fears for their own safety and the safety of
their families, especially after their cooperation with
the Prosecutor. The incident of 29 September entirely
devalues the sole foundation of the request that this case
be processed before the Mechanism. Such actions of
the Amicus Curiae Prosecutor’s team must be disclosed
and sanctioned.
I would like to emphasize that the commitment of
the Republic of Serbia has been demonstrated through
years of effort, striving to ensure that all parties
responsible for war crimes are brought to justice. Serbia
has prosecuted many war criminals before its courts, as
well as in cooperation with the ICTY and the Residual
Mechanism. Our new national strategy for war crimes
proceedings (2021-2016) is aimed at strengthening all
mechanisms for combating war crimes impunity, to
protect and support victims, to establish the fate of
missing persons and to build a social environment of
tolerance and reconciliation.
I am confident that the aforementioned objectives
will be realized through an efficient implementation of
this strategic document, while contributing to resolving
other remaining and painful issues from the time of
the dissolution of the former Yugoslavia. The burden
of armed conflicts and their devastating consequences
on citizens, regardless of their nationality, ethnicity
or religion, has been obstructing the improvement of
good-neighbourly relations and regional cooperation
for many years now.
At the same time, in order to continue the process
of reconciliation, to foster good-neighbourly relations
and to maintain lasting peace and stability in the region
of former Yugoslavia, it is essential to invest additional
efforts in nourishing the culture of remembrance and
dialogue. War crimes proceedings represent one of
the especially important issues within our European
integration process.
During the reporting period, the Office of the War
Crimes Prosecutor of Serbia worked to strengthen
cooperation with regional prosecutors. A regional
conference of the prosecutors took place in Belgrade
on 21-22 September and was supported by the United
Nations Development Programme and the Government
of the United Kingdom, with the active participation
of the representatives of the Offices of the Prosecutors
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Montenegro,
as well as by the representatives of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism, presided by
22/24

13/12/2021

Chief Prosecutor Serge Brammertz. The Serbian and
Bosnian Prosecutors met in Sarajevo in November
to further discuss cooperation regarding the referral
of criminal cases and concrete steps to be taken the
near future.
We believe that it can be concluded that the
cooperation between Serbia and the Residual
Mechanism has been successful. Therefore, we expect
that the Security Council will be actively engaged in
the matters it has initiated.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): Rwanda congratulates
the Niger on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I thank President Agius and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their progress reports
and detailed briefings. We commend them for their
continued efforts in the execution of the mandate
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
We wish to focus our statement on three points:
first, the Kabuga trial; secondly, the remaining
genocide fugitives who are still at large; and thirdly,
the transfer of the nine Rwandans who were in Arusha
to a third country.
On the Kabuga trial, we wish to remind the Council
that Félicien Kabuga is one of the masterminds of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi and the only fugitive
from the genocide apprehended by the Mechanism
since its inception in 2010. After escaping justice for
close to three decades, 85-year-old Kabuga was arrested
in France in May 2020 and transferred to the Hague
Chamber of the Mechanism in October 2020. Today,
more than a year later, his trial is yet to start.
We remind the Council of these basic facts to
underline that what is at stake is, on the one hand,
justice for the victims and survivors of the genocide
crimes committed and enabled by Mr. Kabuga in 1994
and, on the other, the performance of the Mechanism,
which should be evaluated on its ability to deliver on its
core judicial mandate. The priority of the Government
of Rwanda and the priority of justice is and should
be that the trial should start. We hope that the next
report of the Mechanism to the Security Council will
comprise and inform us about progress with regard
to the substance of the trial of Félicien Kabuga,
21-39240

13/12/2021

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

instead of detailed explanations about the extended
preparatory procedures.
Secondly, on the remaining genocide fugitives who
are still at large, I would like to commend the tireless
efforts and work of Prosecutor Serge Brammertz
and his Office. We note with concern that a number
of Member States continue to obstruct international
justice by refusing to extend cooperation to the
Prosecutor’s Office. Once again, we call on all Member
States to honour their international legal obligations to
extend cooperation to the Office of the Prosecutor of
the Mechanism.
As all recall, more than 1.4 million Rwandans were
brutally murdered within only three months during the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi. The Government and
the people of Rwanda continue to ask themselves what
the geostrategic interests of any Member State could
possibly be to side with the perpetrators by helping
them to hide and escape justice for crimes of genocide
committed in Rwanda.
The crime of genocide is imprescriptible. Rwanda
will continue the search for justice for the victims and
the survivors if only for two reasons: to reaffirm the
dignity of the lives of those exterminated during the
genocide and to hold the perpetrators accountable for
their crimes and prevent them from spreading their
genocide ideology beyond Rwanda’s borders.

S/PV. 8927

even after their acquittal by the former International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible
for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I would like to welcome
Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz and thank them
for their briefings today.
The International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals has made important headway
since the previous briefing (see S/PV.8790) in June
in completing its mandate. The Mechanism’s Appeals
Chamber delivered its judgment confirming the fully
deserved life sentence against Ratko Mladić for the
worst atrocities, including genocide in Srebrenica.

Thirdly, regarding the transfer of the nine Rwandans
who were living in a safehouse in Arusha to a third
country, we take note that eight of the nine Rwandan
citizens have now been transferred to the Niger. Rwanda
was surprised not to have been notified by either the
Mechanism or the host country about the transfer of
those nationals of Rwanda. We would appreciate
clarification from the principals of the Mechanism,
in the appropriate General Assembly Committee, on
whether the transfer, settlement and living costs of the
transferred Rwandan nationals — who, let us recall,
have been free from any Mechanism proceedings
for more than a decade — are part of the budget of
the Mechanism.

The Trial Chamber delivered its judgment in the
retrial of Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović and
found them responsible for aiding and abetting crimes
against humanity committed by Serb forces following
the takeover of Bosanski Šamac in April 1992. We
were surprised to find out that, although it established
the existence of a joint criminal enterprise of Serbian
perpetrators in Croatia, Serbia and Republika Srpska,
it did not list Stanišić and Simatović among them. That
decision departs from findings in the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 (ICTY) verdicts against Milan Babić and
Milan Martić for crimes committed in Croatia, which
established the existence of a joint criminal enterprise,
in which Stanišić and Simatović, as Serbia’s top
security officials, participated along with others, led by
Slobodan Milošević.

Finally, it is our sincere hope that the host country
will exercise its responsibility to ensure that none of the
nine persons uses its territory for subversive activities
that have contributed to the insecurity and instability
of the Great Lakes region for the past decades. There
is available evidence in their criminal records that
some of them have been engaging in such activities

We sincerely hope that the Appeals Chamber will
acknowledge the need for the coherence of judgments
rendered by the former ICTY and the Mechanism and
will convict Stanišić and Simatović for participation
in a joint criminal enterprise, as well as for all crimes
committed in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
requested by the Prosecutor.

21-3924023/24

S/PV.8927

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Fully aware of the challenges before it, we hope that
the Mechanism will complete its remaining work soon.
Rwandan fugitives must be apprehended and tried. The
Mechanism’s referral of Serbia to the Security Council
for a third time for the failure to arrest and transfer
Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta must be efficiently dealt
with, as requested in President Agius’s report (see
S/2021/694). The intimidation of witnesses is a serious
crime that undermines accountability efforts, and it
should be treated as such.
The glorification of war criminals and the denial
of genocide are unacceptable. They increase the
suffering of the victims and take us further away from
reconciliation. We especially condemn the recent
cases of high-level glorification of Mladić, Stanišić
and Simatović, as well as the consistent denial of the
genocide committed in Srebrenica.
Croatia is committed to continuing constructive,
non-politicized and evidence-based judicial cooperation
with other States of the region in war crime matters,
but, as we have mentioned many times, meaningful
cooperation is not a one-way process, and we expect
other States to actively engage and contribute to
improving relations.
As stated in several Prosecutor’s reports, Croatia
is still waiting for Serbia’s response to its invitation to
finalize the draft of a bilateral agreement on processing
war crimes, whose conclusion would represent a
significant step forward in judicial cooperation between
the two countries.
With regard to Croatia’s otherwise very good
bilateral cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
recently witnessed the case of a politically motivated
and factually and legally unsubstantiated request

24/24

13/12/2021

initiated by Republika Srpska and forwarded to Croatia
through institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Government of Croatia decided to reject the request
to take over the prosecution of 14 high-ranking
Croatian officers suspected of war crimes allegedly
committed during the 1995 Operation Flash, based
on the provisions of the act on mutual legal assistance
in criminal matters and the bilateral agreement on
mutual legal assistance in civil and criminal matters.
Those provisions were put in place precisely to prevent
the misuse of the instrument of legal assistance for
unsubstantiated defamation and harassment. We regret
that the Prosecutor negatively reflected that decision
in his briefing, raising unfounded allegations without
understanding either the broader context or the clear
legal basis for the decision of the Croatian authorities.
Another important area of cooperation is tracing
missing persons. Determining the fate of 1,853 still
missing Croatian citizens is our long-standing priority.
Last month, the remains of at least 10 people, their hands
tied with wire, were found in a mass grave near the
town of Vukovar. The discovery of that mass grave was
the result of the sole effort of the Croatian authorities,
clearly demonstrating that crucial information is still
not being shared.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm our strong support
for the important work of the Mechanism and its
successful completion.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Security Council, I wish to sincerely thank the
interpreters. who agreed to cover this morning’s very
long meeting,
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

21-39240
