United Nations

A/RES/62/225

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 February 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 131

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2007
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/62/535)]

62/225. Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of
18 December 1985, 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 43/222 A to E of 21 December
1988, 51/211 A to E of 18 December 1996, 52/214 of 22 December 1997, 53/208 A
to E of 18 December 1998, 54/248 of 23 December 1999, 55/222 of 23 December
2000, 56/242 of 24 December 2001, 56/254 D of 27 March 2002, 56/262 of
15 February 2002, 56/287 of 27 June 2002, 57/283 A of 20 December 2002,
57/283 B of 15 April 2003, 58/250 of 23 December 2003, 59/265 of 23 December
2004, 60/236 A of 23 December 2005, 60/236 B of 8 May 2006 and 61/236 of
22 December 2006,
Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it
requested the Secretary-General to ensure the equal treatment of the official
languages of the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2007 1 and
the relevant reports of the Secretary-General, 2
0F

1F

Having also considered the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 3
2F

Reaffirming the provisions relevant to conference services of its resolutions on
multilingualism,
I
Calendar of conferences and meetings
1.

Welcomes the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2007;1
0H

2.
Approves the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings of the
United Nations for 2008 and 2009, as submitted by the Committee on Conferences, 4
3F

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/62/32).
A/62/161 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1.
3
A/62/473.
4
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/62/32), annex II.
2

07-47727

A/RES/62/225

taking into account the observations of the Committee and subject to the provisions
of the present resolution;
3.
Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make any adjustments to
the calendar of conferences and meetings for 2008 and 2009 that may become
necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session;
Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat has taken into account the
4.
arrangements referred to in General Assembly resolutions 53/208 A, 54/248, 55/222,
56/242, 57/283 B, 58/250, 59/265, 60/236 A and 61/236 concerning Orthodox Good
Friday and the official holidays of Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha, and requests all
intergovernmental bodies to observe those decisions when planning their meetings;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that any modification to the
5.
calendar of conferences and meetings is implemented strictly in accordance with the
mandate of the Committee on Conferences and other relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
II
A.

Utilization of conference-servicing resources

1.
Reaffirms the practice that, in the use of conference rooms, priority must
be given to the meetings of Member States;
2.
Notes that the overall utilization factor at the four main duty stations,
while still above the established benchmark of 80 per cent, decreased from
85 per cent in 2005 to 83 per cent in 2006, although the planning accuracy factor
improved by 5 per cent over the 2005 reporting period;
Welcomes the steps taken by those bodies that have adjusted their
3.
programmes of work in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conferenceservicing resources, and requests the Committee on Conferences to continue
consultations with the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their
conference-servicing resources;
Recognizes that late starts and unplanned early endings seriously affect
4.
the bodies’ utilization factor owing to the amount of time lost, and invites the
secretariats and bureaux of bodies to pay adequate attention to avoiding late starts
and unplanned early endings;
Also recognizes the importance of meetings of regional and other major
5.
groupings of Member States for the smooth functioning of the sessions of
intergovernmental bodies, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far
as possible, all requests for conference services for the meetings of regional and
other major groupings of Member States are met;
Notes that the percentage of meetings held by regional and other major
6.
groupings of Member States that were provided with interpretation services in the
four main duty stations in 2006 decreased to 76 per cent, as compared with
87 per cent in 2005, expresses its concern about the difficulties experienced by
Member States owing to the lack of conference services for some meetings of
regional and other major groupings of Member States, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to explore innovative ways to address this problem and to report
thereon to the General Assembly through the Committee on Conferences;

2

A/RES/62/225

7.
Takes note with concern of the information provided in paragraph 38 of
the report of the Secretary-General, 5 and requests the Secretary-General to take
measures to improve the planning of conference resource allocations with a view to
ensuring that the bodies entitled to meet “as required” receive adequate conference
services;
4F

Once again urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the
8.
planning stage to take into account the meetings of regional and other major
groupings of Member States, to make provision for such meetings in their
programmes of work and to notify conference services, well in advance, of any
cancellations so that unutilized conference-servicing resources may, to the extent
possible, be reassigned to meetings of regional and other major groupings of
Member States;
Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with several General
9.
Assembly resolutions, including resolution 61/236, section II.A, paragraph 9, in
conformity with the headquarters rule, all meetings of Nairobi-based United Nations
bodies were held in Nairobi in 2006, but reiterates the need for vigilance in this
respect, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the Assembly at its
sixty-third session through the Committee on Conferences;
10. Welcomes the increased promotional activities undertaken by the
management of the United Nations conference centre of the Economic Commission
for Africa, which resulted in a utilization rate of 60.13 per cent in 2006, a marked
increase over the 2005 rate of 42.23 per cent, which is an upward trend that is
continuing, with a utilization rate of 75 per cent recorded as at 31 May 2007;
11. Also welcomes the cooperation agreement concluded by the Economic
Commission for Africa with the Division of Conference Services at the United
Nations Office at Nairobi with respect to the sharing of conference-servicing and
information technology staff, as well as similar agreements reached with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the United Nations Office at Geneva
and United Nations Headquarters in New York;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore means to increase
the utilization of the conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa,
bearing in mind the headquarters minimum operating security standards, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session;
B.

Impact of the capital master plan, strategy IV (phased approach),
on meetings held at Headquarters during its implementation

1.
Requests bodies whose meetings are listed in the calendar of conferences
and meetings, when planning their meetings, especially major or high-level
conferences, summits and special meetings, organs created under the Charter of the
United Nations, their subsidiary bodies and other intergovernmental organizations
and treaty bodies that normally meet at Headquarters to take into consideration the
limitations and inflexibility of all conference facilities at Headquarters throughout
the construction phase of the capital master plan;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the work of the Security
2.
Council during its night and weekend meetings is not affected by noise from

_______________
5

A/62/161 and Corr.1 and 2.

3

A/RES/62/225

construction taking place underneath the Council conference rooms during the
second phase of the capital master plan;
3.
Requests all meeting requesters and organizers to liaise closely with the
Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat
on all matters related to the scheduling of meetings to allow maximum predictability
in coordinating activities at Headquarters during the construction period;
Requests the Committee on Conferences to keep the matter under
4.
constant review, and requests the Secretary-General to report regularly to the
Committee on matters pertaining to the calendar of conferences and meetings of the
United Nations during the construction period;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that implementation of the
5.
capital master plan, including the temporary relocation of conference-servicing staff
to a swing space, will not compromise the quality of conference services provided to
Member States and the equal treatment of the language services, which should be
provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to
receiving maximum quality of services;
Also requests the Secretary-General to provide adequate information
6.
technology support for documentation services to ensure their seamless operation
throughout the implementation of the capital master plan;
Notes that during the implementation of the capital master plan, a part of
7.
the conference-servicing staff and information technology resources of the
Department for General Assembly and Conference Management will be temporarily
relocated to a swing space, and requests the Secretary-General to provide adequate
support to ensure continued maintenance of the information technology facilities of
the Department, implementation of the global information technology initiative and
delivery of quality conference services;
III
Integrated global management
1.
Notes with appreciation the progress achieved in the implementation of
the global information technology project, aimed at integrating, across duty stations,
information technology into meetings management and documentation-processing
systems, and the global approach to harmonizing standards and information
technology and sharing good practices and technological achievements among
conference services at the four main duty stations;
Also notes with appreciation the initiatives undertaken in the context of
2.
integrated global management aimed at streamlining procedures, achieving
economies of scale and improving the quality of conference services, and in this
regard stresses the importance of ensuring equal treatment of conference-servicing
staff as well as the principle of equal grade for equal work at the four main duty
stations;
Reaffirms that the major goals of the reform of the Department for
3.
General Assembly and Conference Management are to provide high-quality
documents in a timely manner in all official languages, as well as high-quality
conference services to Member States at all duty stations, and to achieve those aims
as efficiently and cost-effectively as possible, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;

4

A/RES/62/225

4.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all language services are
given equal treatment and are provided with equally favourable working conditions
and resources, with a view to achieving maximum quality of those services, with
full respect for the specificities of the six official languages and taking into account
their respective workloads;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the compatibility of
5.
technologies used in all duty stations and to ensure that they are user-friendly in all
official languages;
Further requests the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading
6.
all important older United Nations documents onto the United Nations website in all
six official languages on a priority basis, so that these archives are also available to
Member States through that medium;
Reiterates that the satisfaction of Member States is a key performance
7.
indicator in conference management and conference services;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that measures taken
by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management to seek the
evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to
them, as a key performance indicator of the Department, provide equal opportunities
to Member States to present their evaluations in the six official languages of the
United Nations and are in full compliance with relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly, through the
Committee on Conferences, on progress made in this regard;
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore best practices
9.
and techniques in client satisfaction evaluations and to report on a regular basis to
the General Assembly on the results achieved;
10. Welcomes the efforts made by the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management to seek the evaluation by Member States of the quality of
the conference services provided to them, and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to explore innovative ways to systematically capture and analyse feedback
from Member States and committee chairpersons and secretaries on the quality of
conference services and to report thereon to the General Assembly through the
Committee on Conferences;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly apprised of
progress made in integrated global management;
12. Takes note of the outcome of the work of the integrated global
management task forces, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
administrative policies, practices and procedures of conference services developed
on the basis of recommendations of the task forces are in full compliance with
relevant General Assembly resolutions;
IV
Documentation and publication-related matters
1.
Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official
languages of the United Nations;
2.
Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of
the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters;
5

A/RES/62/225

3.
Stresses that matters related to conference management, including
documentation, fall within the purview of the Fifth Committee;
4.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the rules
concerning the simultaneous distribution of documents in all official languages are
followed with respect to both the distribution of printed copies and the posting of
parliamentary documentation on the Official Document System and the United
Nations website, in keeping with section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution 55/222;
Reaffirms its decision in section III, paragraph 9, of its resolution 59/265
5.
that the issuance of documents on planning, budgetary and administrative matters
requiring urgent consideration by the General Assembly shall be accorded priority;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to direct all departments
6.
of the Secretariat to include the following elements in their reports:
(a)

Summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

(c)

Relevant background information;

7.
Reiterates its request that all documents submitted to legislative organs
by the Secretariat and intergovernmental and expert bodies for consideration and
action have conclusions and recommendations in bold print;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take steps to improve the
8.
quality and accuracy of meeting records in all six official languages through full
reliance in the preparation and translation of those records on sound recordings and
written texts of statements as they were delivered in the original languages;
Notes with concern the continued high level of late submission of
9.
documentation by author departments, which, in turn, has a negative impact on the
functioning of intergovernmental bodies, and requests the Secretary-General to
report to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session, through the Committee on
Conferences, on impediments, if any, to achieving full compliance with the tenweek and six-week rules for the issuance of pre-session documents, including,
where appropriate, proposed measures to address such impediments;
10. Stresses the importance of the concordance principle in order to ensure
equally valid texts of resolutions in all six official languages;
V
Translation and interpretation-related matters
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure the
highest quality of interpretation and translation services in all official languages;
2.
Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General make sure that the
terminology used in the translation and interpretation services reflects the latest
linguistic norms and terminology of the official languages in order to ensure the
highest quality;
Reaffirms section IV, paragraph 3, of its resolution 59/265, section IV,
3.
paragraph 4, of its resolution 60/236 B and section V, paragraph 3, of its resolution
61/236, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General, when recruiting
temporary assistance in the language services, ensure that all language services are
given equal treatment and are provided with equally favourable working conditions
and resources, with a view to achieving maximum quality of their services, with full
6

A/RES/62/225

respect for the specificities of each of the six official languages and taking into
account their respective workloads;
4.
Requests the Office of Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat to
conduct a comprehensive review of the existing special arrangements governing the
recruitment of temporary assistance staff in the language services at the four main
duty stations, in particular as regards their compliance with relevant staff
regulations and rules and General Assembly mandates in the field of human
resources management, and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at
its sixty-third session through the Committee on Conferences;
Expresses continued concern at the high vacancy rate in the
5.
interpretation and translation services at the United Nations Office at Nairobi,
especially the chronic difficulty in staffing the Arabic Interpretation Unit, and
requests the Secretary-General to address this as a matter of priority through, inter
alia, assistance from Member States in advertising and facilitating the conduct of
competitive examinations to fill these language vacancies;
Requests the Secretary-General to hold competitive examinations for the
6.
recruitment of language staff sufficiently in advance so as to fill current and future
vacancies in the language services in a timely manner, bearing in mind the persistent
situation at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, and to inform the General
Assembly at its sixty-third session of efforts in this regard;
Notes with appreciation the measures taken by the Secretariat to fill
7.
current and future vacancies at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, and requests
the Secretary-General to consider further measures aimed at decreasing the vacancy
rates in Nairobi as an exceptional case and to inform the General Assembly at its
sixty-third session of efforts in this regard;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to address the issue of
8.
succession planning by enhancing internal and external training programmes,
developing staff exchange programmes among organizations and participating in
outreach to institutions that train language staff for international organizations;
Takes note of the challenges presented by the demographic situation in
9.
the language services, as described in paragraphs 87 to 89 of the report of the
Secretary-General,5 requests the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary
to avoid any negative impact on the quality of translation and interpretation and to
report thereon, as appropriate;
1H

10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek evaluation by
Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to them, including
through the language-specific informational meetings held twice a year, and to
ensure that such measures provide equal opportunities to Member States to present
their evaluations in the six official languages of the United Nations and are in full
compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the accuracy
of translation of documents into the official languages, giving particular
significance to the quality of translation;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to take the steps necessary to
enhance translation quality in all official languages, in particular for contractual
translation, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-third session;

7

A/RES/62/225

13. Takes note of the information contained in paragraphs 90 to 92 of the
report of the Secretary-General,5 and requests the Secretary-General to provide at all
duty stations adequate staff at the appropriate grade level, with a view to ensuring
appropriate quality control for external translation;
2H

14. Notes the performance measurement matrix proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in response to the request to develop a comprehensive methodology for
performance measurement and management from a full-system perspective, and
looks forward to receiving the indicators for all duty stations beginning in 2008;
15. Takes note of the information on the impact of freelance recruitment on
the quality of interpretation at all duty stations, contained in paragraphs 99 and 100
of the report of the Secretary-General,5 welcomes the measures proposed in this
regard, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the issue to the General
Assembly at its sixty-third session through the Committee on Conferences;
3H

16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-third session on the experience, lessons learned and best practices of the main
duty stations in performing quality control of contractual translations, including on
requirements relating to the number and appropriate level of the staff needed to
carry out this function.
79th plenary meeting
22 December 2007

8
