United Nations

S/PV.3939

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-third Year

3939th Meeting
Thursday, 5 November 1998, 4.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Burleigh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . .

Mr. Buallay
Mr. Amorim
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Niehaus
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Mr. Jagne
Mr. Satoh
Mr. Mahugu
Mr. Monteiro
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Türk
Mr. Dahlgren
Sir Jeremy Greenstock

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 31 October 1998 from the Deputy Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
established by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council resolution 687
(1991) addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1998/1023)
Letter dated 2 November 1998 from the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council resolution 687 (1991)
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1998/1032)
Letter dated 3 November 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/1033)

98-86320 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Expression of welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
The President: I should like, at the outset of the
meeting, to extend on behalf of the Council a warm
welcome to the new Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations, Mr. Yukio Satoh. We look forward to
cooperating with him in the Council’s work.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of October
1998. I am sure I speak for all members of the Security
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Greenstock for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 31 October 1998 from the Deputy
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
established by the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council resolution
687 (1991) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/1023)
Letter dated 2 November 1998 from the Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9
(b) (i) of Security Council resolution 687 (1991)
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1998/1032)
Letter dated 3 November 1998 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1998/1033)
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is

2

3939th meeting
5 November 1998
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 31 October 1998 from the Deputy Executive
Chairman of the Special Commission established by the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of
Security Council resolution 687 (1991) addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1998/1023); the letter
dated 2 November 1998 from the Executive Chairman of
the Special Commission addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1998/1032); and the letter dated 3
November 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/1998/1033).
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1998/1038, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Japan, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America. Brazil, Costa Rica, Portugal, Slovenia and
Sweden have joined as sponsors of the draft resolution.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/1998/1038)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): First of all, thank you very
much, Sir, for your very kind words regarding my first
Security Council meeting. I assure you of my full
cooperation.
I would also like to endorse what the President said
with regard to the excellent job that our colleague
Ambassador Greenstock did. I would also like to say that
I know that with his renowned expertise, the current
President, Ambassador Burleigh, will do a good job of
leading the Council.
On 31 October, the Revolutionary Command Council
and the Baath Party of Iraq decided to suspend
cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and to maintain the restrictions on the work
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Japan strongly regrets this decision. To our great surprise,
the decision came the day after the Security Council
completed its work on the presidential letter to the

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Secretary-General describing the Council’s initial views on
a comprehensive review of Iraq’s compliance with the
relevant Council resolutions, which was proposed by the
Secretary-General on 6 August.
The decision on 31 October, together with Iraq’s
decision on 5 August, has, in effect, rendered impossible
the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions,
including the provisions of resolution 687 (1991), which
stipulate the conditions that must be met in order for the
sanctions to be lifted. This is a regrettable situation for both
Iraq and the international community as a whole.
Deeply concerned by the Iraqi decision, Japan, for its
part, made a démarche to the embassy of Iraq in Tokyo on
2 November, urging Iraq to immediately resume full and
unconditional cooperation with UNSCOM and the IAEA.
In view of the gravity of the situation, the Council
responded immediately by issuing a presidential press
statement on 31 October, sending a firm, unequivocal and
unanimous message to Iraq. The draft resolution before us
is the formal response of the Security Council to the Iraqi
decision of 31 October. The message is quite clear:
sanctions can be lifted only when Iraq complies with the
relevant provisions of the Security Council resolutions and
the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the Deputy
Prime Minister of Iraq and the Secretary-General, and this
can be achieved only through full cooperation with
UNSCOM and the IAEA.
My delegation considers this draft resolution to be
appropriate and, therefore, has joined the United Kingdom
in co-sponsoring it.
The President: I thank the representative of Japan for
his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
Along with the other Council members, France has lent its
support to the draft resolution that is going to be put to the
vote, and given the final draft, we wish to join the other
sponsors. In expressing itself in a unanimous way the
Council demonstrates its unity in the face of an
unacceptable and irrational Iraqi decision. The Council is
acting firmly because Iraq’s decision represents a serious
violation of that country’s obligations. By so acting,
Baghdad is turning its back on the Council’s clearly
expressed intention to proceed without delay to a
comprehensive review of the implementation of its
resolutions as soon as the restrictions imposed on the

3939th meeting
5 November 1998
United Nations Special Commission and the International
Atomic Energy Agency on 5 August were lifted.
The draft resolution that we are going to adopt today
restates the Council’s intention to carry out this
comprehensive review. It also reaffirms the intention of
the Council
“to act in accordance with the relevant provisions of
resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of the
prohibitions referred to in that resolution”.
These provisions, as everyone knows, are embodied in
paragraphs 21 and 22 of Council resolution 687 (1991).
Finally, in its last operative paragraph, the text we
will adopt reaffirms unambiguously the responsibilities
and the prerogatives of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
responsibilities that include evaluating situations as and
when necessary and making the appropriate conclusions.
France appeals to Iraq to seize the opportunity that
the Council is ready to offer it through the undertaking,
initially proposed by the Secretary-General, of a
comprehensive review. The only way for this to be done
and for there to be progress towards lifting the sanctions
that are causing suffering to the Iraqi people is for
Baghdad to rescind without delay the unjustifiable
measures of 5 August and 31 October.
Mr. Türk (Slovenia): Today, two months will have
passed since the Iraqi authorities decided, on 5 August, to
suspend cooperation with regard to the inspection
activities of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA).
The Security Council at that time unequivocally
rejected that decision as being totally unacceptable and in
contravention of Iraqi obligations. While demanding in
vain that Iraq rescind its decision, the Council showed
remarkable patience. Moreover, in its resolution 1194
(1998) of 9 September 1998, the Council clearly indicated
its willingness to address the concerns of Iraqi authorities
by expressing its readiness to conduct a comprehensive
review of Iraq’s compliance with its obligations and by
welcoming the Secretary-General’s proposal in this
regard.
In the face of the persistent absence of full Iraqi
cooperation with UNSCOM and the IAEA, the Security

3

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Council and the Secretary-General continued to work
towards the realization of a comprehensive review, to be
conducted once Iraq resumes full cooperation. These efforts
culminated last Friday when the Council, after intensive
consultations, reached a consensus on an outline of the
comprehensive review.
This was an achievement of great importance. It was
also a clear signal to Iraq that the Council is serious about
a comprehensive review. Faced with this clear and
promising prospect, Iraq, however, decided to cease
cooperation with UNSCOM.

3939th meeting
5 November 1998
agreements opened the way to the lifting of sanctions on
Iraq.
Following upon Iraq’s decision of 31 October,
Russia immediately informed the Iraqi leadership of its
position. We are engaging in active diplomatic efforts to
promote a settlement of the problem, in the belief that
only the resumption of the constructive cooperation of
Iraq with the United Nations will make possible a
comprehensive review and the prospect of lifting the oil
embargo.

This reaction from Iraq is really astonishing. While the
Council was patiently moving towards meeting Iraqi
concerns, Iraq chose to move in the opposite direction. It is
difficult to understand the motives for this reaction. It is
also difficult to see how this grave challenge to the
Council’s authority can result in anything other than a
serious aggravation of the situation.

The way to overcome this new crisis lies, we
believe, exclusively in political and diplomatic efforts
alongside the active role of the Secretary-General. Any
attempt to resolve the problem by force would have
highly unpredictable and dangerous consequences, both
for the United Nations ability to continue to monitor
proscribed military activity in Iraq and for peace and
stability in the region and in the Middle East as a whole.

This will not serve any of Iraq’s interests. Indeed, the
only way for Iraq to progress towards the lifting of the
sanctions remains the fulfilment of its obligations under all
relevant resolutions, notably resolution 687 (1991). If
paragraph 22 of that resolution is to be implemented, the
effective operation of the Special Commission and the
IAEA is essential. This is clearly stated in the draft
resolution before us today.

We are pleased to note that the draft resolution
before us seeks precisely a political solution to the Iraqi
problem and contains no language that could be arbitrarily
interpreted as some kind of permission to use force. The
draft resolution makes it clear that the Security Council,
in accordance with its primary responsibility under the
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security, will remain actively seized of the situation.

We believe that this draft resolution is a timely and
necessary one. Slovenia co-sponsored it and will vote in
favour of it. It is well-balanced and focused. It signals to
Iraq in no uncertain terms that it still has a choice: either to
resume full cooperation, whereupon the Council will
proceed to the comprehensive review, or to forfeit another
opportunity and further delay the moment the Council can
act in its favour.

Without in any way attempting to justify Iraq’s
actions, I wish to stress the exceptional importance of
total clarity with regard to the Security Council’s
intentions to implement its own resolutions. The draft
resolution clearly reaffirms the Council’s intention to take
a decision on the current sanctions in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 687 (1991). This
naturally refers to action under paragraph 22 of that
resolution regarding the lifting of the oil embargo once
Iraq meets its disarmament obligations. The same
understanding was stated in the letter sent on 30 October
by the President of the Security Council to the SecretaryGeneral in support of his idea of a comprehensive review.
That concept is reaffirmed in the draft resolution. We
hope that, in the light of all this, Baghdad will again
assess the emerging situation and rescind its decision of
31 October.

We strongly hope that Iraq will make the right choice
and that it will do so soon.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): We learned with deep concern of the decision of
the Iraqi leadership on 31 October to halt cooperation with
the United Nations Special Commission. That decision is
unacceptable. It has jeopardized the search of recent months
for a solution to the Iraqi problem. That step runs counter
to the agreements between the Secretary-General and the
Iraqi side that Baghdad would rescind its decision of 5
August and that the Security Council would conduct a
comprehensive review of the Iraqi situation. Those

4

With this in mind, as well as the fact that the
sponsors incorporated a number of amendments reflecting
our principled approach to the situation, the Russian

Security Council
Fifty-third year
delegations joins the consensus and will support the draft
resolution.
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): After the signature of the
Memorandum of Understanding by the Secretary-General
and the Government of Iraq last February and up to the
beginning of August, we witnessed a period of progress in
the disarmament activities in Iraq. This progress was due to
the cooperation lent by the Iraqi authorities to the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which was
acknowledged by the Council.
The Iraqi decision of 5 August put an end to what had
finally become a positive trend — a trend leading, we
thought, to the swift completion of the road map known to
Iraq as necessary to achieve the lifting of sanctions.
In a serious effort to re-establish such a trend, the
Council, with the assistance of the Secretary-General,
offered to engage, soon after Iraq were to rescind its
unacceptable decision of 5 August, in a comprehensive
review of Iraq’s compliance with its obligations under the
relevant resolutions, in order to identify any tasks which
still needed to be undertaken to satisfy the remaining
requirements of those resolutions.
In view of those efforts, it was with dismay and
incomprehension that all Council members received the
decision of Iraq, last Saturday, to cease any cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission and to
continue to impose restrictions on the work of the IAEA,
the effective operation of which is essential for the
implementation of resolution 687 (1991).
The draft resolution we have before us contains the
message the Council must now convey to Iraq. It expresses
a firm condemnation of the Iraqi decision of 31 October; it
renews the support of the Council for the Special
Commission and the IAEA; and it demands that Iraq
immediately rescind that decision, as well as the 5 August
decision.
Iraq must understand that it cannot continue to miss
the opportunities offered. Iraq cannot continue to delay
fulfilling the conditions that will enable the Council to act
in accordance with paragraphs 21 and 22 of resolution 687
(1991). Iraq cannot continue to delay the moment when the
Council will be in a position to act on the duration of the
prohibitions referred to in that resolution.

3939th meeting
5 November 1998
The draft resolution before us represents a firm,
unambiguous and determined reaction by the Council. It
also expresses, in no uncertain terms, the united response
of all Council members to the Iraqi stand.
It is up to Iraq now. Iraq must immediately
reconsider its position, re-engage once and for all on the
path of cooperation with UNSCOM and the IAEA, and
ensure full compliance with its obligations. Only in this
way will Iraq enable the Council to lift the sanctions.
Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): On 31 October, Iraq
announced its complete cessation of the little remaining
cooperation it had offered to the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM). It also decided to continue to
restrict the work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). The Iraqi decision was surprising, and
somewhat incomprehensible, in the light of the important
fact that the Security Council, the day before, had
formulated a unified view on the concept of a
comprehensive review of Iraqi compliance. Such a
comprehensive review would, inter alia, have marked the
road out of sanctions for Iraq. But it cannot take place
until Iraq is back in full cooperation with UNSCOM and
the IAEA, and steps like those now being taken by Iraq
will not bring it any closer to the lifting of sanctions. We
are always ready to listen to the views of the Government
of Iraq, but attempts to bargain with the Security Council
over its resolutions cannot be accepted.
In the draft resolution before us, the Security
Council condemns Iraq’s behaviour and confirms its
demands on Iraq. That message cannot be misunderstood:
Iraq must immediately rescind its unacceptable decisions
of 5 August and 31 October and return to full compliance
and cooperation. There is no room for compromise on
these fundamental principles.
At the same time, this draft resolution not only
repeats the Council’s demands; it also reaffirms that
Iraq’s compliance with all its obligations will make it
possible for the Security Council to lift the sanctions, as
stipulated in resolution 687 (1991). It restates the
Council’s readiness to carry out a comprehensive review
of Iraq’s compliance with its obligations once Iraq has
rescinded its decisions and resumed full cooperation with
UNSCOM and the IAEA. It is our sincere hope that the
message embedded in these paragraphs — an exit sign, as
it were, for the route out of sanctions — shall not be
missed by Baghdad.

5

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Finally, a very important principle is reflected in the
last paragraph of the draft resolution. The Security
Council’s primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as laid down in the Charter
of the United Nations, must not be circumvented. We see
this paragraph as an expression of the desire of members to
safeguard that responsibility.
Sweden fully supports the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The draft resolution we are
about to vote on clearly condemns the decision of the
Government of Iraq to stop its cooperation with the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM). It also refers to
the continued restrictions imposed by Iraq on the work of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Since 5 August, when these restrictions first came
about, Brazil has joined other members of the Security
Council in stressing that the lack of full cooperation with
both agencies was totally unacceptable and constituted a
violation of Security Council resolutions. We have also
supported the Secretary-General in his efforts to seek Iraq’s
cooperation in accordance with the Memorandum of
Understanding he signed with the Deputy Prime Minister of
Iraq in February 1998.
The decision of 31 October came at a moment when
the Security Council had just been seriously engaged in
discussing the concept of a comprehensive review of Iraq’s
compliance with Security Council resolutions, as presented
by the Secretary-General. Brazil considers that the
Secretary-General’s possible concept of a comprehensive
review constitutes a thoughtful and balanced approach
which could allow for progress in the implementation of
resolution 687 (1991).
As conceived by the Secretary-General and supported
by the Council, the review shall consist of two distinct and
equally important phases, the first dedicated to
disarmament-related issues and the second encompassing
the other requirements arising from relevant resolutions,
including those relating to Kuwaiti missing persons and
Kuwaiti property.
However, and as the Secretary-General himself
stressed, a condition sine qua non for the Council to
proceed with the review is the rescission by Iraq of its
decision to stop cooperation with UNSCOM and restrict the
activities of the IAEA. Complete and unconditional
cooperation with the Special Commission and the IAEA is
the only way to achieve our goal of addressing fully the

6

3939th meeting
5 November 1998
disarmament-related requirements of section C of
resolution 687 (1991). Only with such cooperation can we
envisage the moment in which the disarmament phase
would be concluded and the ongoing monitoring and
verification phase would be fully in place with the effects
stipulated in paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991).
Precisely on the day before the Iraqi decision to halt
its cooperation with UNSCOM, the members of the
Security Council had agreed on a letter, which was sent
by the President of the Security Council to the SecretaryGeneral, in which the Council offered its initial views on
how to hold a comprehensive review. The letter was
forward-looking and in our opinion provided a reasonable
blueprint for the review. It reflected the consensus of the
Council that this comprehensive assessment of Iraq’s
compliance should be designed so as to lead to the
definition of an agreed course of action and timetable
which, if followed, would enable the Council to fulfil its
intention to act in accordance with the relevant provisions
of resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of the
prohibitions referred to in that resolution.
It was thus with a deep sense of dismay that the
Brazilian Government learned of the Iraqi decision of 31
October. That decision makes it much more difficult for
all of us to proceed in our work with a view to ensuring
Iraq’s compliance with its obligations, thus making it
possible to reintegrate Iraq into the international
community. With that objective in mind, we urge Iraq to
rescind both its decisions, of 5 August and of 31 October,
and to resume full and unconditional cooperation with
UNSCOM and the IAEA.
Finally, from the point of view of my delegation, it
is of special importance that operative paragraph 6 of our
draft resolution stresses that the Security Council will
continue to be seized of this issue, in accordance with its
primary responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is our
view that this principle should continue to guide our
consideration of this matter. Bearing these facts in mind,
my delegation decided to join the group of sponsors of
this draft resolution.
Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): The draft resolution before
us demands that Iraq rescind immediately and
unconditionally the decisions taken to suspend cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
and to maintain restrictions on the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA).

Security Council
Fifty-third year

3939th meeting
5 November 1998

We are among those who believe that the situation in
Iraq will see notable improvement with the commencement
of the comprehensive review and are therefore disappointed
at the latest turn of events. We expect the Government of
Iraq to fulfil its obligations under all relevant Security
Council resolutions and to cooperate fully with the IAEA
and UNSCOM on the basis of the Memorandum of
Understanding of 23 February 1998. It is on the basis of the
understanding reached therein that a way forward must be
forged to facilitate the conclusion of the outstanding issues
and de-escalate the tension caused by recent developments.

Everyone hoped that this situation would continue.
However, Iraq’s decision of 5 August this year has caused
much damage to that relationship. That was followed by
the decision of 31 October, which further complicated the
situation.

We are grateful that our concerns regarding the
content of the draft resolution were taken on board,
including the demand that Iraq rescind its decisions of 31
October and 5 August this year; the reaffirmation of the
Council’s readiness to take up the comprehensive review;
the intention of the Council, as spelt out in operative
paragraph 5, to act in accordance with the relevant
provisions of resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of the
prohibitions; full support for the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and our confidence in his ability to carry this
process forward on the basis of the Memorandum of
Understanding; and our understanding that the present draft
resolution contains nothing that could open the door in any
eventuality for any kind of action without the clear and
precise authority of the Security Council. In that respect,
we are happy to note that the Security Council, in operative
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution,

It is in Iraq’s interest to rescind those two decisions
and resume its cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We hope that this will
be done as soon as possible. My delegation believes that
there is still a chance, and it should be seized. The
international community should make a greater effort to
convince Iraq and to encourage it to rescind its two
previous decisions.

“Decides, in accordance with its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to remain actively
seized of the matter.”
It is, inter alia, on the basis of that understanding that my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
In conclusion, we would once again like to see a
resumption of full cooperation between Iraq and the United
Nations, and urge Iraq to act quickly and decisively in
addressing the current situation.
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
After the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding
between Iraq and the United Nations on 23 February 1998,
the relationship between the two sides continued to be a
good one. Everything seemed to be going smoothly and
naturally. That relationship was free of any problem
whatsoever; during that period no problems, in the full
sense of the word, were created.

My delegation finds those decisions by Iraq
unfortunate. Even as the Security Council was preparing,
over the last two months, to undertake a comprehensive
review, the latest Iraqi decision put an end to all those
strenuous efforts made by the members of the Council.

Iraq’s decision to rescind these two decisions to
cease cooperation with UNSCOM and IAEA would pave
the way for the comprehensive review which was
prepared by the Council and contained in the letter of its
President addressed to the Secretary-General on 30
October.
The review consists of two phases: that of destroying
weapons of mass destruction and that of freeing Kuwaiti
prisoners and restoring Kuwaiti property. We hope that
through this review, Iraq will commit itself to meeting its
obligation. Then the lifting of the long-lasting embargo
could begin, an embargo that has caused the Iraqi people
much suffering and much material and moral damage.
In conclusion, my delegation supports the draft
resolution that we are about to endorse today, and we
hope that it will have positive effects. At the same time,
we hope that consultation and dialogue will continue so
that a way out of the present crisis can be found. That
would enable Iraq to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and thereby devote itself to the
economic and social development that it so sorely needs.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): On several occasions during its current
membership of the Security Council, the delegation of
Costa Rica has expressed its firm conviction that the
logical and viable solution to the constant crises that have
arisen in the context of the relationship between the

7

Security Council
Fifty-third year
United Nations and Iraq lies in the full implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Time and again, whenever the Iraqi authorities have
pushed that relationship to the limit, Costa Rica has stressed
that Iraq must comply with the disarmament obligations
imposed on it by those resolutions, as an indispensable
condition for the lifting of the sanctions imposed.
That unswerving position on the part of my delegation
is based on the fact that we have repeatedly noted a
persistent course of action on the part of the Government of
Iraq to avoid full compliance with those obligations,
through excuses and evasions designed to secure new rules
of the game that could diminish its responsibilities under
those Council resolutions.
The decision taken by the Government of Iraq on 31
October to cease cooperation with the United Nations
Special Commission, together with its continued restrictions
on the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
are a further example of that dangerous course of action
and give us good reason to doubt the Iraqi authorities’
willingness to comply.
This new challenge by Iraq to the authority of the
Security Council not only disregards the obligations that it
entered into with the international community, but also calls
into question the willingness and readiness that it expressed
in the Memorandum of Understanding that it signed with
the Secretary-General on 23 February this year.
That Memorandum established ample scope for
political dialogue, which has now been ignored by Iraq for
the sole purpose of securing further concessions in the
process of implementing Council resolution 687 (1991).
That is why the delegation of Costa Rica cannot accept or
consider valid the attempt to justify Iraq’s decision on the
basis of a failure to understand because of an alleged lack
of clarity in the letter that the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General on 30 October.
Costa Rica hopes that Iraq will proceed to comply
with its international disarmament obligations, honour its
word as given in the Memorandum of Understanding of 23
February and resume cooperation with the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency
without conditions.
Costa Rica also hopes that the Government of Iraq
will demonstrate clearly and unequivocally to the
international community its willingness to resolve the

8

3939th meeting
5 November 1998
current situation and to take firm steps that will enable
the Council promptly to embark on the comprehensive
review.
In this connection, I should like to take the
opportunity to reaffirm my delegation’s support for the
valuable and tireless efforts that the Secretary-General has
made and is still making and to urge him to continue his
work in the hope that dialogue and negotiation will make
it possible to achieve a political solution to the current
crisis.
For all of those reasons, Costa Rica sponsored and,
of course, will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would simply
like to reiterate that it was flabbergasted by the decision
taken by Iraq on 31 October 1998 to cease cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission and to
continue imposing restrictions on the work of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. This constituted yet
another slap in the face, especially at that time, when the
Security Council was in the process of fine-tuning a
possible concept for a comprehensive review of sanctions
imposed on Iraq. The Security Council was working
painstakingly in that direction when what had been
conveniently described as a “hiccup” suddenly assumed
another dimension because of the decision taken on 31
October, so that now it looks like a stranglehold. What
this draft resolution is attempting to do is free the
international community from that deadly grip and,
hopefully, break the vicious cycle of mini-crisis after
mini-crisis. We want to move forward.
It was in that spirit that resolution 1194 (1998) was
adopted in order to set in motion the process that would
culminate in a comprehensive review — provided, of
course, that the logical sequence was adhered to. There is
no need to emphasize that the first step in this sequence
of events is for Iraq to rescind its decision of 5 August.
My delegation subscribes wholeheartedly to the view that
by failing thus far to comply with its relevant obligations,
Iraq is unnecessarily postponing the proposed
comprehensive review and, by extension, prolonging the
unwarranted suffering of the people of Iraq.
In view of the fact that the draft resolution calmly
but firmly provides yet another opportunity for Iraq to
resume cooperation, my delegation will vote in favour of
it.

Security Council
Fifty-third year
Mr. Dangue Réwaka (Gabon) (interpretation from
French): In resolution 1154 (1998) of 2 March 1998, which
endorsed the Memorandum of Understanding signed on 23
February 1998 in Baghdad by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq, the
Security Council reaffirmed its intention to comply with the
provisions of resolution 687 (1991) concerning the duration
of the prohibitions contained in that resolution, provided
Iraq placed no more obstacles in the way of the activities
of the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The assurances that we received from the Iraqi
authorities indicated that nothing would be done to impede
the process of dismantling the weapons of mass destruction
that might still be on Iraqi soil.
However, contrary to every expectation, on 5 August
1998, Iraq decided to suspend and, on 31 October to halt,
its cooperation with those two bodies, running the risk of
postponement, sine die, of the comprehensive review that
the Security Council was preparing to conduct.
Whatever the reasons for Iraq’s decision, we can only
condemn them. Indeed, we believe that that attitude can
only increase our suspicions regarding Iraq’s goodwill to
comply with the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That attitude also has the effect of delaying the
moment when the Security Council must take a decision
under the provisions of paragraphs 21 and 22 of resolution
687 (1991), thereby prolonging the suffering of the Iraqi
people.
It is for all these reasons that, once again, we wish to
encourage Iraq to resume full cooperation with the Special
Commission and the IAEA, because only a resumption of
dialogue — and, particularly, the technical dialogue
between Iraqi experts and the experts from UNSCOM and
the IAEA — will help to provide answers to the Iraqi
Government’s questions regarding the possibility of a
lifting, even a partial lifting, of sanctions by the Security
Council.
Therefore we will support the draft resolution before
us, since it is in keeping with that idea.
We believe that the unreserved support expressed by
members of the Council for the efforts that the SecretaryGeneral has been making to implement the Memorandum
of Understanding of 23 February 1998, and their
reaffirmation to conform to the relevant provisions of
resolution 687 (1991), should inspire greater confidence in

3939th meeting
5 November 1998
Iraq regarding the real desire of Council members to
conduct a review of actions undertaken since the
imposition of the embargo.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation is deeply disturbed and
concerned at the present development in Iraq. We have
always believed that Iraq should implement in full
Security Council resolutions and resume, as soon as
possible, its cooperation with the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). At the same time the Security
Council, in accordance with the provisions of its relevant
resolutions, should also make a timely and objective
assessment of Iraq’s compliance. Only then can Council
resolutions be fully and effectively implemented. It is our
hope that questions left over from the Gulf war can be
properly resolved as soon as possible.
As the Chinese saying goes, “three feet of ice is
hardly the result of one day’s cold”. We should seriously
reflect on the root causes of the present situation. There
is no doubt that Iraq has to fulfil in a comprehensive
manner its obligations under relevant Security Council
resolutions. But the Council also has the responsibility to
make a fair and objective assessment in light of Iraq’s
compliance.
We are of the view that regarding some weapon
files, conditions are ripe to move to the next ongoing
monitoring and verification stage. The fact that the
Security Council has been unable to make such a political
decision is regrettable.
The Secretary-General has proposed that the Council
conduct a comprehensive review of the Iraqi question and
put forward some concrete ideas in this regard. The
Secretary-General’s proposals and ideas have been
warmly received and supported by an overwhelming
majority of the Council members. We appreciate and
support the Secretary-General’s ideas and positive efforts.
We believe that, under the present circumstances,
conducting a comprehensive review is still a way out of
the present impasse. We support the Secretary-General in
his ongoing active role in this regard.
Only through dialogue and consultations and
confidence-building can we resolve the present problem.
There is no other way out. In this context, I should like
to appeal to all sides to exercise restraint and to try to
resolve their differences through dialogue and cooperation

9

Security Council
Fifty-third year
and to refrain from any actions that might sharpen the
conflict and exacerbate tension.
Although there are still elements in the draft resolution
that are not totally to our liking, it is also true that the draft
has incorporated amendments put forward by China and
other interested countries by taking out the part which
determines that the situation in Iraq poses a threat to
international peace and security, and by adding that it is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council to maintain
international peace and security, reiterating its support for
the Secretary-General in his efforts to ensure the
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding and
reaffirming the Council’s intention to act in accordance
with the relevant provisions of resolution 687 (1991) on the
duration of the prohibitions.
We therefore believe that, in general, the text is a
balanced one. In order to ensure the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions and to seek an appropriate
solution to the present problem, we will vote in favour of
the draft resolution. We hope that this resolution will
facilitate the resumption of cooperation between Iraq, on
the one hand, and UNSCOM and IAEA, on the other, so as
to allow an early comprehensive review which will in turn
free the Iraqi people from sanctions.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/1998/1038.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1205 (1998).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for your kind words addressed to me at
the beginning of this meeting, and congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency.
By its decisions of 5 August and 31 October, Iraq has
put itself in flagrant violation of its obligations under the

10

3939th meeting
5 November 1998
relevant resolutions of the Council. It is right that the
Council should react formally and unanimously to this
latest attempt to challenge its authority and that of the
United Nations as a whole.
This resolution reiterates the Council’s full support
for the Special Commission and the IAEA. Their work is
absolutely vital. Iraq’s constant attempts to undermine
them and avoid its obligations only delay the moment
when the decision can be taken on the lifting of sanctions.
Cooperation, not confrontation, is the only way out from
sanctions for Iraq.
Certain speakers have given their views on the
meaning of this resolution as regards the possible use of
force. Let me set out briefly the view of the United
Kingdom. It is well established that the authorization to
use force given by the Security Council in 1990 may be
revived if the Council decides that there has been a
sufficiently serious breach of the conditions laid down by
the Council for the ceasefire.
In the resolution we have just adopted, the Council
has condemned the Iraqi decision to cease all cooperation
as a flagrant violation of its obligations.
This resolution sends a clear message to Iraq:
resume cooperation now. If Iraq does so, the Council has
spelt out unambiguously that it stands ready to conduct a
comprehensive review of Iraq’s compliance with its
obligations under the relevant resolutions and what steps
remain to be taken. We hope Iraq will respond positively
and resume full cooperation soon.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for his kind words addressed to me. I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the United States.
By adopting this resolution, the Security Council has
sent a clear and unmistakable message to Iraq: noncompliance will not be rewarded or tolerated. Iraqi efforts
to defy Council resolutions and obtain a lifting of
sanctions without full compliance have failed, and will
fail. Compliance with the Council’s resolutions is the only
course which will lead Iraq back towards acceptance
within the community of nations.
The restrictions which Iraq has imposed on the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) since
5 August are intolerable. Let me be clear: key provisions
of resolution 687 (1991) cannot be implemented unless

Security Council
Fifty-third year
UNSCOM and the IAEA have Iraqi cooperation and full,
immediate and unimpeded access.
The Secretary-General, whose efforts to obtain Iraqi
compliance are commended in this resolution, has expressed
his own view that Iraq’s 31 October decision to halt
UNSCOM activities is a serious breach and major violation
of the 23 February Memorandum of Understanding. It is
significant that today’s resolution similarly cites the Iraqi
decision as a flagrant violation of resolution 687 (1991) and
other relevant resolutions. I would also recall that both
President Clinton and Secretary of State Albright have
emphasized that all options are on the table, and the United
States has the authority to act.
The Council has made clear on many occasions —
most recently in its 30 October letter to the SecretaryGeneral and today in this resolution — that it is prepared

3939th meeting
5 November 1998
to recognize and respond to Iraqi compliance, but not
until Iraq lifts all restrictions on UNSCOM and the IAEA
and resumes cooperation.
Iraq should recognize the gravity of the situation it
has created. Iraq must turn back from the dangerous and
self-defeating course it has chosen. The United States
sincerely hopes that Iraq will heed the clear message of
this resolution and take the necessary steps without delay.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

11
