United Nations

A/RES/64/137

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 February 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 62 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/433)]

64/137. Intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of violence
against women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 61/143 of 19 December 2006, 62/133 of 18 December
2007 and 63/155 of 18 December 2008, and all its previous resolutions on the
elimination of violence against women,
Reaffirming the strong support expressed in its resolution 63/311 of
14 September 2009 for the consolidation of the Office of the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, the Division for the Advancement of
Women, the United Nations Development Fund for Women and the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women into a composite
entity, taking into account the existing mandates, which would be led by an
Under-Secretary-General,
Reaffirming also the obligation of all States to promote and protect all human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and reaffirming further that discrimination on the
basis of sex is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 1 and other international
human rights instruments, and that its elimination is an integral part of efforts
towards the elimination of all forms of violence against women,
0F

Reaffirming further the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against
Women, 2 the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 3 the outcome of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”, 4 and the declaration
adopted at the forty-ninth session of the Commission on the Status of Women, 5
1F

2F

3F

4F

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
See resolution 48/104.
3
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
4
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
5
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(E/2005/27 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2005/232.
2

09-47005

*0947005*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/137

Reaffirming the international commitments in the field of social development
and to gender equality and the advancement of women made at the World
Conference on Human Rights, the International Conference on Population and
Development, the World Summit for Social Development and the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, as well
as those made in the United Nations Millennium Declaration 6 and at the 2005 World
Summit, 7
5F

6F

Recalling Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 and
1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008 on women and peace and security, and welcoming the
adoption of Council resolution 1882 (2009) of 4 August 2009 on children and armed
conflict and Council resolutions 1888 (2009) of 30 September 2009 and 1889 (2009)
of 5 October 2009 on women and peace and security,
Welcoming Human Rights Council resolution 11/2 of 17 June 2009, 8
7F

Recognizing that women’s poverty and lack of empowerment, as well as their
marginalization resulting from their exclusion from social policies and from the
benefits of sustainable development, can place them at increased risk of violence,
and that violence against women impedes the social and economic development of
communities and States, as well as the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Deeply concerned about the pervasiveness of violence against women and girls
in all its different forms and manifestations worldwide, and reiterating the need to
intensify efforts to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence against women and
girls throughout the world,
Stressing that States have the obligation to promote and protect all human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, including women and girls, and must
exercise due diligence to prevent and investigate acts of violence against women
and girls and punish the perpetrators, to eliminate impunity and to provide
protection to the victims, and that failure to do so violates and impairs or nullifies
the enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Expressing its appreciation for the high number of activities undertaken by the
United Nations bodies, entities, funds and programmes and the specialized agencies,
including by the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on violence
against women, its causes and consequences, to eliminate all forms of violence
against women, and welcoming the recent appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on violence against children,
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General,
1.
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/155; 9
8F

2.
Calls upon the international community, including the United Nations
system and, as appropriate, regional and subregional organizations, to support
national efforts to promote the empowerment of women and gender equality in order
to enhance national efforts to eliminate violence against women and girls, including,
upon request, in the development and implementation of national action plans on the
_______________
6

See resolution 55/2.
See resolution 60/1.
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/64/53),
chap. III, sect. A.
9
A/64/151.
7

2

A/RES/64/137

elimination of violence against women and girls, through, inter alia, official
development assistance and other appropriate assistance, such as facilitating the
sharing of guidelines, methodologies and best practices, and taking into account
national priorities;
Calls upon all United Nations bodies, entities, funds and programmes
3.
and the specialized agencies and invites the Bretton Woods institutions to intensify
their efforts at all levels to eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls
and to better coordinate their work, inter alia, through the Task Force on Violence
against Women of the Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender Equality, and
looks forward to the results of the ongoing work of the Task Force on composing a
manual on joint programming, with a view to increasing effective support for
national efforts to eliminate all forms of violence against women;
Expresses its appreciation for the progress achieved in the
4.
Secretary-General’s 2008–2015 campaign “UNiTE to End Violence against
Women”, through the development of a framework for action outlining five key
outcomes to be achieved by 2015, supported, inter alia, by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women social mobilization and advocacy platform “Say NO
to violence against women”, the United Nations inter-agency initiative “Stop Rape
Now: United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict” and the regional
components of the campaign, stresses the need to accelerate implementation of
concrete follow-up activities by the United Nations system to end all forms of
violence against women, in close consultation with existing system-wide activities
on violence against women, requests the Secretary-General to report on the basis of
the results of his campaign, and encourages Member States to join forces in
addressing the global pandemic of all forms of violence against women;
Calls upon the inter-agency Programme Appraisal Committee of the
5.
United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence against
Women, in consultation with the Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender
Equality, to include in its next strategy for the Trust Fund ways and means to further
enhance its effectiveness as a system-wide funding mechanism for preventing and
redressing all forms of violence against women and girls and to give due
consideration, inter alia, to the findings and recommendations of the external
evaluation of the Trust Fund once finalized;
Notes with concern the growing gap between available funding in the
6.
United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate Violence against
Women and the funds required to meet the increasing demand, and urges States and
other stakeholders, where possible, to significantly increase their voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund in order to meet the annual target of 100 million
United States dollars by 2015 as set by the Secretary-General’s campaign “UNiTE to
End Violence against Women”, while expressing its appreciation for the contributions
already made by States, the private sector and other donors to the Trust Fund;
Stresses that, within the United Nations system, adequate resources
7.
should be assigned to those bodies, specialized agencies, funds and programmes
responsible for the promotion of gender equality and women’s rights and to efforts
throughout the United Nations system to eliminate violence against women and
girls, calls upon the United Nations system to make the necessary support and
resources available in order to allow the Task Force on Violence against Women to
undertake a resource flow analysis to assess the resources available for this work
and elaborate recommendations for their most effective and efficient use, and also
calls upon the United Nations system to respond swiftly to those recommendations
once they have been issued;
3

A/RES/64/137

8.
Welcomes the establishment of the Secretary-General’s database on
violence against women, 10 expresses its appreciation to all the States that have
provided the database with information regarding, inter alia, their national policies
and legal frameworks aimed at eliminating violence against women and supporting
victims of such violence, strongly encourages all States to regularly provide updated
information for the database, and calls upon all relevant entities of the United
Nations system to continue to support States, at their request, in the compilation and
regular updating of pertinent information and to raise awareness of the database
among all relevant stakeholders, including civil society;
9F

Also welcomes the adoption of an interim set of indicators to measure
9.
violence against women 11 by the Statistical Commission at its fortieth session, 12 and
looks forward to the results of the ongoing work of the Commission on this topic;
10F

1F

10. Requests the Secretary-General to present an oral report to the
Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-fourth session, and thereafter to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session, with information provided by the United
Nations bodies, funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, on recent
follow-up activities to implement resolution 63/155 and the present resolution,
including on the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate
Violence against Women, and urges United Nations bodies, entities, funds and
programmes and the specialized agencies to contribute promptly to that report.
65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

_______________
10

Available from www.un.org/esa/vawdatabase.
See E/CN.3/2009/13, para. 28.
12
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2009, Supplement No. 4 (E/2009/24), chap. I,
sect. B, decision 40/110.
11

4
