11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

determination, decolonization, fundamental human
rights and the establishment of a new international
economic order, which are matters of common concern
for the two organizations,

Taking into account the fruitful co-operation which already exists between the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the specialized agencies and other
bodies of the United Nations system, such as the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
1. Decides to promote further the co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference in the political, economic, social,
cultural and humanitarian fields and urges the two organizations to co-operate in their common search for
solutions to global problems, such as questions relating
to international peace and security, disarmament, selfdetermination, decolonization, fundamental human
rights and the establishment of a new international
economic order;
2. Notes with satisfaction the determination of the
Organization ofthe Islamic Conference to work towards
finding solutions to the serious problems relating to
international peace and security in accordance with its
Charter and the Charter of the United Nations:
3. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts to maintain contacts with the Organization of the Islamic Conference and requests him
to further strengthen these contacts;
4. Welcomes the active participation of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in the work of the
United Nations in the fields of common interest to both
organizations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to examine ways
and meaos of further strengthening co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of the
lslamic Conference and to submit a report to that effect
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference".

63rd plenary meeting
14 November 1980

35/37.

The siti,ation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security",
Recalling its resolution ES-6 /2 of 14 January 1980
adopted at its sixth emergency special session,
Reaffirming the purposes and prim:ipks of the Charter of the U nited N ations and the obligation of ali Sta tes
to refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of any State,

17

Reafjirming further the inalienable right of ali peoples to determine their own form of government and to
choose their own economic, political and social system
free from outside intervention, subversion, coercion or
constraint of any kind whatsoever:
Grave/y concerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principies, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Deeply concerned at the increasing outflow of refugees from Afghanistan,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political
solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan.
Recognizing the importance of the continuing efforts
and initiatives of the Organization of the lslamic Conference for a political solution of the situation in respect
of Afghanistan,
1. Reiterares that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and nonaligned character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful solution of the problem;

2. Reafjirms the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and to choose their
economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any
kind whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan:
4. A /so ca lis upon ali parties con cerned to work for
the urgent achievement of a political solution and the
creation of the necessary conditions which would enable
the Afghan refugees to return voluntarily to their homes
in safety and honour
5. Appeals to ali States and national and international organizations to extend humanitarian relief
assistance, with a view to alleviating the hardship of the
Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the U nited
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees:
6. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of thc
Secretarv-General in the search for a solution to the
problem' and hopes that he will continue to extend assistance, including the appointment of a special representative, with a view to promoting a political solution
in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution, and the exploration of securing appropriate
guarantees for non-use of force, or threat of use of force.
against the political independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of ali neighbouring States,
on thc basis of mutual guarantees and strict 11011interference in each other's interna! affairs and with full
regard for the principies of the Charter of the U nited
Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed
of progress towards the implementation of the present
resolution and to submit to Member States a report on
the situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security".

70th plenary meeting
20 Novemher 1980
