S/PV.8817

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8817th meeting

Friday, 9 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ben Lagha
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-18435 (E)
*2118435*

S/PV.8817

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian agreement we have reached here will
literally save lives.

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2021/636, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Ireland, Norway, the Russian Federation
and the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolutions before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya,
Mexico, Niger, Norway, Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2585 (2021).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by expressing deep gratitude
to the co-penholders for the extraordinary efforts
they made to get us to this point today. I also want to
thank all of the members of the Security Council for
their support.
Thanks to resolution 2585 (2021), millions of
Syrians can breathe a sigh of relief tonight knowing
that vital humanitarian aid will continue to flow into
Idlib through the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing after
tomorrow. Parents can sleep tonight knowing that
their children will be fed for the next 12 months. The
2/7

09/07/2021

Today’s vote is therefore an important moment. It is
a moment for millions of Syrians who will not have to
worry about starving to death in the coming weeks. It is
an important moment for our global recovery from the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, because
vaccines can now flow into Syria.
It is important that the United States and Russia
were able to come together on a humanitarian initiative
that serves the interests of the Syrian people. It is
an important moment for the United Nations and for
the Security Council, which today showed we can
do more than just talk — we can work together to
find solutions and deliver action on the world’s most
pressing challenges.
With the reauthorization of the Syria cross-border
humanitarian mechanism for the next 12 months, the
United Nations can now get back to its important
business of saving lives through the delivery of food,
shelter, medicine and other humanitarian assistance to
the Syrian people.
Today’s successful adoption averted a catastrophe
for a population that has already suffered too
much. Courageous United Nations front-line and
non-governmental organization workers can now
make their plans and secure their procurements to
deliver necessary aid through this literal lifeline.
Starving children will receive food. Sick mothers will
receive medicine. A people ravaged by COVID-19 will
receive vaccines.
While we had urged the Security Council to go
even further and expand the humanitarian access that
is so desperately needed today, the Council has made a
decision to save lives. I am therefore thankful for our
humanitarian agreement. Today’s reauthorization will
not completely fill the vast needs on the ground, but it
will provide crucial relief. We will continue working
to expand all forms of access. There is more we can
do — and should do — in the weeks and months ahead.
I want to conclude where I started, that is, by thanking
the co-penholders — Ireland and Norway — for their
strong leadership and responsible stewardship of the
negotiations. They made this humanitarian agreement
possible. From the bottom of my heart, thank you to all
my colleagues, whose alignment on this agreement will
save countless lives.
21-18435

09/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are pleased that, despite all the
difficulties and contradictions, the Security Council
today managed to find an important point of contact on
such a complex issue as a cross-border mechanism for
the supply of humanitarian aid in Syria. We are grateful
to our American colleagues, who worked in the spirit
of the agreements reached during the Geneva summit
between Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden.
The text of today’s resolution 2585 (2021) is a major
milestone on the way to resolving the Syrian crisis
and overcoming its consequences. For the first time,
it emphasizes the need to improve supplies across the
contact lines. That is fully consistent with the United
Nations principles for the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Council members agree that humanitarian action must
also address the urgent needs of the Syrian population,
in particular with regard to water, health and education.
Council members thereby gave the green light
for the cross-border mechanism to be gradually
supplemented and then replaced by supplies across the
contact lines. We will closely monitor this process over
the next 6 months, after which the Secretary-General
is to submit a substantive report on the operation of
the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing, with a particular
focus on the transparency of cross-line operations and
supply processes. Moreover, the Secretary-General
will regularly report on trends in the launch of supplies
across the contact lines, as well as on improvements in
humanitarian delivery modalities and recovery projects.
We expect to have detailed information on the
provision of humanitarian assistance through the
cross-border mechanism, in particular United Nations
mechanisms for distribution on the ground, location
and storage of such assistance. That will be the best way
to guarantee that humanitarian workers are protected.
Today we are witnessing a historic moment. For the
first time, Russia and the United States managed not
only to reach agreement but also to present a joint text
that was supported by all our colleagues in the Council.
We hope that this kind of day will be a turning point
and that this will represent a win not only for Syria but
also the Middle East region and the world as a whole.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to take this
opportunity to wholeheartedly thank all Council
members for their uniquely close and constructive
cooperation throughout the six-month period during
which we have been working to renew this very

S/PV. 8817

important resolution 2585 (2021). It is in fact the first
time since 2016 that we have unanimously adopted this
life-saving cross-border resolution. So once again, I
would say a huge thank you to all Council members for
their cooperation.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I take the floor to explain
India’s position on resolution 2585 (2021), which was
just adopted.
Allow me at the outset to thank the co-penholders,
Ireland and Norway, for their efforts. The decade-long
violence and terror has had a devastating impact on
the lives of Syrians. Syria, which was the fulcrum of
Arab culture and the leading voice in the region, is now
facing a precarious situation. India has been calling for
enhanced and effective humanitarian assistance to all
Syrians throughout the country, without discrimination,
politicization or preconditions.
More than 13 million people across Syria need
humanitarian assistance in one form or another. Syrian
women and children and the elderly have been severely
impacted in disproportionate ways. Today’s adoption,
therefore, will reassure 3.4 million people in northwest Syria.
We also need to reflect on the humanitarian situation
not just in the north-west but also on the rest of the
territory of Syria. Both the Secretary-General and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
have repeatedly spoken about the worsening situation
with respect to humanitarian operations on the ground.
There is an urgent need for an active engagement
between the international donor community,
humanitarian agencies and financial institutions with
Syria, consistent with the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Syria to address the
humanitarian situation and reconstruction needs.
Concrete steps need to be taken to address the
hurdles that are obstructing the functioning of crossline operations as well. We need a realistic basis to
move forward. India firmly believes that the long-term
security and stability of the region can be achieved only
by preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria. We are deeply concerned at the involvement of
external actors in Syria, which is making the situation
worse. We also remain convinced that there can be no
military solution to the Syrian conflict and reaffirm
our commitment to advancing a Syrian-led and Syrianowned, United Nations-facilitated political process in
line with resolution 2254 (2015).

21-184353/7

S/PV.8817

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the fact that the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2585 (2021), on the extension of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria. China
attaches great importance to the humanitarian situation
in Syria and supports the international community and
United Nations agencies in scaling up humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people, in line with the guiding
principles of emergency humanitarian assistance, as set
out in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
China has for a long time, through bilateral
channels, provided various forms of assistance to
Syria in terms of food, medicine, education and public
services, inter alia, and has played a positive role in
improving the humanitarian situation on the ground. In
our view, all humanitarian operations in Syria should
be premised on full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria.
The cross-border humanitarian delivery mechanism
is a special arrangement conceived under specific
circumstances and as such should be subjected to a
timely assessment and the necessary adjustments as to
its efficacy and applicability in the light of the situation
on the ground, with a view to transitioning from crossborder to cross-line delivery.
It should be stressed here that unilateral sanctions
are the main obstacles to improving the humanitarian
situation in the country. Secretary-General Guterres,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs have repeatedly expressed
concerns as to the negative humanitarian consequences
brought about by unilateral sanctions and called for
lifting them. The international community enjoys a
broad consensus on this issue.
Since last year, on each and every occasion, including
this one, on which the Council held deliberations on
this draft resolution, China and many Council members
have repeatedly expressed this concern. At the same
time, China wishes to stress that the cross-border
mechanism is a controversial matter, both politically
and legally, whereas the cross-line mechanism should
be the dominant channel for delivering humanitarian
assistance. Expressions of support for cross-line
assistance must not remain empty words. The Council
should identify what stands in the way of cross-line
delivery and urge the parties concerned to open up as
4/7

09/07/2021

early as a possible the delivery route from Damascus to
the north-west part of Syria.
At the same time it is of critical importance to
enhance the monitoring of cross-border delivery, as
this will help prevent crossing points from being used
in a manner that goes beyond the Council’s mandate.
As it is the Council that has mandated the establishment
of the cross-border mechanism, it naturally bears
the responsibility for ensuring the transparency and
impartiality of the mechanism and guarantee its
humanitarian nature.
As we just saw, thanks to the joint efforts of all
the parties concerned with respect to the draft that the
Council just acted on, elements included with regard
to enhancing cross-line delivery, strengthening the
transparency of the cross-border mechanism, post-war
reconstruction and the coronavirus disease response.
Those elements reflect the legitimate concerns of China
and other Council members and are the right steps to
take to properly and a comprehensively resolve the
Syrian humanitarian issue under the new circumstances
that prevail today. That is why China voted in favour of
the resolution.
However, at the same time, we continue to believe
that there was much to improve in the draft, especially
when it comes to calling in clear terms for the lifting of
unilateral sanctions. Now we expect Council members
to continue to take effective measures to eliminate the
negative impact of unilateral sanctions and to create
favourable conditions for fundamentally overcoming
the challenging humanitarian situation in Syria and
guaranteeing the well-being of the Syrian people.
Finally, I wish to especially thank Ireland
and Norway as the co-penholders of the draft for
maintaining constructive communication with Council
members and for their tremendous efforts in pushing
for the final consensus among the parties.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the co-penholders
for their immense work and persistent efforts to maintain
the cross-border humanitarian mechanism. Ireland and
Norway have worked closely with all Council members
to reach an outcome based on humanitarian needs,
aiming to support Syrian people across the country.
Because of that determination, we voted in favour
of renewing the mandate for 12 months. Estonia thanks
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other United Nations agencies, which,
21-18435

09/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East

despite hardships, have continued to provide life-saving
and life-sustaining aid to the people in urgent need
inside Syria.
Dame. Woodward (United Kingdom): Like others,
the United Kingdom would like to start by thanking
Ireland and Norway for their tireless efforts over the
past few weeks to engage Council members to find
a way to meet Syrians’ humanitarian needs. Without
their superb efforts and consultation, we would not
have gotten to where we are today.
The United Nations has been clear, over the past
few months, that the humanitarian needs of the Syrian
people cannot be met without the renewal of the
Organization’s cross-border mandate for a further 12
months. We are therefore pleased that resolution 2585
(2021) is a 12-month renewal of humanitarian access.
With regard to addressing the humanitarian needs
of the Syrian people, it remains our firm view that
the Security Council’s action should be determined
by the Organization’s assessments of humanitarian
need. We recognize that the draft text put forward by
the penholders represents a significant compromise to
take into account the views of all Council members and
is the minimum necessary to meet the humanitarian
needs of the Syrian people over the next 12 months.
That is why we have voted in favour of the resolution
put forward by Ireland and Norway today.
I would like to stress, however, that Syria remains
one of the most dangerous places for humanitarian
actors. We therefore call for maximum effort to ensure
that any reporting does not place their safety at further
risk. We hope that we, as a whole Council, can use
this spirit of compromise to find a political solution
to this decade-long conflict and the suffering of the
Syrian people.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): Kenya takes the floor to
explain its vote.
We would like to sincerely thank and commend the
co-penholders for their resolute efforts. We also applaud
the cooperation that has produced this text — sponsored
by the co-penholders, the United States and Russia — in
a spirit of compromise and unity.
Our affirmative vote reflects our strong
commitment to the well-being of all Syrian people. Our
applause for resolution 2585 (2021) is a clear signal that
common ground can be found even on the most complex
matters. Month after month, Kenya has reiterated

S/PV. 8817

its position to stand with the Syrian people and has
continued to underscore that the Council’s decision on
the cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism should
be underpinned primarily by the needs of the Syrian
people and the practicalities ensuring that those needs
are met. We are therefore delighted that we resolutely
made the decision to pursue this endeavour.
Kenya continues to support the provision of
humanitarian assistance through all available
modalities, including cross-border and cross-line
deliveries, in line with applicable commitments of
international humanitarian law.
My delegation also commends the efforts of
the international community and international
humanitarian organizations, people who risk their lives
every day in their commitment to provide humanitarian
assistance to the people across Syria with great efforts
and efficiency.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the only sustainable
solution to the humanitarian crisis is a political solution
to the conflict in Syria. As we have stated time and
time again, Kenya’s firm conviction is that the solution
is a Syrian-led and -owned process that ensures that a
wide spectrum of Syrians are at the forefront.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Tunisia
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2585
(2021), on extending the cross-border mechanism for
the delivery of humanitarian aid to Syria. My country’s
delegation would like to thank the penholders, Ireland
and Norway, for their efforts to reach this consensual
text. We would also like to thank the other members
of the Security Council for their positive engagement
throughout the negotiations in order to preserve the
unity of the Council and enable it to speak with one voice
on the humanitarian dossier in Syria. We hope that the
resolution will contribute to achieving the main goal
of easing the humanitarian suffering of our brotherly
Syrian people in all parts of Syria, particularly in the
light of the repercussions of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which, as we know, has a greater impact on
the most vulnerable.
We are totally satisfied that the resolution refers
to promoting cross-line delivery of humanitarian
assistance and to intensifying recovery efforts, in line
with Tunisia’s principled position in favour of putting
an end to the suffering of the Syrian people by any
means possible. We hope that the consensus achieved in
the Council reflects a collective determination to find

21-184355/7

S/PV.8817

The situation in the Middle East

the solutions necessary to permanently alleviating the
suffering of the Syrians while maintaining their dignity
and sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Syria.
We would like to reiterate that the only lasting
solution is a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
solution, as established in resolution 2254 (2015).
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Ireland and Norway for their efforts
as co-penholders of resolution 2585 (2021), particularly
for keeping the discussions focused on humanitarian
needs in Syria and for submitting a very reasonable and
concrete draft text.
The resolution adopted today represents an
agreement that will extend the operations of the crossborder mechanism for 12 additional months. That is
why Mexico voted in favour of the resolution. However,
it is important to point out that this result is not ideal,
as we would have preferred a more ambitious text to
address the complex humanitarian situation that Syria
is experiencing.
However, we understand that the renewal of the Bab
Al-Hawa for 12 months will enable the continuation
of humanitarian operations because, at the very least,
it will add certainty to the planning of activities and
budget, which require a minimum time frame of
one year.
With regard to the references to humanitarian
actors, Mexico would also have preferred a more general
formulation without making specific references.
The decision to adopt resolution 2585 (2021)
was taken with the humanitarian needs of the Syrian
population in mind. We reiterate that all discussions
on this issue must be and remain focused on
humanitarian needs.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.
France is relieved that the cross-border humanitarian
mechanism in Syria has been renewed for 12 months.
There is currently no alternative to this mechanism
for providing vital assistance to thousands of people
every day. Indeed, the Syrian regime continues to use
humanitarian aid for political purposes.
We welcome the tireless efforts of Norway and
Ireland to reach a compromise. But let us be clear — the
mechanism we have just renewed is not and will not be
sufficient to meeting the humanitarian needs. We regret
6/7

09/07/2021

that the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Yarubiyah crossings have
not been reopened, since, in the last year, humanitarian
needs have increased by more than 20 per cent in the
north-west of the country and by 38 per cent in the
north-east.
Let me also be clear about this point — our position
and that of our European partners remains unchanged.
We will not fund reconstruction and we will not lift
sanctions until a credible political process is firmly in
place, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), which
was adopted unanimously by the Security Council, nor
will we fund development activities that would help
strengthen the Syrian regime in the absence of progress
towards a political solution.
Nothing in resolution 2585 (2021) can be
interpreted as indicating a change in our well-known
position on this issue. Instead, we will continue to fully
assume our humanitarian responsibilities in the spirit
of the Secretary-General’s Parameters and Principles
for United Nations assistance in Syria. Furthermore,
nothing in this resolution can be interpreted as
implying the transmission of data on aid recipients
and humanitarian partners that are not intended to be
made public.
Lastly, we reaffirm our commitment to the full
respect of the neutrality and impartiality of humanitarian
organizations. In such a politicized context, it is in
no one’s interest to mention impartial humanitarian
organizations — neutral actors — in a resolution.
Finally, I would like to add that the fact that
resolution 2585 (2021) was put to the vote without the
draft being available in all official languages should not
constitute a precedent.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Security Council has met once again
to adopt a resolution on the so called a cross-border
mechanism for humanitarian aid (resolution 2585
(2021)).
Undoubtedly, the Permanent Missions of Russia and
China, along with other missions, made efforts during
the negotiations to bring to light important elements
to improve the humanitarian situation and deliver
21-18435

09/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8817

aid to those in need of it in Syria, in accordance with
United Nations principles for delivering humanitarian
assistance in emergency situations, as well as to support
Syria in addressing the coronavirus disease pandemic
and its effects on various aspects of life, lifting unilateral
coercive measures and stressing that humanitarian
activities are broader than merely responding to the
emergency needs of affected populations. Indeed,
humanitarian activities must also include support for
projects involving such basic services as water, sewage,
health care, education, shelter and early recovery
that the Syrians need. That would help to provide an
environment conducive to the dignified and voluntary
return of refugees and displaces to their homes.

My delegation reaffirms its firm, principled
position rejecting this politicized mechanism, which is a
flagrant violation of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Syrian territories. There are
serious defects in the work of this mechanism, including
lack of transparency, credibility and professionalism in
controlling and distributing humanitarian assistance
and the failure to direct this assistance to those in need
of it, instead of directing it to terrorist organizations.
In addition, the mechanism ensures that the Turkish
regime profits financially while supporting the
Al-Nusra Front/Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which is on
the sanctions list of the Security Council, and letting it
control Idlib for a prolonged time.

However, Western States have focused their
efforts only on the extension of a mechanism that
serves their agendas while emphasizing once again
their indifference to the suffering of the entire Syrian
people. They explicitly continue to target my country
politically and insist on violating its sovereignty and
besieging its people.

In conclusion, my delegation stresses that the
Syrian Government will spare no effort to meet the
humanitarian needs of and provide support to those
in need of it in order to alleviate the negative effects
of the terrorist war that has been imposed on Syria.
We will continue to support and facilitate access for
United Nations agencies and national and international
partners in the area of humanitarian work in order
to ensure that assistance reaches all those who need
it in the Syrian Arab Republic. My country stresses
that improving the humanitarian situation requires
positive and constructive engagement with the Syrian
Government through the humanitarian assistance centre
located in Damascus, free of all pressure, blackmailing
and repeated refusals and dictates.

It is misleading by way of exaggeration on the
part of those States when they promote the mechanism
by saying that it is a lifeline. Their objective is to
manipulate the feelings of public opinion and blackmail
its emotions. The promotional tours undertaken by
representatives of some of those States to the areas
adjacent to the Bab Al-Hawa crossing are flagrant
expressions of unilateralism, selectivity and bias. They
ignore the suffering of millions of Syrians in various
Syrian provinces as a result of the unilateral coercive
measures that they themselves have imposed. They
are suspiciously silent about the withholding of water
by the Turkish regime as a weapon of war against
civilians, let alone the ongoing looting of Syrian wealth
by American and Turkish occupation forces.

My country’s delegation regrets that the two
humanitarian penholders did not consult with it on
resolution 2585 (2021), thereby disregarding the point
of view of the country concerned. This constitutes a
breach of their obligations as two members of the
Security Council and as penholders.
The meeting rose at noon.

21-184357/7
