At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representative of Morocco, l&J to extend an
invitation to Mr. Engin Ansay, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United Nations,
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.

11. Decides to remain seized of the matter until a peaceful
solution is achieved.
Adopted unanimously at the 3039th
meeting.

Decisions

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at the
request of the representative of Morocco, 181 to extend an
invitation to Mr. Abou! Nasr, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States to the United Nations, under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

In a letter dated 3 Februacy 1992,177 addressed to the
President of the Security Council, for the attention of the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General enclosed a
letter dated 31 January 1992178 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission ofGermany to the United Nations
transmitting the text of a letter from the Federal Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Gennany addressed to the SecretacyGeneral, and requesting that that letter be brought to the
attention of the members of the Council. The letter referred to
the great danger which the mining of the entire territory of
northem Somalia constituted for the civilian population, and
stated that the German non-govemmental organization
Komitee Kap Anamur had asked the German Govemment to
support a mine-clearing programme which was already being
implemented by Komitee Kap Anamur. In particular, the
Committee had asked for the provision of two demilitarized
mine-clearing tanks. The German Govemment was ready to
grant that request and assumed that that humanitarian measure
did not conflict with the provisions of Council resolution 733
(1992).

Resolution 746 (1992)

or 17 Mardi 1992
The Security Council,
Considering the request by Somalia for the Security Council
to consider the situation in Somalia, 174
Reaffinning its resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January 1992,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
11 March 1992182 on the situation in Somalia,
Taking note of the signing at Mogadishu on 3 March 1992
of the cease-fire agreements, 183 including agreements for the
implementation of measures aimed at stabilizing the cease-fire
through a United Nations monitoring mission,

In a letter dated 5 Februaty 1992,179 the President of the
Security Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:

Deeply regretting that the factions have not yet abided by
their commitment to implement the cease-fire and thus have
still not permitted the unimpeded provision and distribution of
humanitarian assistance to the people in need in Somalia,

"I have the honour to infonn you that your letter
dated 3 February 1992177 transmitting a communication
from the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany
bas been brought to the attention of the members of the
Council. They have taken note of the intention of the
German Govemment and have no objection thereto."

Deeply disturbed by the magnitude of the human suffering
caused by the conflict and concerned that the continuation of
the situation in Somalia constitutes a threat to international
peace and security,

The situation in Somalia

Bearing in mind that the factors described in paragraph 76
of the Secretary-General's report must be taken into account,

Decisions

Cognizant of the importance of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in the context of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,

At its 3060th meeting, on 17 March 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Italy, Kenya, Nigeria
and Somalia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of
the item entitled:

Underlining the importance which it attaches to the
international, regional and non-govemmental organizations,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross,
continuing to provide humanitarian and other relief assistance
to the people of Somalia under difficult circumstances,

"The situation in Somalia:
(a) "l.etter dated 20 J anuary 1992 from the Chargé
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Somalia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/23445); 3

Expressing its appreciation to the regional organizations,
including the Organization of African Unity, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
for their cooperation with the United Nations in the effort to
resolve the Somali problem,

(b) "Report of the Secretary-General (S/23693 and
Corr.1)". 3

56

Decision

1. Talœs note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General of 11 March 1992 on the situation in
Somalia, 182

At its 3069th meeting, on 24 April 1992, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Somalia t(, participatc,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitlcd "111e
situation in Somalia: report of the Secrctary-C:rCncral (S/23829
and Add.1 and 2)". 43

2. Urges the Somali factions to honour their commitment
under the cease-fire agreements signed at Mogadishu on 3
March 1992, 183
3. Urges al] the Somali factions to cooperate with the
Secretary-General and to facilitate the delivery by the United
Nations, its specialized agencies and other humanitarian
organizations ofhumanitarian assistance to all those in need of
it, under the supervision of the coordinator mentioned in
resolution 733 (1992);

Resolution 751 (1992)
of 24 Aprll 1992

The Security Council,
Considering the request by Somalia for the Sccurity Council
to consider the situation in Somalia. 174

4. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue his humanitarian efforts in Somalia and to use ail the resources at bis
disposai, including those of the relevant United Nations
agencies, to address urgently the critical needs of the affected
population in Somalia;

Reaffimiing its resolutions 733 ( 1992) of 23 J anuary 1992
and 746 (1992) of 17 March 1992,
Having considered the report of the Secrctary-C:rencral of
21 and 24 April 1992 on the situation in Somalia. 184

5. Appeals to all Member States and to ail humanitarian
organizations to contribute to and to cooperate with these
humanitarian relief efforts;

Taking note of the signing of the cease-fire agreements in
Mogadishu on 3 March 1992, 183 including agreements for the
implementation of measures aimed al stabilizing the cease-fire
through a United Nations monitoring mission.

6. Strongly supports the Secretary-General's decision
urgently to dispatch a technical team to Somalia, accompanied
by the Coordinator, in order to work within the framework and
objectives outlined in paragraphs 73 and 74 ofhis report and to
submit expeditiously a report to the Security Council on this
matter;

Taking note also of the signing of letters nf agreement in
Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Kismayo on the mechanism for
monitoring the cease-fire and arrangements for the equitablc
and effective distribution of humanitarian assistance in and
around Mogadishu,1 85

1. Requests that the technical team also develop a highpriority plan to establish mechanisms to ensure the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance;

Deeply disturbed by the magnitude of the hum an suffering
caused by the conflict and concemed that the continuation of
the situation in Somalia constitutes a threal to international
peace and security,

8. Calls on all parties, movements and factions in
Mogadishu in particular, and in Somalia in general, to respect
fully the security and safety of the technical team and the
personnel of the humanitarian organizations and to guarantee
theircomplete freedom ofmovement in and around Mogadishu
and other parts of Somalia;

Cognizant of the importance of cooperation hctwecn the
United Nations and regional organizations in the contcxt of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the U nitcd Nations,

9. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue, in close
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity, the League
of Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
his consultations with all Somali parties, movements and
factions towards the convening of a conference for national
reconciliation and unity in Somalia;

Underlining the importance which it attaches to the
international, regional and non-governmental organizations.
including the lntemational Committee of the Red Cross,
continuing to provide humanitarian and other relief assistance
to the people of Somalia under difficult circumstanccs,
Expressing its appreciation to the regional organizations,
including the Organization of African Unity. the I-eague of
Arab States and the Organization of the Jslamic Confcrence,
for their cooperation with the United Nations in the effort to
resolve the Somali problem,

10. Calls upon all Somali parties, movements and factions
to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General in the implementation of the present resolution;
11. Decides to remain seized of the matter until a peacefu!
solution is achieved.

1.
Talœs note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General of 21 and 24 April 1992 011 the situation in
Soma) ia; 184

Adopted unanimously al the 3060th
meeting.

57
