V.

36/183.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

United Nations Financing System for Science
and Technology for Development 103

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980.
the annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
in particular paragraph 36 thereof in which the General
Assembly provided that the international community would
implement the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and
Technology for Development 104 principally in order to
strengthen the scientific and technological capacities of developing countries, to restructure the existing pattern of
international scientific and technological relations and to
strengthen the role of the United Nations system in science
and technology and the provision of increased financial
resources,
Recalling further the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development, adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for
Development,
Recalling the urgent need to develop and strengthen the
endogenous scientific and technological capacities of the
developing countries in order to enable them to apply science
and technology to their own development with a view to
the elimination of the existing inequality between developed
and developing countries in science and technology,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen further the role of the
United Nations system in the field of science and technology
through, inter alia, new and s~bstantial resources in addition
to those which already exist,
Recognizing the need to define specific and concrete proposals for action designed to strengthen the effectiveness
of the United Nations system, with particular emphasis on
the strengthening of the scientific and technological capacities of the developing countries,
Recalling its resolution 34/218 of I 9 December 1979, m
which it decided to establish a United Nations Financing
System for Science and Technology for Development,
Recalling further its decision that the long-term arrangements for the Financing System should start in 1982 and
that the establishment of interim arrangements should not
prejudice the ultimate decision with regard to long-term
arrangements, 105
Taking note of the report of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development, concerning the report of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts
on the United Nations Financing System for Science and
Technology for Development, 106
Considering that, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 34/218, the United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development shall be terminated
on 31 December 1981 ,

103

See also sect. VIII. resolution 36/ I 84.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.79.1.21 and conigenda), chap. VII.
10
' See resolution 34/218, sect. VI. paras. 8 and 9.
106
Official Records of the Generu/ Assembly. Thirt_v-sixth Session, Supplement No. 37 (A/36/37), part three. sect. IV.A
104

117

Reaffirming the role of the Intergovernmental Committee
on Science and Technology for Development, as specified
in General Assembly resolution 34/218.

I. Decides to establish, in accordance with the Vienna
Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development and General Assembly resolution 34/218, longterm arrangements for the United Nations Financing System
for Science and Technology for Development, which will
become operative on 1 January 1982;
2. Decides that the guiding principles of the Financing
System shall be as follows:
1. The Financing System shall, at the request of Governments, finance a broad range of activities intended to
strengthen the endogenous scientific and technological
capacities of developing countries. Adequate resources
should be allocated to the various activities identified in
the Vienna Programme of Action, including national,
subregional, regional, interregional and international activities. Particular attention should be paid to the implementation of different types of projects and programmes
of direct relevance to developing countries. Those activities should be complementary to bilateral and multilateral
programmes for science and technology and supportive
of the national efforts of developing countries. Due attention should be given to effective co-ordination of activities of the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system in science and technology for development. The operational plan for the implementation
of the Vienna Programme of Action, due to be completed
by concrete and specific action proposals by the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for
Development at its fourth session, including the areas of
concentration as adopted by the Committee at its third
session, will constitute the gP:neral framework for the
activities of the Financing System.
2. In determining the nature and level of the resources
of the Financing System, the following considerations
should be taken into account:
(a) Asymmetry of the technological capacity between
developed and developing countries;
(b) Need for predictability and continuous flow of
financial resources;
(c) Need for substantial resources in addition to those
that currently exist within the United Nations system;
(d) Need for untied external resources for the scientific and technological development of the developing
countries.
3. The Financing System shall be a vehicle for the
mobilization, co-ordination, channelling and disbursement of financial resources. The Financing System should
be organized on a voluntary and universal basis, open to
the participation of all States as full members. The resources of the Financing System will be constituted by
contributions from States and through financial arrangements which the Financing System may enter into with
international, regional and other public and private financial institutions. All member States should contribute
to the Financing System in a manner consistent with their
capacities. All member States should participate in the
direction of the Financing System.
4. The Financing System should be endowed with
an amount of resources to be agreed upon and contributed
by participating countries in order to provide a stable base
for its operations and should have the flexibility needed
to attract resources from various sources.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

118

5. In determining the forms of operation of the Financing System the experience gained in the operation
of the United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development should be taken into account;
3. Takes note with great interest of the recommendations of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on the
United Nations Financinfi System for Science and Technology for Development 07 and, in particular, notes that,
in accordance with the criteria set forth in section VI, paragraph 3, of General Assembly resolution 34/218, the core
resources of the Financing System should amount to $200
million per annum for the period 1983- I 985;
4. Decides that the institutional arrangements should be
determined, inter alia, in the light of the magnitude of the
financial resources and the nature of operations of the Financing System;
5. Further decides that those institutional arrangements
shall be agreed during the transitional year, 1982, in accordance with the relevant provisions of section II of the
present resolution;

II
1. Decides that the year 1982 shall be considered the
transitional period of the United Nations Financing System
for Science and Technology for Development;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to convene a Pledging Conference for the United Nations Financing System
for Science and Technology for Development in the first
quarter of 1982 to receive pledges for the transitional year
and, in that context, urges all States to make generous contributions, bearing in mind the recommendations in that
regard of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on the
United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development;
3. Decides that, without prejudice to the final agreement
on the long-term institutional and financial arrangements for
the Financing System, the general operational provisions
of the United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development, including its resources, organization and management, as well as the procedures set forth
in the annex to General Assembly resolution 34/218, will
apply and be transferred to the Financing System during the
transitional period;
4. Decides that an Ad Hoe Intergovernmental Group on
the United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development, open to the participation of all
States, should hold two sessions, the first, lasting one week,
from l to 5 March 1982, and the second, lasting two weeks,
from 12 to 23 April 1982, and further decides that the time
before and between those sessions should be fully utilized
for consultations in order to ensure the successful conclusion
of the work of the Group;
5. Urges Governments to ensure that representation at
those two sessions shall be at a high level and include experts
in the field of finance;
6. Requests the Ad Hoe Intergovernmental Group to
prepare its recommendations on the institutional, organizational and financial arrangements for the Financing System and to submit them to the Intergovernmental Committee
on Science and Technology for Development at its fourth
session;
7. Requests the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development to submit its recommendations, through the Economic and Social Council,

to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session for
consideration and decision.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/185.

Report of the World Food Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 ( XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling further its resolutions 34/110 of 14 December
1979 and 35/68 of 5 December 1980 on the report of the
World Food Council and 35/69 of 5 December 1980 on the
situation of food and agriculture in Africa,
Recalling also the Declaration of Principles and the Programme of Action, as adopted by the World Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, 108
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution
1981171 of 24 July 1981 on food and agriculture,
Expressing its appreciation to the Government and people
of Yugoslavia for the excellent facilities and generous hospitality provided to the World Food Council at its seventh
ministerial session,
Noting that the World Food Council emphasized the need
to adopt, according to priorities identified in the field of
food, comprehensive national and international measures
with a view to realizing the aims and objectives of the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade in the promotion of food and
agricultural development in the developing countries,
Recognizing that a substantial increase in the export earnings of developing countries is essential for adequate financing of their over-all economic development and their
imports of food and agricultural inputs,
Expressing concern that trade barriers constitute a serious
handicap to the efforts of developing countries, in particular,
to realize their economic potential, and of the international
community to overcome recession and inflation and expand
over-all productivity,
Noting, in that context, the need for adoption by all countries of policies designed to avoid disruption of international
trade and to facilitate access to international markets of
agricultural exports, particularly those from developing
countries,
Noting with great concern that the food situation remains
extremely precarious for many developing countries despite
significant increases in production and improved distribution
in some countries ir. the past year,
Noting also with great concern the growing hunger and
malnutrition in many developing countries, especially in the
least developed countries, particularly those in Africa,
Expressing its deep concern at the fact that a substantial
part of world resources, material as well as human, contin'"" See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report
of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development.

107

See A/CN.11121. part one.

Rome, 12-20 July 1979 (WCARRDIREP). part one; transmitted to the
members of the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General
iArl4/485).
