United Nations

A/RES/67/219

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 March 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 22 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2012
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/67/439/Add.2)]

67/219. International migration and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/208 of 23 December 2003, 59/241 of 22 December
2004, 60/227 of 23 December 2005, 61/208 of 20 December 2006, 63/225 of
19 December 2008 and 65/170 of 20 December 2010 on international migration and
development, as well as its resolution 60/206 of 22 December 2005 on the
facilitation and reduction of the cost of transfer of migrant remittances, its
resolutions 62/156 of 18 December 2007 and 66/172 of 19 December 2011 on the
protection of migrants, and its resolution 62/270 of 20 June 2008 on the Global
Forum on Migration and Development, and recalling also Commission on
Population and Development resolution 2006/2 of 10 May 2006, 1
Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 2 its resolution 60/265 of
30 June 2006 on the follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005 World
Summit, including the Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally
agreed development goals, and recalling further the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals and its outcome
document, 3
Recalling further its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields,
Recalling the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document, entitled
“The future we want”, 4

_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2006, Supplement No. 5 (E/2006/25), chap. I,
sect. B.
2
Resolution 60/1.
3
Resolution 65/1.
4
Resolution 66/288, annex.

12-49174

*1249174*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/219

International migration and development

Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 5 and recalling the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 6 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,6 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 7 the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 8 and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, 9
Recalling the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, 10 and reiterating the call to
Member States that have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying or
acceding to the Convention,
Recalling also the importance of the Decent Work Agenda of the International
Labour Organization, including for migrant workers, the eight fundamental
Conventions of that Organization and the Global Jobs Pact adopted by the
International Labour Conference at its ninety-eighth session, as a general framework
within which each country can formulate policy packages specific to its situation
and national priorities in order to promote a job-intensive recovery and sustainable
development,
Recalling further the summary by the President of the General Assembly of
the 2006 high-level dialogue on international migration and development, 11 and
taking note of the summary by the President of the Assembly of the informal
thematic debate on international migration and development held on 19 May 2011, 12
Acknowledging that the 2006 high-level dialogue provided a useful
opportunity to address constructively the issue of international migration and
development and heightened awareness of the issue,
Acknowledging also the contribution of the informal thematic debate, held in
2011, to the discussions on international migration and development,
Recognizing the contribution of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development to addressing the multidimensional nature of international migration
and promoting balanced and comprehensive approaches,
Acknowledging the important and complex interrelationship between
international migration and development and the need to deal with the challenges
and opportunities that migration presents to countries of origin, transit and
destination, recognizing that migration brings benefits and challenges to the global
community, and confirming the importance of including the matter in relevant
debates and discussions held at the international level, including at the United
Nations, in relation to development,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 13

_______________
5

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
8
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
9
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
10
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
11
A/61/515.
12
A/65/944.
13
A/67/254.
6

2/5

International migration and development

A/RES/67/219

2.
Decides to hold a two-day high-level dialogue on international migration
and development on 3 and 4 October 2013, after the general debate of the sixtyeighth session of the General Assembly, at United Nations Headquarters;
Also decides that the organizational arrangements for the high-level
3.
dialogue shall be as follows:
(a) The overall theme of the high-level dialogue on international migration
and development will be “Identifying concrete measures to strengthen coherence
and cooperation at all levels, with a view to enhancing the benefits of international
migration for migrants and countries alike and its important links to development,
while reducing its negative implications”;
(b) The high-level dialogue will consist of four plenary meetings and four
interactive multi-stakeholder round tables:
(i) Round tables 1 and 2 will be held in the morning and afternoon of the
first day of the high-level dialogue;
(ii) Round tables 3 and 4 will be held in the morning and afternoon of the
second day of the high-level dialogue;
(iii) Summaries of the deliberations of the four round-table sessions will be
presented orally by the chairs of the round-table sessions during the
concluding plenary meeting of the high-level dialogue;
(c)

The themes for each of the four round tables will be as follows:

(i) Round table 1 will focus on assessing the effects of international
migration on sustainable development and identifying relevant priorities in
view of the preparation of the post-2015 development framework;
(ii) Round table 2 will focus on measures to ensure respect for and protection
of the human rights of all migrants, with particular reference to women and
children, as well as to prevent and combat the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in persons and to ensure orderly, regular and safe migration;
(iii) Round table 3 will focus on strengthening partnerships and cooperation
on international migration, mechanisms to effectively integrate migration into
development policies and promoting coherence at all levels;
(iv) Round table 4 will focus on international and regional labour mobility
and its impact on development;
(d) Each of the four round tables will be co-chaired by two representatives,
to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly, with due regard for
geographical balance, in consultation with regional groups;
Further decides that the participants in the high-level dialogue shall
4.
participate in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;
5.
Invites Member States and observers to participate in the high-level
dialogue at the highest possible level;
6.
Invites the Holy See and the State of Palestine, in their capacity as
observer States, and the European Union, in its capacity as observer, to participate
in the high-level dialogue and its preparatory process;
Invites all relevant entities of the United Nations system and relevant
7.
special rapporteurs and representatives, as well as the International Organization for
Migration and other relevant international organizations having received a standing
3/5

A/RES/67/219

International migration and development

invitation to participate as observers in the work of the General Assembly, to
contribute to the preparation of and participate in the high-level dialogue;
8.
Invites the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of
representatives of other relevant intergovernmental organizations and entities who
may participate in the high-level dialogue, taking into account the principle of
equitable geographical representation, and to submit the proposed list to Member
States for their consideration in accordance with past practice;
Also invites the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of
9.
representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council who may participate in the high-level dialogue and
the one-day informal interactive hearings provided for in paragraph 11 below;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a note on the organization of
work of the high-level dialogue;
11. Decides to hold one-day informal interactive hearings in 2013 with
representatives of non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations and
the private sector, to be organized and presided over by the President of the General
Assembly, and requests the President of the Assembly to prepare a summary of the
hearings prior to the high-level dialogue in September 2013;
12. Requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with
Member States, to draw up a list of representatives of other relevant nongovernmental organizations, academic institutions and private sector entities who
may participate in the high-level dialogue and the one-day informal interactive
hearings, on the basis of recommendations by the Secretary-General in respect of
their specific expertise and involvement in international migration and development
issues, taking into account geographical representation; the list will be considered
by the Member States on a non-objection basis no later than one month prior to the
hearings provided for in paragraph 11 above;
13. Decides that representatives of non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, civil society
organizations and the private sector, one from each grouping having been selected
during the informal interactive hearings, are to be included by the President of the
General Assembly, in consultation with Member States, in the list of speakers for
the plenary meetings of the high-level dialogue, time permitting, and also decides
that the President of the Assembly, in consultation with Member States, shall
determine the list of representatives of non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, civil society
organizations and the private sector who can participate in each of the round tables
of the high-level dialogue, taking into account the principle of equitable
geographical representation;
14. Invites the President of the General Assembly, with the assistance of the
Secretariat and with support from interested Member States, the United Nations
system and other stakeholders, to organize, prior to the high-level dialogue, a panel
discussion with a focus on its overall theme, complementary to and taking into
account other preparatory initiatives relating to the high-level dialogue;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, with inputs from the members of the
Global Migration Group and other relevant entities, to prepare a comprehensive
overview of studies and analyses on the multidimensional aspects of migration and
development, including the effects of migration on economic and social
development in developed and developing countries;
4/5

International migration and development

A/RES/67/219

16. Invites the regional commissions and their subregional offices, in
collaboration with other relevant entities of the United Nations system, as well as
the International Organization for Migration and its Council, to organize discussions
to examine regional aspects of international migration and development and to
provide inputs, in accordance with their respective mandates, to the preparatory
process of the high-level dialogue;
17. Invites Member States, through appropriate regional consultative
processes and, as appropriate, within other major initiatives in the field of
international migration and development, including the Global Forum on Migration
and Development, to contribute to the high-level dialogue;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-ninth session,
under the item entitled “Globalization and interdependence”, the sub-item entitled
“International migration and development”;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
61st plenary meeting
21 December 2012

5/5
