United Nations

A/RES/65/12

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 February 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 73

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 November 2010
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/65/L.13 and Add.1)]

65/12. Report of the International Criminal Court
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/9 of 2 November 2009 and all its previous relevant
resolutions,
Recalling also that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 1
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
0F

Reiterating the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
Emphasizing that justice, especially transitional justice in conflict and postconflict societies, is a fundamental building block of sustainable peace,
Convinced that ending impunity is essential if a society in conflict or
recovering from conflict is to come to terms with past abuses committed against
civilians affected by armed conflict and to prevent such abuses in the future,
Noting with satisfaction the fact that the International Criminal Court has
achieved considerable progress in its analyses, investigations and judicial
proceedings in various situations and cases which were referred to it by States
parties to the Rome Statute and by the Security Council, in accordance with the
Rome Statute,
Recalling that effective and comprehensive cooperation and assistance in all
aspects of its mandate by States, the United Nations and other international and
regional organizations remains essential for the International Criminal Court to
carry out its activities,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing effective
and efficient assistance to the International Criminal Court in accordance with the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court (“Relationship Agreement”), 2
1F

_______________
1
2

10-51326

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
Ibid., vol. 2283, No. 1272.

*1051326*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/12

Acknowledging the Relationship Agreement as approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 58/318 of 13 September 2004, including paragraph 3 of
the resolution with respect to the payment in full of expenses accruing to the United
Nations as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement, 3 which
provides a framework for continued cooperation between the International Criminal
Court and the United Nations, which could include the facilitation by the United
Nations of the Court’s field activities, and encouraging the conclusion of
supplementary arrangements and agreements, as necessary,
2F

Welcoming the continuous support given by civil society to the International
Criminal Court,
Recognizing the role of the International Criminal Court in a multilateral
system that aims to end impunity, establish the rule of law, promote and encourage
respect for human rights and achieve sustainable peace, in accordance with
international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Criminal Court for providing
assistance to the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
1.

Welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court for 2009/10; 4
3F

2.
Welcomes the States that have become parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court1 in the past year, and calls upon all States in all regions
of the world that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to consider ratifying or
acceding to it without delay;
0H

Welcomes the States parties as well as States not parties to the Rome
3.
Statute that have become parties to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities
of the International Criminal Court, 5 and calls upon all States that have not yet done
so to consider becoming parties to that Agreement;
4F

4.
Calls upon States parties to the Rome Statute that have not yet done so to
adopt national legislation to implement obligations emanating from the Rome
Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in the exercise of its
functions, and recalls the provision of technical assistance by States parties in this
respect;
Welcomes the cooperation and assistance provided thus far to the
5.
International Criminal Court by States parties as well as States not parties, the
United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and calls upon
those States that are under an obligation to cooperate to provide such cooperation
and assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and the
enforcement of sentences;
Emphasizes the importance of cooperation with States that are not parties
6.
to the Rome Statute;
7.
Invites regional organizations to consider concluding cooperation
agreements with the International Criminal Court;

_______________
3

Articles 10 and 13 of the Relationship Agreement.
See A/65/313.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2271, No. 40446.
4

2

A/RES/65/12

8.
Recalls that, by virtue of article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, if
the acceptance of a State which is not a party to the Rome Statute is required under
article 12, paragraph 2, of the Rome Statute, that State may, by declaration lodged
with the Registrar of the International Criminal Court, accept the exercise of
jurisdiction by the Court with respect to the crime in question;
Encourages all States parties to take the interests, needs for assistance
9.
and mandate of the International Criminal Court into account when relevant matters
are being discussed in the United Nations;
10. Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of the
Relationship Agreement,2 which forms a framework for close cooperation between
the two organizations and for consultation on matters of mutual interest pursuant to
the provisions of that Agreement and in conformity with the respective provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Rome Statute, as well as the need for the
Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session of the
expenses incurred and reimbursements received by the United Nations in connection
with assistance provided to the International Criminal Court;
1H

11. Expresses its appreciation for the work undertaken by the International
Criminal Court liaison office to United Nations Headquarters, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to work closely with that office;
12. Encourages States to contribute to the Trust Fund established for the
benefit of victims of crimes within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court and the families of such victims, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to that Trust Fund thus far;
13. Notes the Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, convened and opened by the Secretary-General and held in
Kampala from 31 May to 11 June 2010, at which States parties reaffirmed their
commitment to the Rome Statute and its full implementation, as well as its
universality and integrity, and which undertook a stocktaking exercise of
international criminal justice, considering the impact of the Rome Statute on victims
and affected communities, peace and justice, complementarity and cooperation,
called for the strengthening of the enforcement of sentences, adopted amendments
to the Rome Statute to expand the jurisdiction of the Court to three additional war
crimes when committed in armed conflicts not of an international character, adopted
amendments to the Rome Statute to define the crime of aggression and to establish
conditions under which the Court could exercise jurisdiction with respect to that
crime, and decided to retain article 124 of the Rome Statute; 6
5F

14. Also notes the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
Organization, 7 in which the Secretary-General expresses the view that the link
between peace, development and justice was strengthened through the outcome of
the first Review Conference of the Rome Statute, and that the Kampala Declaration
and the amendments to the Rome Statute, including on the crime of aggression, will
provide the international community with additional tools for fighting impunity;6
6F

15. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute at its seventh session, while recalling that according to article 112,
paragraph 6, of the Rome Statute, the Assembly of States Parties shall meet at the
_______________
6
7

See International Criminal Court, document RC/11.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/65/1).

3

A/RES/65/12

seat of the International Criminal Court or at United Nations Headquarters, to hold
its ninth session in New York, 8 looks forward to the ninth session, which is to be
held from 6 to 10 December 2010, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary services and facilities in accordance with the Relationship Agreement and
resolution 58/318;
7F

16. Encourages the widest possible participation of States in the Assembly of
States Parties, invites States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the participation of
least developed countries, and acknowledges with appreciation contributions made
to that Trust Fund thus far;
17. Invites the International Criminal Court to submit, in accordance with
article 6 of the Relationship Agreement, a report on its activities for 2010/11, for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session.
52nd plenary meeting
23 November 2010

_______________
8

See resolution ICC-ASP/7/Res.3 of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

4
