S/PV.7203

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7203rd meeting

Thursday, 19 June 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Gálvez
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress towards the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel (S/2014/397)

14-43542 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1443542*

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress
towards the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel (S/2014/397)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/397, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the progress towards the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sellassie.
Ms. Sellassie (spoke in French): I am honoured
to brief the Security Council on the progress towards
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel. As the Council knows, I assumed
my functions very recently, and I would like to take
this opportunity to share my first impressions and some
views on the future direction of the United Nations
efforts in the Sahel region.
Since the endorsement of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel by the Council last
year, the United Nations system in the region has jointly
initiated a number of regional activities in the areas of
governance, security and resilience, as outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/397).
In the area of governance, we have given priority
to activities that promote political inclusion and
seek to build consensus among the population on
the basis of national and regional priorities. We have
also underscored capacity-building activities for
the improved delivery of essential services. While
continuing to focus on those important priorities, we
need to do more to reach the people of the Sahel and
to place them at the centre of efforts to address the
challenges of governance.

2/21

19/06/2014

In the area of security, we have initiated activities
that seek to promote the common management of the
borders and to prevent the spread of violent ideology
through confidence-building and capacity-building
measures. Those activities need to be scaled up, while
more attention and resources must be paid to fighting
youth unemployment.
In the area of resilience, we will continue to link
humanitarian interventions and development activities,
including by promoting legitimate cross-border
economic activity.
(spoke in English)
In the short time that I have been in office, I have
been struck by the deterioration of the political and
security situation in the region, notably in Libya, the
enduring political and security challenges in Mali, and
the persistent terrorist attacks throughout the region, in
particular those carried out by Boko Haram in Nigeria,
all of which continue to have negative consequences
on civilians and local economies. The humanitarian
situation remains extremely fragile in 2014. At least
20 million people remain at risk of food insecurity and
nearly 5 million children are at risk of acute malnutrition.
Meanwhile, the high levels of youth unemployment in
the Sahel increase the appeal of violent ideology.
As the Council is aware, the implementation of
the United Nations integrated strategy requires both
the sustained political will of the Governments of the
countries of the Sahel and, more broadly, a profound
political, economic and social transformation in the
region. One of the key lessons that we learned from
the crisis in Mali is that democratization processes,
which translate into internationally sanctioned
elections and efforts towards decentralization, need
to be complemented by efforts to strengthen State
institutions and to better integrate and manage diverse
societies. At every level, the quality of governance
is crucial to creating an environment that effectively
reduces the risk of identity-based conflict, the religious
radicalization of society, the youth in particular, and
their recruitment to terrorist groups or any kind of
criminal network.
The formulation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel has raised very high expectations
among the people of the region, requiring tangible
benefits for the populations as quickly as possible. That
is why, in implementing the integrated strategy, the
United Nations system will prioritise the inclusion of

14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

civil society, tribal and religious leaders, and research
institutions.
The dramatic surge in the terrorist acts of Boko
Haram in northern and central Nigeria since 2013
is now also threatening Cameroon, the Niger and
Chad. Moreover, the conflict and state collapse in the
Central African Republic have led to higher instability
in Central Africa and thereby increased the risk of
new connections between terrorist groups based in
the Sahara/Sahel region, Nigeria, the Horn and East
Africa. The reality on the ground is that North, West
and Central Africa form a contiguous geopolitical
region where short-term as well as mid- and long-term
multidimensional responses to various threats to peace
and security need to be implemented collectively.
That is why efforts to address security challenges
in the Sahel within the framework of the United
Nations strategy cannot ignore the interactions
between core Sahel countries and North Africa or
between core Sahel and other countries of West and
Central Africa. Responding to the threats of insecurity
in the Sahel in a sustainable manner requires a wellcoordinated approach encompassing North, West and
Central African countries and a flexible, issue-based,
geographical definition of the borders of the Sahel
region. The successful implementation of the strategy
therefore requires that the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General for West Africa and for Central
Africa and the Special Envoy for the Sahel work closely
together in diplomatic and political action, taking into
account also United Nations political initiatives in
North African countries, especially Libya.

S/PV.7203

the platform has faced challenges in promoting regional
cooperation in the Sahel, largely due to the emergence of
competing interventions and strategies that may delay
progress towards long-term stability and development
in the region.
Moving forward, it is important to support
the rotating chairmanship in order to strengthen
coordination and cooperation among all the concerned
regional and international actors. This cannot be
achieved by simply exchanging information. There is a
need to leverage the comparative strengths of national
Governments, subregional economic communities,
the African Union and other concerned multilateral
organizations and financial institutions in order to
harmonize the multiple strategies.
I am fully committed to supporting the effective
functioning of the platform. In this task, I have joined
hands with the African Union High Representative
for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Pierre Buyoya. Within the
framework of our respective mandates, he and I are
co-chairing the technical secretariat, which is tasked
to support the work and implement the decisions of
the coordination platform, under the guidance of the
rotating chairmanship.

In November 2013, the Ministers of the region
established a coordination platform for the Sahel,
entrusted with the overall coordination of the initiatives
on the Sahel with a rotating chairmanship, currently
held by Mali. The broad membership of the platform,
from Cape Verde to the Sudan and from Cameroun to
Tunisia, reflects the adoption of a flexible geographical
definition of the region, which is necessary for the
successful implementation of the strategy. It can also
generate the much needed interregional cooperation
I mentioned earlier, and improve relations among the
countries concerned, beyond the boundaries of the
individual economic communities.

Although the United Nations has significantly
improved internal coordination and promoted a more
coherent response, more needs to be done if the
coordinated support of the international community
is to effectively respond to the persisting challenges
in the Sahel region. When the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, the
President of the World Bank Group, the President of
the African Development Bank and the European
Commissioner for Development visited the region in
November last year, they committed to breaking down
institutional barriers and ensuring better targeted and
coordinated support based on complementary areas
of strength. I intend to honour that commitment as a
matter of priority. If the international community does
not improve coordination, then the limited resources
that have been made available so far will not have
the desired impact. Acting fast and in a coordinated
manner is necessary to overcome the current pattern of
recurrent crises and move towards a future of stability
and development in the region.

Since its establishment, the members of the
platform have met twice, endorsing the road map of
the current chairmanship and agreeing to take concrete
steps to improve coordination. Despite these efforts,

My predecessor, Mr. Romano Prodi, oversaw
the development of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa, Mr. Said

14-435423/21

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

Djinnit, has helped set up coordination mechanisms
within the United Nations system for the effective
implementation of the strategy. I will build on these
important efforts, while continuing to consult with all
concerned Member States and civil society, as well as
regional and international partners for the successful
implementation of the integrated strategy for the Sahel.
(spoke in French)
The countries of the region need assistance in laying
the foundations of stability and sustainable development.
Strengthening cooperation among national, regional
and international partners is a precondition for the
delivery of the needed assistance. The United Nations
priority during the coming year will be to amplify joint
action by harmonizing and aligning political, security,
development and humanitarian efforts throughout the
region. However, if we are to succeed, we will need
the support and involvement of the Security Council
in promoting joint action on the part of all actors
working for the well-being of the peoples of the Sahel
and, above all, the commitment and political will of the
Governments of the countries of the region to undertake
without further delay the structural reforms necessary
to the prosperity of the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Sellassie for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
Russian Federation for having organized this debate
on the Sahel. I congratulate Ms. Hiroute Guebre
Sellassie on her nomination as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel and thank her for
her briefing. I also pay tribute to the former Special
Envoy, Mr. Romano Prodi, for his tireless efforts, and
commend the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa.
I welcome the fact that the Sahel region, which
is one of the poorest in the world, has attracted the
Security Council’s attention. The region continues
to face security, humanitarian, governance and
development problems, as well as the damaging impact
of drought and desertification. The presence of armed
groups — including separatist, terrorist and criminal
groups — and the proliferation of weapons and
youth unemployment further complicate the already
precarious situation.

4/21

19/06/2014

Chad welcomes the efforts of regional and
international organizations to find solutions to the
region’s problems. We especially appreciate the
holding, in New York on 26 September 2013, of a highlevel meeting on the situation in the region, as well as
the high-level visit from 5 to 7 November 2013 to Mali,
the Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad carried out by the
Secretary-General along with the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, the President of the
African Development Bank (ADB), the Commissioner
of the European Union responsible for development
and representatives of the World Bank. We also
welcome the announcement of new investments in the
region — totalling $6.75 billion from the European
Union and $1.05 billion from the World Bank — to
benefit the five countries of the region. I should like
to make some observations on the three pillars of the
strategy, namely, governance, security and resilience.
With regard to governance, I welcome the
commendable initiatives by the United Nations
system and its partners, including the United Nations
Development Programme, UNICEF, UNESCO and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, aimed at resolving the governance
problems that exist in several of the countries of the
region. Among other things, those efforts touch on
the question of women, promoting social cohesion,
preventing conflict, supporting Governments in order
to improve access to basic services, creating jobs and
income-generating activities, supporting efforts to
assess the risks of vulnerability, birth registration,
strengthening teaching, vocational and professional
education facilities, and assistance to defence and
human rights institutions, among other things.
With regard to security, the deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali,
followed by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
contributed greatly to stabilizing that country.
Nevertheless, the restoration of the territorial integrity
of the country continues to be a major challenge.
The resumption of clashes between Malian forces
and armed groups in Kidal on 19 May has seriously
undermined a country that is already quite fragile. We
wish to commend the joint efforts by the Chair of the
African Union and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MINUSMA that led
to the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement on 23 May.
We would also like to welcome the Algiers talks among

14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

the armed groups, which have made it possible to
establish a platform for an inclusive dialogue with the
Government.
However, the ever-increasing terrorist attacks,
isolated incidents and the use of improvised explosive
devices against both Malian and international forces
are unacceptable and we resolutely condemn them.
Last week’s attack in Aguelhoc, in which four of Chad’s
soldiers serving in MINUSMA were killed and others
were injured, serves to remind us that the terrorist
threat has not been stemmed.
There are also enormous risks in Libya that the
democratic transition could be reversed, in spite of the
election of the Constituent Assembly last April and the
progress made in the area of transitional justice. The
country today is favoured territory for lawlessness and
all sorts of criminal and terrorist activity.
The terrorist acts and kidnappings of children
by Boko Haram in Nigeria are a further cause for
concern. That group has access to sophisticated
weapons and poses a growing threat to the region of
Lake Chad and Central African through its exploitation
of the porousness of the borders and the situation of
unemployment and ignorance among young people.
As the report of the Secretary-General points out
(S/2014/397), terrorist attacks in the Maghreb and
the Sahel increased by 60 per cent in 2013 over the
previous year, reaching a total of 230 incidents. This is
worrying when it comes to survival of both people and
public institutions. The United Nations, which has been
working in the region since July 2013, should continue
and step up its efforts. I wish to welcome the regional
projects carried out by the Organization to foster
security, in particular the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force of the Department of Political Affairs.
Security is at the heart of development. The goal
should be to wage a relentless war against jihadists,
terrorists, criminals and traffickers. Particular
emphasis must be placed on strengthening cooperation,
especially with the Maghreb, by involving police,
customs and education services, creating a regional
and subregional database and stepping up information
exchange.
Moreover, young people must be made aware of the
true teachings of religion, so as to prevent radicalization

S/PV.7203

and involvement in the ranks of terrorist and criminal
groups. We must also provide solutions to the economic
problems of youth. We must highlight to young people
the crucial role of traditional and religious leaders in
preventing and resolving conflict.
Security in and of itself is not enough; there must
be a major campaign with regard to resilience, given
the Sahel’s acute development problems and its grave
humanitarian difficulties. In spite of the efforts made
by the countries of the region, at least 20 million people
face the risk of food insecurity, with 4.1 million already
in a critical stated, almost 5 million children threatened
by acute malnutrition and more than 1.5 million
refugees and displaced persons as a result of epidemics
and natural disasters. I welcome the regional initiatives
by all the agencies of the United Nations system aimed
at strengthening the people’s resiliency.
We ask that particular attention be focused on
women by way of access to productive elements such
as land, financing and credit, technology and so forth.
Young people should also receive support in the areas
of education and access to decent employment.
We are embittered at seeing the degradation of
the environment as a result of climate change. We call
for adaptation and mitigation measures, in particular
through adaptation and the management of watersheds,
including those in Chad and the Niger River, as well as
by the implementation of the Great Green Wall for the
Sahara and the Sahel Initiative.
We must also encourage investment in herding
communities and create avenues for development
that can serve to settle people and improve their
living conditions. In that regard, we call for support
for national development programmes and regional
initiatives, in particular those developed by the African
Union and other institutions in the Sahel.
It is also crucial that we resolve the energy crisis in
the Sahel by emphasizing investments and by exploiting
the limitless potential of renewable energy, including
solar, wind, geothermal and biomass.
All of that will require considerable financial
resources, which should be provided through flexible
disbursement procedures, so as to effectively support
efforts in the Sahel. In that regard, we hope that the
Sahel Action Fund being put in place at the ADB will
bring substantial added value for the implementation of
the projects identified.

14-435425/21

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

We also count on the support of the World Bank,
the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) and all other
bilateral and multilateral partners to provide ongoing
financial and technical support to the countries of the
region, especially the five countries singled out in the
Sahel strategy. We commend the putting in place of a
coordination mechanism for the strategy. We welcome
the fact that the ministerial coordination platform for
the Sahel, currently led by Mali, provides a framework
to consider the major problems in the region and to
arrive at a common understanding on the initiatives and
follow up the progress achieved.
We remain optimistic that close collaboration
between the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the High Representative of the African
Union, as co-chairs of the technical secretariat for the
coordination platform, will be strengthened with a view
to coordinating and harmonizing initiatives.
We also welcome the development of an
implementation plan for the strategy covering the
period 2014 to 2016. We take note of the move of the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral from Rome to Dakar on 1 January.
Chad also welcomes the drafting of various
initiatives aimed at resolving the manifold and complex
problems affecting the Sahel, including the African
Union strategy for the Sahel, the European Union
strategy for security and development in the Sahel,
the joint Sahel programme of the Permanent Interstate
Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel and the
IDB, the regional programme for the Sahel being
developed by the World Bank, which is focused on
resilience and the economic perspective, the Sahel
strategy of the Economic Community of West African
States and other relevant initiatives.
We hope that the strategy, given its evolving nature,
will take on the main priorities of development as set
forth in relevant national and regional development
programmes. In that context, in order to better
contribute to meeting the objectives set, Chad has
already appointed a coordinator for each of the three
objectives of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel. In that regard, we ask that a formal working
group with the Permanent Missions in New York of the
countries of the Sahel region to ensure follow-up in the
development and implementation of initiativies.
In conclusion, we hope that pursuant resolution
68/247, section VI, para. 13, the title of the current

6/21

19/06/2014

Special Envoy be raised to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral level to enhance the scope of the Office’s
action to match the level of the challenges to be met in
the vast region of the Sahel.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
for her statement and wish to express to her, on behalf
of France, our full support in carrying out her new
mandate.
The crisis in Mali, which has marshalled a large
part of our energy for more than a year, symbolizes to
the extreme the fragility of the Sahel. What is the added
value of the United Nations to help the Sahel countries
to face those challenges? The United Nations strategy
should respond by striving to attain three objectives.
First, the strategy must define a common
transnational approach to all agencies. The approach
should be transnational because the United Nations
response to the problems of the Sahel with regard to
humanitarian, security and development issues has long
been segmented according to States. That does not make
sense to respond to problems that are transnational in
nature, be they issues of security or climate or related
to the situation of nomadic peoples of the Sahel. Next, a
common approach by all United Nations agencies is also
essential in all areas. Terrorism feeds on governance
and development problems. Conversely, security issues
have a negative impact on economic growth of the States
of the Sahel. Without security there is no development
and without development there is also no security.
I commend the United Nations on those two aspects
for the work it has accomplished in the last two years
under the coordination of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa. His work has
provided a good foundation for a regional and integrated
approach by the United Nations.
Secondly, the United Nations should help all
stakeholders to coordinate their efforts for the Sahel.
A good example in that regard is the Malian crisis.
The coordination among all international actors is not
obvious. Yet it is essential if the parameters of a lasting
peace in Mali are to be defined. The United Nations
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) have a key
role to play in that process, as the Security Council has
pointed out.
Across the Sahel, many initiatives and forums
bring together the countries of the region in different
14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

configurations — the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union,
“countries of the field” and the Group of Five for the
Sahel, among others. In addition, international partners
have developed their own approach to the Sahel; for
example, the European Union has its own strategy for
the Sahel, as do the African Union, ECOWAS, and the
World Bank, with its Sahel initiative. We must ensure
that those multiple initiatives are coordinated in an
efficient manner. In that context, the United Nations
and the Special Envoy can play a role of good offices
to bring together the regional and international efforts
in the Sahel.
In that context, the coordination platform for the
integrated strategy in the Sahel, implemented on the
occasion of the visit of the Secretary-General to the
Sahel in November 2013, is a unique framework. It is
being chaired by Mali for two years, and the United
Nations and the African Union provide the secretariat.
The platform is the only forum that brings together all
the countries of West Africa and the Maghreb, as well as
the international and regional organizations concerned.
Thirdly and most important, the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel must lead to concrete
projects in all areas. In the area of governance, the next
year will be marked by a large number of elections
in the Sahel and West Africa, which are all tests for
the robustness of these States. The task of the United
Nations is to assist States wanting such assistance in
organizing the deadlines in a transparent and credible
manner.
In the area of security, the Secretary-General
recalls that the terrorist attacks in the Maghreb and
Sahel grew by 60 per cent in 2013 compared to 2012,
which includes 230 incidents throughout the region. As
members of the Council know, France is very involved
in helping the countries of the region. We intervened
directly at the request of the Malian authorities and in
support of our African partners. The Elysée Summit
for Peace and Security in Africa in December 2013
provided an opportunity for African countries to
intensify their cooperation in order to strengthen their
security capabilities and their ability to respond to
crises. For its part, the United Nations can contribute
to that effort.
In the humanitarian and development areas, extreme
poverty is a root cause of problems in the Sahel. That
is compounded by a fast-growing population, which
weighs on the development of those countries. In 2014,

S/PV.7203

the number of people suffering from food insecurity
in the region is estimated to be over 20 million. Five
million children are threatened by a risk of serious
malnutrition. The development of desert areas should
be a major focus of our efforts, in support of pastoralism
and the development of infrastructure to open up those
spaces. We welcome the commitment of international
partners in that area.
The decision of Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in February in Rome to launch
a consolidated appeal for the Sahel for $2 billion
over three years is innovative. It is the first time that
a multiannual approach has been adopted. It adds to
the major commitments of the World Bank and the
European Union. France, the largest bilateral donor in
the region, has also decided to increase its commitment
to €900 million for the period 2014 to 2015.
In conclusion, I would like to call for the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel not to be
just another theoretical document, disconnected from
reality. The problems plaguing the Sahel are too
serious for us to let that happen. The United Nations
strategy must be genuinely at the service of the States
and peoples of the Sahel and should lead to practical
solutions.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s briefing on the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. I
congratulate Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie on her recent
appointment as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel and thank her for her briefing. I take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the former Special Envoy,
Mr. Romano Prodi, for his work and contribution in the
launching and initial implementation of the strategy for
the Sahel.
Since the last briefing on the strategy, the regional
security and humanitarian landscape have continued to
be of concern. Porous borders and weak State structures
throughout the region, compounded by specific
challenges in Libya and Mali, and the increasing
activities of Boko Haram in Nigeria, especially along
the borders with Chad and Cameroon, provide an
enabling environment for increased illicit activities
and potential instability in the subregion. Although
several initiatives and meetings have taken place, the
pace of implementation of concrete projects aimed at
addressing the root causes of conflicts and creating
resilience in the populations of the region needs to
be accelerated. In the same vein, we would like to

14-435427/21

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

emphasize the importance of ownership, political will
and trust among Governments of the region, which are
critical for the success of those initiatives. In that regard,
the development of the 2014-2016 implementation plan
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
is encouraging. Allow me to make a few comments on
some of the pillars of that strategy.
On governance, we welcome activities that were
undertaken to address challenges related to women’s
participation in the political process, the promotion of
social cohesion and job creation and income-generating
activities, with a focus on youth. In addition, we would
like to stress that strengthening the capacity of the
countries of the region to ensure the effectiveness of
the State authority will enable regional States to protect
populations and borders. In that regard, there is a need
to associate and coordinate with different regional
actors, such as the Economic Community of West
African States, Maghreb countries, the African Union
(AU) and United Nations agencies.
On resilience and the humanitarian situation, we
are pleased to note the development of the strategic
response plan for 2014-2016. The region is facing
chronic humanitarian needs, with more than 20 million
people in need, including refugees and internally
displaced persons. Unfortunately, the response to those
needs has been below expectations. We call on partners,
especially the financial partners, such as the European
Union, World Bank and the African Development
Bank, to honour their pledges by supporting enabling
projects for the people of the region. It is also important
that countries of the Sahel region, as well as the whole
African continent, improve the management of natural
resources in order to move towards self-resilience and
long-term sovereignty.
On security, the scourge of terrorism and extremism
has not spared the Sahel region, with unprecedented
security and humanitarian consequences. There is
a need for a regional response to a regional threat,
as demonstrated by the increased terrorism in the
region and in Libya and northern Mali. Terrorism is
increasingly becoming interconnected throughout
Africa — from Boko Haram in Nigeria, Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb and Ansar Dine in Mali, and
Ansar Al-Sharia in Libya to Al-Shabaab in Somalia,
and from the Maghreb to East Africa and the Horn
through West Africa, with links to Syria, Yemen and
other parts of the world. This is a worrying situation,
threatening the African and world stability. We need

8/21

19/06/2014

now to have proactive policies and mechanisms and
concrete measures to prevent the proliferation of those
negative groups. Those measures can succeed only
if the United Nations works hand in hand with the
regional and subregional organizations to enhance and
sustain innovative mechanisms aimed at foreseeing and
preventing terrorist activities instead of managing their
deadly consequences.
Rwanda would like to stress that security should be
one of the key priorities of the Sahel strategy, with a focus
on enhancing cross-border cooperation and building
capacity for better border control and management.
At the same time, we would like to encourage regional
initiatives to enhance security cooperation in the Sahel
in order to combat terrorism, transnational crime, and
arms and drug trafficking more effectively. In that
regard, Rwanda welcomes the holding of the meeting
organized by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in Nouakchott in May 2014.
In conclusion, Rwanda commends the important
work done by the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoys in coordinating initiatives with the African
Union, represented by President Pierre Buyoya, AU High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel; the World Bank;
the African Development Bank and other interlocutors
in the region, with a view to giving momentum to the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. We
pledge our continued support for those activities and
call on Governments of the region to fully utilize the
demonstrated international will to support the Sahel
region.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I congratulate
Ms. Hiroute Sellassie on her appointment as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel. I also
thank her for her briefings on the progress in the
implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel.
The Sahel region, which stretches across an
extensive transitional area of Africa, has faced many
complex and interconnected challenges. The region
remains vulnerable and susceptible to food insecurity,
terrorism and drug and arms trafficking, among others.
In particular, the security challenges in Libya, the
recent violent clashes in northern Mali and terrorist
attacks by Boko Haram in Nigeria have had a negative
impact on the civilian and local economies of the Sahel
region.

14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

As such, the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, which encompasses the three sectors
of governance, security and resilience, serves as an
invaluable framework to ensure a comprehensive and
coordinated approach to addressing such multifaceted
challenges. We believe that the full and timely
implementation of the strategy is of utmost importance.
In that vein, I would like to touch upon three points
regarding the implementation of the strategy.
First, it is important to strengthen the long-term
capacity of the Governments in the Sahel region
through the United Nations strategy. Capacity-building
can also foster the political will and national ownership
of the Governments concerned. In particular, given the
seriousness of the security challenges surrounding the
porous borders of the Sahel region, capacity-building
for border control, counter-terrorism, combating
transnational organized crime, and preventing violent
extremism needs to be urgently implemented.
Another element required is ensuring overall
coherence and complementarity. Taking into account
the various regional initiatives for the Sahel, it is
imperative to have an effective coordination and
coherence mechanism. The regional organizations,
based on their comparative advantages, should seek
to create synergies with other initiatives in order to
maximize the effectiveness of assistance and avoid the
duplication of effort. In that regard, we note that the
second meeting of the ministerial coordination platform
on strategies for the Sahel, which was held in Bamako
on 16 May, we called for the continued coordination
and priority setting through such mechanisms.
Finally, more focus should be placed on women
and young people, who are the potential driving force
for the development of the Sahel region. Women play a
key role in food production in the Sahel and often show
resilience to natural and economic shocks. Moreover,
unemployed young people are taken advantage of by
terrorist and extremist groups under circumstances of
poverty and food insecurity. Ensuring their participation
in the political process and empowering them through
assistance and support would greatly contribute to the
promotion of governance, security and resilience in the
Sahel region.
It is essential that the international community
maintain its engagement and commitment to the Sahel.
The Republic of Korea is committed to supporting those
efforts to promote peace, stability and development in
the region.

S/PV.7203

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Like others, we welcome
Ms. Guebre Sellassie to her first Council briefing as
Special Envoy.
Today’s meeting is important in maintaining the
spotlight on the ongoing humanitarian, governance
and security challenges in the Sahel region and on the
United Nations response. As we have been warned time
and again, we cannot forget the Sahel or we will face
more crises like the one experienced in Mali.
Recent developments are very worrying. They
include clashes between the Government and armed
groups in northern Mali, the deteriorating security
situation in Libya, and the increasing impact of Boko
Haram. Civilians across the region face the persistent
threat of violence and food insecurity. Terrorism and
organized crime are harming legitimate economic
opportunities, undermining Government capabilities
and creating political instability. That in turn is allowing
armed groups to expand their influence. There are new
flows of refugees and internally displaced people.
As we know, just as the problems transcend
borders, so too must their solutions. The United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel provides a truly crossregional platform to address those challenges. The
focus must now be on the implementation of all three
pillars of the strategy — governance, security and
resilience — prioritizing the highest impact activities. I
will focus on three issues.
First, we must look at coordination. The Sahel
strategy is a tool for coordination, both within the
United Nations and more broadly, internationally. It
should assist in promoting coherence of the actions
of regional and international actors so that time and
resources are not wasted. We are encouraged by the
growing leadership from the region, including through
the ministerial coordination platform, which met in
Bamako in May. We welcome United Nations and
African Union support for the platform. We also note
the establishment of the Group of Five for the Sahel
to facilitate coordination among Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Mauritania and the Niger. Complementarity and
the synchronization of those initiatives will obviously
be vital.
Secondly, we must deal with terrorism. Africa,
as we know, has become a central theatre in the fight
against terrorism. The evolving nature of the Al-Qaida
network poses particular threats to the Sahel region,
where terrorist attacks increased last year by an

14-435429/21

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

alarming 60 per cent — the highest level in the past
12 years. Al-Qaida affiliates in the Sahel exploit local
conflicts. Their leadership is younger, more prone to
brutal violence and less responsive to community
leaders, and they are more independently resourced,
raising money through the taking of territory, organized
crime and kidnapping for ransom.
Tackling the terrorist threat requires measured
security and law enforcement approaches coupled with
community-based action to counter violent extremism.
Regional Governments need to diminish the appeal of
terrorism to vulnerable populations, especially youth,
who are at particular risk of radicalization and who form
the largest demographic constituency in the region.
Countering violent extremism is complex, but
it is more relevant than ever in preventing terrorism
and conflict. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
increased focus on the issue and the priority the
Regional Working Group on Security has given it. That
policy leadership now needs to be followed by concrete
activities. Strengthening engagement between the
Department of Political Affairs, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate will continue to be
important, and we urge the United Nations to leverage
the full range of development and security entities to
build community resilience against terrorism.
The Council has a specific instrument to tackle
the Al-Qaida threat — namely, the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. However, its effectiveness depends upon the
ability of affected States to use the regime as part of
their national and regional counter-terrorism strategies.
We need to do more to empower and encourage
the countries of the Sahel to do so. As Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, we have worked to improve collaboration
with regional authorities to identify individuals and
entities who should be targeted by the regime.
Finally, on resilience, which is the third pillar of the
strategy, over 20 million people in the Sahel — a number
equal to the population of Australia — are threatened
by food insecurity, including 5 million children facing
acute malnutrition. An entire generation is at risk.
As the number of people confronting food insecurity,
weather extremes, instability and violence grows, the
need for a comprehensive approach to preventing and
addressing those threats is self-evident. We welcome
the efforts to date of the Regional Working Group on
10/21

19/06/2014

Resilience towards promoting systemic change on
resilience.
We are pleased that the humanitarian community’s
three-year strategic response plan for the Sahel is well
aligned with the Regional Working Group’s efforts. We
encourage the international community to continue
support in line with that strategic approach. Australia’s
humanitarian assistance to the Sahel region, which
amounted to over $60 million in the past year, has
aimed to bridge the gap between humanitarian relief
and development by building community resilience and
addressing the root causes of chronic malnutrition.
In conclusion, we are confident we have the tool,
in the integrated strategy, to help address the region’s
interconnected challenges in an integrated way.
The focus, self-evidently, must now be on concrete
initiatives. We look forward to the release of the 20142016 implementation plan very soon, and we wish the
Special Envoy well in her work and stand very ready to
support her.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/397)
on progress towards the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, presented by his Special Envoy,
Ms. Guebre Sellasie. We take this opportunity to
congratulate her on her appointment and to recognize
the work done by her predecessor, Mr. Romano Prodi.
The report describes the initiatives taken and
progress made in implementation of the governance,
security and resilience pillars laid out in the integrated
strategy for the Sahel, while recognizing the complex
challenges and tasks that must be faced to make
progress in terms of peace and stability in the region.
We note the regional initiatives and the meetings and
programmes hosted by the United Nations through
its agencies and other members of the international
community. They illustrate the importance attached to
the situation in the region and the urgency of making
progress towards concrete results.
My delegation believes special attention should be
paid to strengthening the rule of law and its institutions
and engaging in cooperation to that end. We appreciate
the series of meetings held under the theme of the first
strategic objective, namely governance, particularly
considering that a large number of countries will have
elections in the coming two years and they will need
to be credible, transparent and clean. In that regard,
we would like to highlight the importance of ensuring

14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

the full and effective participation of women in those
electoral processes from their earliest stages and, in
general, in the public political arena and the economic
sector. We acknowledge the efforts and work that the
United Nations Office for West Africa, UN-Women and
the Economic Community of West African States are
carrying out in this area.
In relation to the second objective, which is
security, the region now faces a complex and difficult
situation. The report describes the events in Mali and
Libya and the activities of terrorist groups in the region.
The uncertainty facing the region due to transnational
crime, the activities of extremist groups, trafficking in
arms and drugs and environmental issues, among other
challenges, continues to hamper progress and requires
a swift and appropriate response.
There was a 60 per cent increase in terrorist attacks
in the Sahel and the Maghreb between 2012 and 2013
and an increase in the presence of extremist groups
and jihadists. Enhanced efforts are therefore needed
so that the countries of the region, with the support of
the international community, can proceed to establish
mechanisms or instruments that enable them to respond
to those threats. Only a coordinated response in which
there is a fluid exchange of information between national
entities will allow them to confront those scourges. We
welcome, in that respect, the first meeting of officials
from the police, customs and intelligence services who
are responsible for border control in 11 countries of the
Sahel and Maghreb.
In terms of resilience, the humanitarian situation
in the region is fragile, and the numbers in the report
are troubling. Twenty million people at risk of food
insecurity, 5 million children at risk of malnutrition and
over 1.5 million displaced are alarming figures. We hope
that the development for the first time of a three-year plan
with a view to providing a comprehensive multisectoral
response and generating stronger partnerships between
the humanitarian community and the development
community will respond to those pressing needs. We
hope to have more background on the development and
implementation of that plan.
At a time when there is talk of donor fatigue,
it seems necessary to not only rethink mechanisms
to respond to emergencies, but to be generating
mechanisms or partnerships to make progress in the
region’s development. Failure to respond adequately
to these situations is to risk allowing criminals and
extremist organizations to use precisely such conditions

S/PV.7203

to capture and recruit vulnerable groups, in particular
youth.
We take note of the various initiatives and
mechanisms adopted in order to make progress on
implementing the integrated strategy for the Sahel.
We stress the importance of all such initiatives and
mechanisms being properly coordinated and maintained
over time and, in particular, responding to priorities
determined by the countries themselves. Such an
approach in which, alongside national ownership, the
link between the rule of law, security and development
will be recognized, will allow for the complex situation
in the region to be adequately addressed.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel, Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, for her
valuable briefing, which complemented the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/397) on the progress
towards the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel.
Despite the major challenges facing the region
caused by the long years of civil conflict, the persistent
efforts of the international community, the United
Nations and its entities, stakeholders and regional
organizations have yielded some progress. Jordan
affirms the close link and interdependence among the
strategy’s three pillars of governance, security and
resilience. In that context, we emphasize the following
main points.
First, while the countries of the Sahel may
urgently require sustained efforts to integrate correct
governance principles and build governance structures
after years of civil conflict, that process must be based
on a stable security situation. It is well known that the
security challenge in the Sahel region is not limited to
containing or ending civil conflict. It requires further
efforts to deal with the trafficking of small arms, illicit
drugs, valuable resources and livestock. Obviously,
the financial windfalls of such operations may be
used to finance the terrorist activities of extremist
organizations inside and beyond the region, given
the very close linkages between organized crime and
terrorism, especially the pervasive corruption and weak
State control of the borders.
Secondly, Jordan has repeatedly affirmed the
need to focus on partnership and inclusiveness of
all groupings — including the religious, ethnic and
political sectors — in efforts to restore stability and

14-4354211/21

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

rebuild State institutions in the Sahel. Alienation and
marginalization policies have led to growing outrage
on the part of some groups, thereby broadening social
divisions that have led to increased civil strife based
on religious, ethnic and tribal factors that have proved
extremely difficult to overcome in the recovery period.
As witnessed recently, extremist groups have exploited
civil conflicts in various regions of the African
continent so as to broaden their influence and win the
sympathy of sectors of society that have provided them
with an enabling environment that has allowed them
to penetrate national security agencies and target the
international presence.
Thirdly, addressing the difficult humanitarian
situation faced by certain countries of the Sahel
requires concerted national and international action and
persistent efforts to lessen the humanitarian suffering
resulting from that situation. In that context, Jordan
affirms the need for efficient burden-sharing among
national and international parties based on each party’s
competencies and comparative advantage. We must
also work diligently to achieve economic development
and create employment opportunities, especially for
the young, and provide incentives for migrating capital
to return to the homeland, as an important part of the
effort to attract investment, while focusing on education
as a long-term investment to ensure stability. It is also
important to strengthen and rebuild judicial institutions
to ensure the entrenching of the rule of law.
Finally, the coordinated efforts of national and
international stakeholders and regional organizations
to implement the strategy require continued monitoring
and evaluation, in view of possible changes in the field
that may, in turn, require adjusting some elements
of the strategy. We also reaffirm the importance of
accurately measuring the impact of efforts to implement
the strategy in the field and to redirect financial and
human resources to achieve the desired outcome most
efficiently.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Russia for organizing this meeting on the Sahel
under its presidency of the Security Council. My thanks
also go to the new Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel, Ms. Guebre Sellassie, for her
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
on the progress achieved in implementing the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel (S/2014/397).
The report rightly highlights the importance to the
international community of taking a coordinated

12/21

19/06/2014

approach to strengthening governance, security,
resilience and development in the Sahel region.
Since the beginning of the year, the security
situation has deteriorated in northern Mali, Libya and
around Lake Chad. We have witnessed an increasing
number of violent actions on the part of the terrorist
group Boko Haram, and human rights violations and
attacks on civilians and members of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, perpetrated by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique
de l’Ouest, Ansar Dine and Al-Mourabitoune. Those
terrorist groups and the criminal networks proliferating
throughout the region represent cross-border threats to
peace and security that undermine States’ authority and
hamper development opportunities.
No State is capable of countering the threat alone;
strengthened regional cooperation and the support
of the international community are needed. Recent
activities of the Group of Five for the Sahel — the new
regional group comprising Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger— the ongoing efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
continuing Nouakchott process initiated by the African
Union amply illustrate the readiness of countries in the
region to strengthen cooperation in security matters.
Beyond security, it is important that the Sahel
States make sustained efforts, with the support of the
international community, to find lasting solutions to
the root causes of instability in the region that have
allowed criminal networks and terrorist groups to
thrive. We must respond to the structural humanitarian
crisis — particularly food security — and support
sustainable and inclusive socioeconomic development
that creates jobs and ensures basic social services and
the development of agriculture and infrastructure,
based on lessons learned. Particular attention should
be focused on border areas and on the infrastructure
that facilitates regional integration. That will further
improve territorial control and strengthen States’
authority over their territory.
In addition, strengthening democracy, establishing
Government infrastructure conducive to development,
fighting corruption, promoting and protecting human
rights, as well as reconciliation and decentralization,
should in our view be at the heart of the action for peace
and security in the Sahel. Indeed, resilient democratic
institutions are a bulwark against violent radicalization
and the emergence of national and regional conflicts.
14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Today we are witnessing a proliferation of initiatives
and international coordination frameworks that reflects
the difficulty of developing a common approach to
solving the multiple crises that affect the Sahel. Faced
with that proliferation, a pragmatic approach is needed.
In that context, we believe that the key role should be
played by the coordination platform for Sahel strategies,
whose chairmanship will be held by Mali from 2013 to
2015. That platform, which was established during the
joint visit to the region by the Secretary-General and
the President of the World Bank last November, has the
advantage of bringing together around the same table
all the players of the region and their partners, which of
course include the European Union. It responds to the
need for national and regional ownership and is backed
up by a technical secretariat.
We would like to take the opportunity this meeting
offers to encourage the United Nations system as a
whole, along with all the relevant players, to strengthen
in a coordinated way their regional added-value
programmes in accord with the road map adopted
during the second ministerial meeting of the platform
for the coordination of strategies for the Sahel, which
was held on 16 May in Bamako.
For our part, through our bilateral and regional
cooperation programmes, our contributions to the
involvement of the European Union and regional actors
and as a new member, since last month, of the African
Development Bank, Luxembourg is determined to
continue working to strengthen the partnership and the
solidarity between the international community and the
countries of the Sahel region.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Hiroute Guebre Sellassie for her briefing and
take this opportunity to welcome her to her new role.
I also want to thank the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for West Africa, Said Djinnit, for his
work over recent months to begin the implementation
of the integrated strategy.
Recent developments again underscored the deep
inter-connections between States in the Sahel region.
Events in northern Mali in May affected not only Mali
itself but the wider region, and the barbaric attacks of
Boko Haram in northern Nigeria damaged not only the
prosperity and security of Nigeria but also that of its
immediate neighbours. To address the threat of Boko
Haram, the British Foreign Secretary hosted a meeting
on 12 June, in London, to further boost regional
cooperation against Boko Haram. Representatives from

S/PV.7203

Nigeria and other countries of the region, the African
Union, the United Nations and the European Union
attended that meeting, following the Paris summit of
17 May. Participants at the meeting highlighted that
the issue of Boko Haram spreads further than Nigeria’s
borders. They agreed to law enforcement, military and
intelligence cooperation to help combat the terrorist
threat, and they stressed that security and stability
could be achieved only through respect for human
rights, alleviating poverty, creating jobs, strengthening
the rule of law and building accountable governance.
The complexity and scope of the challenges in
the region, taken with what is required to meet them,
justify the adoption by the integrated strategy of a
flexible definition of the broad Sahel-Sahara region.
The broader view is right. It enables the United Nations
and the wider international community to flex their
responses across the region according to priority needs.
We fully support the integrated strategy’s
three-pillared approach to activity in the Sahel.
All three pillars — governance, security and
resilience — are linked. Without concerted progress
across each of those agendas, it will be difficult to make
lasting overall progress. The Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2014/397) shows us that progress has been
made in all three areas. It shows what can be achieved
by mobilizing both multilateral organizations and the
States of the Sahel region. One year into the strategy’s
implementation phase, more still needs to be done.
First, in the immediate term, with the onset of the
annual lean season, the international community must
be ready to alleviate the hardship of food insecurity.
As the representative of France already pointed out,
an estimated 20 million people will endure the pains
of food insecurity this year: that is one in eight across
the region. The United Kingdom, through its continued
commitment to provide 0.7 per cent of gross domestic
product for development assistance, stands ready to do
our part.
Secondly, looking ahead, we must help Sahel
States to manage their porous borders more efficiently
and enable them to deliver core services such as
health, education and justice. The United Kingdom
will continue to work with its partners, including the
European Union, to help achieve that.
Thirdly, as the Secretary-General’s report notes, we
should also encourage the development of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, and we should encourage those five

14-4354213/21

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

countries to enhance their cooperation across a broad
regional agenda, including economic cooperation.
The Secretary-General’s report calls for an
increased level of coordination to make our efforts as
effective as possible. The United Kingdom agrees with
that conclusion and will support the Special Envoy
for the Sahel as she leads the implementation of the
integrated strategy and seeks to strengthen governance,
resilience and security across the Sahel.
Ms. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I
also thank Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for the Sahel, for her briefing.
We welcome her following her recent appointment to a
post of such enormous responsibility. Argentina believes
that her responsibility is enormous, because that is how
we see it here in the Council and throughout the United
Nations. The Sahel is one of the areas with the lowest
human development indices in the world. The Sahel
continues to suffer from enormous shortcomings and
it must face longstanding injustices and new threats,
such as environmental degradation, to mention only
one among so many others. As we see with the conflicts
in the Sudan, Libya and Mali, we have not been able to
provide a response to the underlying causes of those
conflicts, nor to the numerous illegal networks, nor to
the threats represented by the various extremist and
terrorist groups operating in the region.
However, Argentina has expressed on other
occasions that religious beliefs in and of themselves are
not the cause of conflicts. There is no religious belief
or holy text that is based on hate and that promotes
the destruction of peace. That does not exist in any
religious belief. What we have in these cases is a
mediocre level of politicization on the part of some who
hold certain religious beliefs that they contrast with
others, creating contradictions and incompatibilities.
By the same token, poverty and inequality are not in
and of themselves a threat to security; rather, they are
a challenge for sustainable human development. But we
also know that vulnerable, impoverished people who
face discrimination and exclusion, in the absence of
jobs, education and social cohesion, are used as tools
by extremist and terrorist groups and by transnational
criminal networks in order to make them look less like
outcasts.
The Security Council should not be surprised to
learn that young men and women are used by terrorist
or extremist elements or by international organized
14/21

19/06/2014

crime, when the world is under the sway of economic
models that encourage runaway consumerism, obscene
gains and profits, in which the principle of solidarity
is eroded the law of the jungle, and where financial
markets, without ethics or law, define the future of
peoples and States.
We cannot be surprised about such realities. That is
why we are having this debate. And in the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly, we have the
challenge of dealing with the post-2015 and sustainable
development goals. The Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/397) does not state this specifically, but it
clearly lays out those challenges.
When looking at specific conflicts in this region,
Argentina has repeatedly emphasized the importance
of keeping our eye firmly on the Sahel, underscoring
the importance of having an integrated United Nations
strategy that encompasses all the various aspects
mentioned by my colleagues — security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.
Therefore, when Mr. Prodi introduced the integrated
strategy to us, we expressed our expectation that it
would constitute an important step towards imposing
greater coherence and effectiveness on the existing
multitude of parallel and simultaneous national,
regional and international programmes.
I do not wish to always be perceived as a voice of
doubt and suspicion, but it is really very difficult to
accept that if cooperation and coordination constitute
an ethical and political decision aimed at cooperating
with the Sahel region and enabling us to solve the
extreme suffering there, this clearly indicates that
failing to coordinate and to confront the obstacles is
also a political decision. I would therefore say to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General that if there
can be a policy of coordinating action, there can also
be a policy that decides not to do so. We thus insist on
the need for greater cohesion and effectiveness in the
many regional, national and international programmes
that the report describes.
We must hear and understand the struggles over
who has real power in the Sahel and among external
actors. A naive attitude and cosmetic changes will
not help to improve security, democracy, the rule of
law, development or human rights. We have to know
what the dispute is about and who is disputing it. I
also believe that it is very important that, instead of
directing accusations at those who believe in whatever
god, we should be looking at the women and children
14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

who are living in poverty. Let us listen to and welcome
the regional meetings where plans are being discussed
for the challenges in the Sahel, such as the meeting on
16 May of the ministerial coordination platform for the
Sahel, currently chaired by Mali, or the meeting on
16 February launching the Group of Five for the Sahel.
These demonstrate the national ownership of the issue
by the countries of the region, and we should listen to
them in order to understand and thus to learn.
Finally, and briefly, I would like to note three
issues that constitute a challenge for the region, as
my delegation sees it. The first is that while primary
responsibility for peace, security and development in
the Sahel lies with the countries of the region, Argentina
firmly believes in the importance of support from
the international community and the United Nations,
especially bearing in mind the other challenges that are
also affecting the Sahel, such as climate change and
the economic and financial crisis resulting from the
actions of the richest countries in the world. We should
also take into consideration the issues of financing for
humanitarian assistance and that for 2014 the Sahel’s
humanitarian needs will reach $2 billion.
Secondly, many of the problems we are seeing are
the result of deep-rooted causes that require meaningful
solutions, not merely palliative ones. Saying that we are
ready to eradicate poverty is not the same thing as being
willing to reduce extreme poverty. We must affirm that
we are willing to cooperate in recognizing and ensuring
that women have full enjoyment of their human rights
by helping them to become small business owners or
parliamentarians, when constitutions change.
Lastly, for the Sahel, too, we must initiate profound
change to tackle this crisis and modify the organization
and structures of the global economic system so that
its economic instruments can become tools that help
human development rather than the other way around.
We commend the progress that has been made in much
of the region and on the African continent and the work
of the regional and subregional organizations working
on preventing conflict and on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, as well as in the areas of development
and the protection and promotion of human rights.
I would like to point out that it would be helpful
for the next report to include detailed information on
the progress of th edisbursement of the $1.5 billion
for new regional investments promised by the World
Bank during the joint visit to the region in November
2013 by its President and the Secretary-General, which

S/PV.7203

we believe was very important. Regarding all the
programmes and funds mentioned in the report, we
would like to have objective data on the financial totals
dedicated to each of the strategic pillars in order to be
able follow them up in detail.
There are many challenges, but Argentina is
convinced that while the countries and peoples of the
Sahel have a difficult road ahead of them, no country
should have to despair. We take note of the comments
of Chad, and we believe that the proposal for putting
together a formal working group to include the
representatives of the countries of the region here in
New York is a very interesting idea.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I would like
to begin by thanking the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for her briefing. We welcome Ms. Guebre
Sellassie’s taking on of this critically important post
and look forward to working with her. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report and his leadership on this issue.
As we come together to discuss the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
it is worth noting that this entire initiative is built on the
premise that the serious security challenges facing the
Sahel are by definition regional. Whether we are speaking
of groups carrying out attacks across borders, droughts
leading to regional food insecurity or a humanitarian
crisis in one country that displaces refugees to several
others, we know that these problems are not confined
to any one State, and their solutions cannot be either. In
order to address such complex transnational problems
effectively, we must come up with regional solutions
and enlist a full range of actors in carrying them out,
including Governments, multilateral and regional
institutions, non-governmental organizations and civil
society groups.
I would divide the challenges we face in the
Sahel — and by “we” I mean all of us who care about
the region and its people and who see its security and
stability as tied to our own — into two categories.
The first consists of emergencies and immediate
crises, such as the current instability in Libya and the
deteriorating situation in northern Mali, where we
have seen renewed fighting. I would also include the
growing threat posed by Boko Haram, because, while
it was that group’s brazen kidnapping of schoolgirls
that captured international headlines — and let me be
clear, the outrage their abduction has generated is fully
justified — that was not an isolated attack. Indeed,

14-4354215/21

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

Boko Haram was attacking innocent civilians long
before that incident, and since then it has continued to
mount attacks with alarming regularity and increasing
lethality. Just a few weeks ago, the group massacred
scores of citizens along Nigeria’s border with Cameroon.
It is estimated that the group has killed more than 1,800
civilians this year alone.
There is a clear consensus that the deeds of those
extremists, like the instability in Mali and Libya, must
be met with a coordinated international response. That
consensus was reflected in the ministerial meeting
hosted last week by the Government of the United
Kingdom, at which the Foreign Ministers of Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, as well as representatives
of the European Union, France, Canada, the United
Nations, the African Union and my Government
agreed upon a unified response to the crisis in Nigeria.
That meeting produced concrete commitments from
all of the participating countries — from beefing up
the multinational joint task force to strengthening
the sanctions against Boko Haram’s leaders at the
international and national levels to ensure that neither
their militants nor their coffers find safe haven.
That consensus is reflected at the regional
level, as well, in the ongoing work of the ministerial
coordination platform, which brings together five
Sahelian Governments to collaborate on security and
development issues. That same consensus undergirds
President Obama’s announcement a few weeks ago
of the Counterterrorism Partnerships Fund, which is
aiming to work with allies and partners worldwide
to respond to the evolving threat posed by violent
extremism, including in the Sahel.
The second category of challenges in the Sahel
consists of the longer-term chronic problems faced
by the region, such as wide-spread environmental
degradation, chronic food insecurity and the lack
of opportunities for the region’s young people. To
cite one alarming statistic, at least 20 million people
are at risk of food insecurity in the Sahel and nearly
5 million children are at risk of acute malnutrition.
Those chronic long-term problems may seem less
pressing on the surface, but left unaddressed, chronic
problems become crises, and crises demand urgent and
often more costly or risk-fraught responses. So if we
know that youth under the age of 25 form the largest
constituency in the Sahel and that they are the hardest
hit by the growing unemployment in the region, and if
we know that young people who have no opportunities

16/21

19/06/2014

are particularly vulnerable to radicalization and
recruitment into extremist groups, then we must invest
more in expanding opportunities for young men and
women in the region.
I would like to offer a few recommendations as we
continue to work together to address those challenges
in the Sahel. While we are on the right track towards
adopting a regional multilateral approach to those
complex problems, we need to improve our coordination.
That means being more mindful of avoiding overlap in
prioritizing resouces to ensure that the ones we have
provided are used in the most efficient and effective
way possible.
Secondly, we must invest in prevention and we
must invest in resilience. We need to do a better job
of addressing the long-term chronic problems before
they metastasize into urgent and large-scale crises.
My Government is doing that right now through
programmes like the Resilience in the Sahel-Enhanced
(RISE) initiative. Announced in February by the
United States Agency for International Development,
its premise is simple. We invest in making the most
vulnerable populations more resilient so they can
bounce back when the inevitable crisis comes, whether
it is a drought, flood or some other unforeseen but
predictable disaster. The United States has dedicated
$130 million to RISE over its first two years. The
programme is already implementing a range of projects,
such as promoting the cultivation of heartier crops in
the Niger and working to reduce acute malnutrition in
Burkina Faso.
We, the United Nations, have also been doing that
through a number of smaller initiatives, like many of
those mentioned by the Secretary-General in his report.
In one of those initiatives in Mali, the United Nations
Development Programme brought together 100 civil
society groups to promote the involvement of women
in the peace process and local-level dialogue. While
programmes like that may not stop the fighting in Mali
immediately, they can help empower communities to
mitigate the violence and they can lay the foundations
for building future peace.
I am convinced that if we can address those
problems collectively and collaboratively, as if we are
willing to not only react to the emergencies, but also
to do more to anticipate them and to address their root
causes, then we will be able to make the Sahel more
peaceful and more prosperous, which is in all of our

14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

interests. We are confident that the integrated strategy
encapsulates those various elements.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Ms. Hiroute
Guebre Sellassie, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel, for the briefing on the progress
towards the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel region. As this is the
first briefing of Ms. Sellassie to the Council, allow me
to congratulate her upon assuming that position and
express our support for her leadership and engagement
in tackling the challenges the Sahel region faces. I also
wish to commend the United Nations Office for West
Africa for its dedicated efforts in the Sahel region.
Throughout the reporting period, we witnessed
the further deterioration of the political, security and
humanitarian situation in the Sahel region, which
results from the continuous erosion of State authority
linked with humanitarian and development challenges,
as well as the adverse effects of climate change. Weak
governance, porous borders, illegal migration and
arms trafficking, the phenomenal rise of terrorist
activities — especially those carried out by Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida-affiliated groups — and the lack
of development opportunities need to be addressed to
prevent the outbreak of crises, such as those we have
recently witnessed in Libya, Mali and elsewhere.
Enhanced cooperation and coordination among Sahel
States are essential in order to prevent threats posed
by terrorist groups, notably Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West
Africa, Ansar Eddine and Al-Mourabitoune, that cross
borders and seek safe havens in the Sahel region and to
combat the activities of those terrorist groups.
It is crucial to ensure that the elections in Libya
be held without any delays and broad agreement on
the future of the transition of the country is reached
among all parties. Recent clashes in northern Mali
demonstrated the urgency of making progress in the
political dialogue. Further deadlock could have major
security consequences for Mali and the wider region.
The security and political challenges in the Sahel
continue to be triggered by the precarious humanitarian
situation. As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/397)
states, despite good agricultural and pastoral seasons,
at least 20 million people remain at risk of food
insecurity and nearly 5 million children are at risk of
acute malnutrition. Moreover, the people of the Sahel
are extremely vulnerable to the environmental and
economic shocks that strike the region frequently. As

S/PV.7203

the Governments of the region have limited capacities
to address the multifaceted, cross-cutting security,
political and humanitarian challenges, coordinated
international engagement is of utmost importance; yet
the primary responsibility and ownership for fostering
peace, security and development in the Sahel should be
in the hands of the countries of the region.
We commend the United Nations engagement in
addressing the challenges in the Sahel and support
its leading role in coordinating international efforts.
The Secretary-General led a visit to the region last
November with representatives of the World Bank, the
African Union Commission, the African Development
Bank and the European Union (EU) and conveyed a clear
message of readiness and willingness of international
actors to coordinate their efforts. Financial assistance
provided by the EU and the World Bank, as well as
other members of international community, provides a
basis to turn commitments into actions on the ground.
We welcome the Sahel strategies and projects by
the EU, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, as well as the establishment
of the ministerial coordination platform and other
regional initiatives. We also welcome the commitment
of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mauritania, the Niger and Mali
to deepening cooperation and establishing the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
With many tools and initiatives aimed at addressing
the root causes of the crisis in the Sahel, it is crucial
to ensure their coherence and avoid duplication. We
commend the conclusions of the high-level meeting,
held in February 2014 in Brussels, recognizing that the
coordination platform for the Sahel should constitute
the overall coordination mechanism ensuring the
synergies among the various strategies and approaches
on the Sahel.
The United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel and its implementation plan are the right tool to
ensure the cooperation and coordination of activities
among various actors. We hope that the Group of Five
for the Sahel will also get involved.
As the implementation plan, with a focus on
governance, security and resilience, has been
developed, it is now essential to ensure the coherence of
activities on the ground and to deliver tangible results,
thereby improving the living conditions of the people
in the region. The Security Council should be regularly
informed about achievements in the implementation of

14-4354217/21

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

19/06/2014

the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Setting clear implementation benchmarks would be a
useful tool for monitoring progress and for identifying
issues that need the further attention of the international
community.

and effective support to the countries in the region,
promote mutual trust through dialogue and cooperation
and maintain security and stability in the border areas
through common efforts to combat the threats of
terrorism and extremism.

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
today’s meeting. I also wish to thank Special Envoy
Ms. Sellassie for her briefing.

Secondly, focusing on addressing the root causes of
conflicts, such as poverty and underdevelopment, is the
very foundation of lasting stability in the Sahel region.
Building on the gradual strengthening, self-reliance and
self-development of Sahelian countries, the international
community and the international financial institutions
should increase humanitarian assistance to the Sahel
region, as well as technical support and investment to
the countries in the region so as to help those countries
to achieve social and economic development and to
improve the livelihood of their people. China welcomes
the World Bank, the African Development Bank and
other financial institutions providing financial support
to the Sahel region. We hope that the relevant pledges
will be provided as soon as possible.

The Sahel is a vast region with a large population
and rich natural resources. In recent years, thanks to
the ongoing efforts of the regional countries and the
strong support of the international community, the
overall situation in the Sahel region remains stable. Its
economy continues to grow and there has been positive
progress in the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel. China appreciates
the active efforts of the United Nations, regional and
subregional organizations in Africa, such as the African
Union, and the relevant countries and bodies to improve
the situation in the Sahel and to promote development
in the region. China welcomes the good work of the
newly appointed Special Envoy, Ms. Sellassie, for the
implementation of the integrated strategy.
However, it must be acknowledged that the countries
of the Sahel still face multifacted challenges, such
as uneven development, growing ethnic tension, the
spread of terrorism, the proliferation of illicit weapons
and increased transnational organized crime. With
regard to how to further improve the situation in the
Sahel region and encourage the countries of the region
to achieve lasting stability and development as soon as
possible, I would like to underscore the following three
points.
First, support for the efforts of the regional countries
to maintain peace and stability is key to improving the
security and humanitarian situation in the Sahel region.
Currently, owing to an impasse in the political process
and a turbulent security situation, some countries in the
region face the threats of increasing terrorist activities,
the proliferation of illicit weapons and the spread of
transnational organized crime. Effectively dealing
with such threats requires the unwavering efforts of
the various countries to promote a political process
for which they have ownership and to continuously
strengthen capacity-building in the area of security.
The international community should also strengthen
coordination and cooperation so as to provide consistent

18/21

Thirdly, the international community should
actively help the countries of the Sahel region
strengthen capacity-building in the area of security
through regional cooperation. In recent years, the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States have actively promoted the development
of a joint security mechanism and have committed
themselves to dealing with African issues with an
African approach, thus making good efforts to address
the issues in the Sahel. The United Nations should fully
utilize the role of the Sahel strategy as the coordination
platform, coordinate the efforts of various parties and
build synergy among various initiatives and strategies
for the development of the region.
Finally, the Chinese Government attaches great
importance to China-Africa relations and supports
African countries in finding a development path
appropriate to their national conditions. Through
bilateral assistance and by participating in peacekeeping
operations, China has supported the countries in the
Sahel region in their efforts to achieve stability and
development and has done its utmost to help African
countries take leadership in addressing their issues,
including the problems in the Sahel.
In future, China will continue to support African
countries in strengthening capacity-building in the
areas of peacekeeping and combating terrorism and
piracy. We are ready to further strengthen cooperation

14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

with the United Nations and regional organizations
so as to play our part in an early and comprehensive
resolution of the issues facing the Sahel region.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Special Envoy Sellassie
for her briefing and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2014/397).
The briefing that we have just heard and the
Secretary-General’s report indicate that considerable
challenges remain for the Sahel in terms of the three
pillars of the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel, namely, governance, security and resilience.
On governance, we note that more needs to be done
by countries in the Sahel to foster greater inclusiveness in
their political processes and to improve participation by
marginalized groups, including women and young people.
Experience shows that the exclusion of entire groups from
political participation often generates tension that could
cause instability and even conflict.
We also note from the Secretary-General’s report
that State and public security, national reforms, regional
integration and economic development have all been
negatively affected by fragile State institutions and
weak border management in the Sahelian countries.
Insecurity in border areas has affected governance at
the local level and reduced the effectiveness of State
authority over national territories. There is therefore
a need to bolster State institutions and to strengten
border management in order for progress to be made in
improving governance in the region. One way to achieve
better border management would be for contiguous
States to collaborate effectively on border issues.
On security, we are concerned that the situation
in the Sahel remains precarious. Multiple challenges,
including political instability and the activities of
organized criminal groups and terrorist organizations,
such as Boko Haram and groups affiliated with
Al-Qaida, as well as extremist armed groups, are
significant contributing factors in that state of affairs.
The situation has been compounded by porous borders
across the region, which allow trafficking in arms
and drugs and the virtual unimpeded movement of
terrorists.
Such security challenges cannot be overcome by
any one country acting alone. The cooperation of all
countries of the region and, indeed, of the international
community will be essential in order to achieve that.
A good example of such cooperation can be seen in
the establishment of the multinational joint task force

S/PV.7203

by Chad, the Niger, Cameroon, Benin and Nigeria to
carry out coordinated patrols of their common border
areas in the fight against Boko Haram and other
terrorist groups. The five countries have also created
a regional intelligence fusion unit to strengthen
intelligence cooperation on terrorism. We would like
to acknowledge with gratitude the technical expertise
that France, the United Kingdom, the United States,
China and Canada are committing to support those and
other initiatives in our efforts to fight Boko Haram. We
also take this opportunity to thank all nations that have
expressed support and good will to us as we confront
the menace of Boko Haram.
With respect to resilience, we are deeply concerned
about the extremely fragile humanitarian situation in the
Sahel. The statistics in the Secretary-General’s report
paint a grim picture of 20 million people at risk of food
insecurity, 5 million children at risk of malnutrition
and over 1.5 million displaced. However, the report
does not mention the efforts of national Governments
and humanitarian actors to provide assistance to
those in need. We believe that those efforts should be
reflected in subsequent reports in order to allow for an
appreciation by the Council of the degree to which the
problem is being addressed, especially at the national
level.
Experience shows that humanitarian crises can
have security implications for the country concerned,
as well as for neighbouring countries, if the situation
is not carefully managed. We urge the United Nations
and other humanitarian actors to pay close attention to
the difficult humanitarian situation in the Sahel, with a
view to alleviating the hardship faced by those affected
by it.
In terms of the implementation of the integrated
strategy, we welcome the progress made during the
reporting period. We take particular note of the highlevel meeting on the situation in the Sahel held on the
margins of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly in September 2013, the high-level visit of
the Secretary-General and other senior international
officials to Mali, the Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad in
November 2013, and the various activities of the former
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Romano
Prodi. We pay tribute to Mr. Prodi for his service and
efforts in support of the Sahel.
The establishment of a steering committee to provide
strategic guidance, as well as three United Nations
inter-agency working groups on governance, security

14-4354219/21

S/PV.7203

Peace and security in Africa

and resilience, is a significant step in the implementation
of the integrated strategy. We take positive note of
the close consultations the United Nations has been
holding with other stakeholders, including the African
Union (AU), the European Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), with
a view to agreeing on common priorities and joint
programming in the areas of governance and security.
It is significant that the activities proposed by the
United Nations will be implemented in collaboration
with ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the AU and other partners. That kind
of cooperation is a win-win for all concerned, and we
would like to see it strengthened.
To conclude, I would like to congratulate Special
Envoy Sellassie on her appointment and assure her of
Nigeria’s full support for her and her Office.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Russian Federation.
We support the considerations raised in the briefing
made by Ms. Sellassie regarding the situation in the
Sahelo-Saharan region. The Russian Federation position
regarding the problems facing the region is consistent
and unchanged — they require a comprehensive
solution and the sustained attention of the international
community.
We can see in the region the clear link between the
need to establish a sound system of State governance,
the search for appropriate responses to securityrelated challenges, and the provision of sustainable
development, in parallel with overcoming significant
humanitarian problems. In that respect, in our view,
the load-bearing architecture of the integrated strategy,
composed of three key pillars, has been well crafted, but
more time will be needed to fine-tune this mechanism
so that it can operate at full speed.
Significant steps have already been taken towards
institutionalizing the formation of the implementation
mechanism for the strategy and filling it with concrete
content. We would refer first and foremost to the
creation of the coordination platform for the Sahel at
the ministerial level, whose role will be to become one
of the strategy’s pivotal components. We welcome the
work of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Those measures are important in bringing the States
of the region together around a single platform and the

20/21

19/06/2014

elaboration of a common vision on how to eliminate
the root causes of instability. However, positive
administrative steps should in no case act as a substitute
for real work. Regional initiatives should be backed
by a broad spectrum of measures to be taken by the
international community. The United Nations, unique
in terms of its scope, is indispensable. We are pleased
with the interest shown by the representatives of widely
differing States and regions, including, of course,
Russia. Global and regional financial institutions will
be needed, too. There is no question, however, that the
leading role in implementing the strategy should fall to
the States of the Sahel themselves.
I should like to underscore one further essential
issue. We must prevent any fragmentation of our efforts
and the resulting dilution of resources. Coordination at
all levels will be an important factor in the strategy’s
success. In that respect, I would be remiss not to recall
the particular role played by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Office for
West Africa.
We are seriously alarmed by the growing threat that
the region may become a bridgehead for well-organized
terrorism and criminal structures. In a vast, virtually
lawless area where illicit weapons and drugs abound,
one cannot but be concerned by the radical views
taking root among the young. In such circumstances, it
is especially important to agree on common approaches
to combating transnational crime and to creating an
appropriate legal framework.
It is quite clear that a powerful impetus to the
growth of terrorist-related threats in the Sahel was
provided by the turbulent and chaotic processes of
the so-called Arab Spring. To be frank, on the basis
of our observations at least, that term is being used
increasingly infrequently. To put it mildly, its outcome
is assuredly ambiguous. The chaos in Libya continues
to spread well beyond its borders, and the conditions
for a positive turning point have, unfortunately, been
lacking to date.
The crisis in Mali was a serious challenge to the
States of the region. We cannot speak of any sustained
positive trends in that country. The whole broad
perimeter of the Sahel is turbulent as well. However,
and in conclusion, I wish to voice the hope that a
constructive pooling of efforts at all levels under the
aegis of the United Nations integrated strategy for the

14-43542

19/06/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Sahel will contribute to improving the situation and the
quality of life of the people of the region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

S/PV.7203

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.

14-4354221/21
