General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Seseion

106
2. Toe conciliation commission shall . make its r~commendations within five months after its appomt~ent. If 1ts r~ommendations are not accepted by the parties t<:, the dispute
within two months after they have been dehvered, e~ther
party may bring the dispute before the Court by a wntten
application.
.ARTICLE IV

Toe present Protocol sball ~ open for signatu~e by a!l
States which may become Parties. to the Conventlo~, untll
31 December 1970 at United Nations Headquarters m New

York.
.ARTICLE V

Toe present Protocol is subject to_ ratific:ition. Toe instruments of ratification sball be depos1ted w1th the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
.ARTICLE VI

Toe present Protocol shall remain_ open for accession. by
ali States which may become Parties to the Convention.
Toe instruments of accession shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
.ARTICLE VII

1. Toe present Protocol shall enter into force on the same

day as the Convention or on the_ thirtieth day f~llow!n¡;
the date of deposit of the second mstrument of ratification
of or accession to the Protocol with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, whichever day is later.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the present
Protocol after its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article, the Protocol sha!l enter into force
on the thirtieth day after deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification or accession.
.ARTICLE VIII
Toe Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inforrn
all States which may become Parties to the Convention:
(a) Of signatures to the present Protocol and of the
deposit of instruments of ratification or accession in accordance with articles IV, V and VI;
(b) Of the date on which the present Protocol will enter
into force in accordance with article VII.
.ARTICLE IX

Toe original of the present Protocol, of which the Chinese,
English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally
authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, who shall send certified copies thereof
to ali States referred to in article IV.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed
the present Protocol, opened for signature at New York on
16 December 1969.

2531 (XXIV). Settlement of civil claims in con•
nexion with the Convention on Special Missions

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Convention on Special Missions,
adopted by the General Assembly on 8 December
1969, 10 provides for immunity from the jurisdiction
of the receiving State of members of a special mission
of the sending State,
Recallíng that such immunity may be waived by the
sending State,
Noting in addition that, as was recalled in the preamble to the Convention, the purpose of immunities is
10 Resolution 2530 (XXIV), annex.

not to benefit individuals but to ensure the effi.cient
performance of the functions of special missions,
Mindful of the deep concem expressed during the
deliberations of the General Assembly that claims of
immunity might, in certain cases, deprive persons in the
receiving State of the · benefit of a judicial settlement,
Recommends that the sending State should waive the
immunity of members of its special mission in respect
of civil claims of persons in the receiving State when
it can do so without impeding the performance of the
functions of the special mission, and that, when immunity is not waived, the sending State should use its
best endeavours to bring about a just settlement of the
claims.
1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
2532 (XXIV). Tribute to the International Law
Commission in connexion with the adoption of the Convention on Special Mission•

The General Assembly,
Having adopted the Convention on Special Missions10
on the basis of the draft articles prepared by the International Law Commission, 11
Expresses its deep gratítude to the International Law
Commission for its outstanding contribution to the
codification and progressive development of the rules
of international Jaw on special missions.
1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969 .
2533 (XXIV). Consideration of principle11 of
international law conceming friendly relations and co-operation among Statea in
accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1966 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, 2103
(XX) of 20 December 1965, 2181 (XXI) of 12 December 1966, 2327 (XXII) of 18 December 1967 and
2463 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, in which it
affirmed the importance of the progressive development
and codification of the principies of international law
conceming friendly relations and co-operation among
States,
Recalling further that among the fundamental purposes of the United Nations are the maintenance of
international peace and security and the development
of friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Considering that the faithful observance of the principles of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations is of paramount importance for the maintenance of international peace
and security and the improvement of the intemational
situation,
Considering further that the progressive development
and codification of the principles of intemational law
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States, so as to secure their more effective application,
11 Otficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/6709/Rev.1 and Corr.1), chap.
ter 11, section D.
