S/PRST/2008/27

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 July 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5935th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 July 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest possible terms the
attack on 8 July 2008 on a UNAMID military and police convoy in
Um Hakibah by 200 fighters on horses and in 40 vehicles, using sophisticated
weaponry and tactics, which resulted in the death of 7 peacekeepers and a
further 22 United Nations/African Union personnel being wounded. This
unacceptable act of extreme violence is the largest attack on UNAMID since
the transfer of authority from the African Union Mission in Sudan on
31 December 2007. The Council is particularly concerned that the attack was
premeditated, deliberate and intended to inflict casualties.
“The Security Council welcomes the United Nations investigation under
way and the Government of the Sudan’s statement to assist the United Nations
investigation. It calls on the Government of the Sudan to do its utmost to
ensure that the perpetrators of the attack are swiftly identified and brought to
justice. The Council underlines its determination to take action against those
responsible after hearing the outcome of UNAMID’s investigation.
“The Security Council expresses its condolences to the Governments of
Rwanda, Ghana and Uganda for the deaths of their peacekeepers and to the
victims’ families. It commends the dedication of UNAMID personnel. The
Council stresses that any attack or threat against UNAMID is unacceptable,
and demands that there is no reoccurrence. It underlines that attacks on United
Nations peacekeepers during an armed conflict can constitute war crimes
under applicable international law and calls upon all parties to comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
“The Security Council calls on all parties to agree to a cessation of
hostilities, to engage fully and constructively in the political process under the
leadership of the new UN/AU joint Chief Mediator, Mr. Djibrill Yipènè
Bassolé, and to cooperate fully with the deployment of UNAMID and respect
its security and freedom of movement.
“The Security Council further calls on the United Nations and all parties
to facilitate the rapid and complete deployment of UNAMID and on capable
Member States to contribute the helicopter and transportation units necessary
to ensure the successful implementation of UNAMID’s mandate.”

08-42598 (E) 160708

*0842598*
