S/PV.8384

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8384th meeting

Monday, 29 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz/Mr. Inchauste Jordán. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014,) 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018) (S/2018/947)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-34501 (E)
*1834501*

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the
shooting in Pittsburgh, United States of America
The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I should like to condemn the deadly
shooting that occurred on Saturday at the Tree of Life
congregation synagogue in Pittsburgh. This hateful act
led to the deaths of 11 civilians, targeted at their place of
worship. The members of the Security Council express
their deepest condolences to the families and loved
ones of those killed, and they offer their sympathy to
the people and the Government of the United States.
I ask those present to now rise in a minute of silence
in honour of the memory of the victims.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018)
(S/2018/947)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/947, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401
(2018).
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
2/21

29/10/2018

Mr. Lowcock: I concluded my briefing to the
Security Council last month (see S/PV.8355) with a
question: Would the agreement reached between the
Russian Federation and Turkey on Idlib provide only
a moment of respite, or would it represent the start of
a more stable future for millions of civilians in that
part of the country? We have seen a glimmer of hope
in the weeks of relative quiet since the agreement
was reached. It is extremely important for millions of
people in Idlib that that remains the case. The stakes
are very high because the alternative is humanitarian
suffering on a scale that would overwhelm all ability
to respond, devastating a population that is already
weakened through years of conflict, displacement
and deprivation.
The United Nations and its partner organizations
continue to reach people in need throughout Syria. Over
the first seven months of the year, in total across the
country, an average of almost 5.5 million people were
reached with life-saving assistance every month. In
September, nearly 2.5 million people were reached with
food aid from Damascus. That includes some people in
areas that have recently come under the control of the
Government, with assistance often delivered through
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
However, in many areas that recently changed
control, the United Nations has not had sustained
access. We have discussed this with the Syrian
authorities, who have made clear that areas under their
control should now be reached in a comprehensive
and regular manner from Damascus. They have also
agreed to facilitate a greater number of missions and
that we can more systematically deploy United Nations
personnel with aid that is often delivered in partnership
with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. We look forward
to the rapid implementation of that approach. It will
allow our teams on the ground to undertake essential
independent assessments of the situation and see more
of who is being helped and how. At the same time, we
will continue to submit plans for Government agreement
for crossline access into north-west Syria.
That leads me to a broader point I wanted to make
about the approach we are taking to assessing and
meeting humanitarian need across Syria. The United
Nations mandate for humanitarian action, set by the
Council in its series of resolutions and also by the
General Assembly in resolution 46/182, adopted in
1991, requires us to consult the Government. We think
that is very important. At the same time, our mandate
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

also emphasizes the principles of independence,
impartiality and neutrality in humanitarian action, in
particular to ensure that assistance is provided on the
basis of need, and not driven or determined by any
other considerations.
The humanitarian system, as the Council knows,
is financed on a voluntary basis. The main questions
I am asked by all those whose help I seek in financing
humanitarian action everywhere around the world are
always the same. How do you know what the needs are?
And how do we know, if we give you money, that it
will really get to the people who need it most? If people
whose money we are seeking are not persuaded by the
answers we provide to those questions, my experience
is that they do not give us the money we ask for.
Ensuring that we work on the basis of the humanitarian
principles is therefore both a matter of complying with
our mandates, as we want to and as we must do, but it is
also a matter of practical necessity.
I have discussed those issues in detail with the
Government on a number of occasions in recent weeks.
The discussions have led to important agreements in
extending the United Nations ability to assess needs as
comprehensively as possible, fully in compliance with
our mandate, as we prepare the humanitarian needs
overview and the United Nations-coordinated response
plan that we will be publishing for Syria for 2019. I
hope to be able to report progress to the Council in
carrying out expanded needs-assessment exercises in
the next few months.
The United Nations cross-border operation from
Turkey has continued to reach hundreds of thousands
of people in need every month. It has been scaled up
in recent weeks to ensure pre-positioning of assistance
as a contingency measure in the event of a military
escalation, as well as to provide winterization support.
Nearly 1,000 trucks are delivering plastic sheeting,
winter clothes and boots, heaters and stoves. Critical
supplies also continue to be delivered into north-east
Syria through the Al-Yaarubiyah border crossing
from Iraq.
In the first nine months of 2018, over 750,000
people on average each month were reached with food
aid through United Nations cross-border activities.
Sustaining that is essential for those in need, in terms
of both providing aid and supporting service delivery.
It is for that reason that the extension of the provisions
of resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2393 (2017) remains of

S/PV. 8384

the highest importance. The Secretary-General in his
report (S/2018/947), and I now, call upon the Council to
renew the resolution for another 12 months.
Cross-border operations continue to be very
closely managed and monitored. We continue to take
every step possible to ensure United Nations operations
meet the highest standards. The way we do that was
reviewed in detail earlier this year at the request of
the Council, and we reported on it to the Council in
June (S/PV.8296). We train implementing partners and
local authorities on the implementation of international
humanitarian law; we advocate for principled delivery
of assistance with non-State armed opposition groups
inside Syria; and we have developed a code of conduct,
signed by most non-State armed groups operating in
north-west Syria, committing to respect international
humanitarian law. We also take all possible steps to
ensure compliance with money-laundering and counterterrorism legislation applicable to the United Nations.
Let me turn to other areas of concern in Syria.
In Rukban, on the Syria-Jordan border, the United
Nations — in cooperation with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent — had prepared to undertake a large delivery
of assistance from Damascus for 50,000 people,
a vaccination campaign for approximately 10,000
children and a rapid needs assessment. The convoy
was planned for Saturday, 27 October, but reports of
insecurity along the route forced us to postpone it. The
population at Rukban has not received assistance since
January this year and they are increasingly desperate.
There are continuing reports of children dying due
to poor sanitary conditions and a lack of health care.
That dire humanitarian situation cannot be allowed
to continue. The United Nations is ready and willing
to proceed with the convoy immediately. Therefore,
my message to all concerned is to please make the
necessary arrangements to ensure the security of the
humanitarian personnel and the accompanying convoy
so it can proceed without delay.
Intense fighting continues to affect civilians along
the east bank of the Euphrates river in southern parts
of Deir ez-Zor governorate. There have been reports of
dozens of civilian deaths and more injuries as Syrian
Democratic Forces, supported by international coalition
Forces, engage in hostilities in the final remaining
enclade in Syria of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). Approximately 7,000 people have been
displaced from Hajin due to fighting in recent weeks.
Up to 15,000 people remain trapped inside ISIL-

18-345013/21

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

29/10/2018

controlled areas. An attack by ISIL on one of the camps
where displaced people were staying has reportedly
resulted in the death and injury of civilians, as well as
the abduction of more than 100 people. Some of them
have since reportedly been killed.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Before I
begin, I wish to express our condolences to the families
of the victims of the plane crash in Indonesia, which
claimed the lives of 189 civilians.

While I remain concerned about the situation in
Raqqa, I want to report that the United Nations has had
increasing access to the area. A September assessment
visit by the World Health Organization found that health
needs in Raqqa remain great, with an acute shortage of
all levels of health-care services in the city. Assistance
also continues to be provided to Raqqa city and the
north-east, with the United Nations and our partner
organizations now reaching over 600,000 people each
month. In summary, and in conclusion, there are five
areas where we now seek the support of Member States
and the Security Council.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock for his valuable briefing, which confirms the
continuing dire humanitarian situation in Syria. We
support his five asks and call upon all Security Council
members to work vigorously to that end. I would like
to pay tribute to all medical and humanitarian workers
for their efforts in the field to alleviate the suffering
in Syria.

First is in the continuing implementation of the
agreement between the Russian Federation and Turkey
and the prevention of a military onslaught on Idleb and
the surrounding areas. The humanitarian impact of
that would be, as we have repeatedly told the Council,
absolutely devastating to the civilian population.
Secondly is the renewal for another year of
resolution 2165 (2014), in particular to sustain crossborder aid essential to support and protect more than
3 million civilians in Idlib — most of whom are women
and children — and for essential supplies and services
across the north of Syria.
Thirdly, we seek support in ensuring that our United
Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent humanitarian convoy
is granted secure access to Rukban camp immediately.
Fourthly, we seek support for our efforts to improve
access, needs-assessment and evidence-gathering on
how the resources we have raised are being used.
Finally, we need continued and more generous
financing for our current humanitarian response plan.
While I am — on behalf of millions of Syrians who
are the beneficiaries — extremely grateful for the
$1.7 billion we have raised so far in 2018, this year’s
plan is still less than 50 per cent funded.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
4/21

(spoke in English)

I will present this statement on behalf of the
co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian file, namely,
Sweden and Kuwait. I will focus on two points: the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure and
humanitarian access.
First, we reaffirm that all parties must respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law in
all circumstances, including by protecting civilians
and civilian infrastructure. We also call on all parties
to respect international human rights law. The period
covered by the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/947)
witnessed killings, arbitrary arrests and detentions,
the deprivation of liberty, abduction, torture and
inhumane, cruel and degrading treatment. We condemn
in the strongest terms those practices against civilians
by any party.
Secondly, we welcome the Russian-Turkish
agreement on the ceasefire in Idlib — whose
population is around 3 million, including 1 million
children — which averted the immediate threat
of a humanitarian catastrophe there. We applaud
the pre-positioning measures taken by the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners of humanitarian
assistance and food to places in Idlib in preparation for
the worst possible situation. In that regard, we stress
the importance of the sustainability of the ceasefire
in Idlib, and throughout Syria, to enable access to
humanitarian assistance and the evacuation of injured
persons, in accordance with international law and as
stipulated in resolution 2401 (2018).
Thirdly, we are also concerned with developments
in other parts of Syria. In Deir ez-Zor there
are thousands of civilians affected by military
operations. In that context, we call upon all parties to
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

strengthen the protection of civilians during military
operations against the terrorist group Da’esh. We
express our concern about the continuing danger of
explosives — including mines and improvised explosive
devices — in Raqqa, especially for the 152,000 people
who have returned there.
Fourthly, unfortunately, the reporting period
witnessed a continuation of one of the most egregious
violations of international law, namely, the continued
targeting of hospitals and health facilities. We condemn
attacks against hospitals, as well as attacks targeting
critical civilian facilities, and remind all parties of
resolution 2286 (2016) and the specific obligations
under international humanitarian law to respect and
protect medical and humanitarian personnel exclusively
engaged in medical duties, as well as their means of
transport and equipment, and hospitals and other
medical facilities.
The report also refers to a number of cases where
schools have been targeted, resulting in the suspension
of school activity. We remind the parties of their
obligations under international law, the need to comply
with resolution 2427 (2015), on children and armed
conflict, and not to target schools.
There are still significant challenges for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria, as stated
in the Secretary-General’s report. Although 1.5 million
people remain in hard-to-reach areas, inter-agency
convoys have not been approved since 16 August.
We call upon the Syrian authorities to cooperate
with the United Nations to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches those most in need — especially
in the areas that have come back under Government
control — through the various humanitarian modalities.
Only about 30 per cent of the population with acute
needs in those hard-to-reach areas are today assisted
by needs-based, principled and sustained humanitarian
assistance. A major reason for that is non-approval by
Syrian authorities of requests for permission for access.
We emphasize the need for humanitarian assistance to
reach those in need in accordance with humanitarian
principles, including the principles of impartiality and
non-discrimination. In that context, we welcome the
reference in the recent joint statement agreed by Turkey,
Russia, France and Germany, which underscored the
need to ensure the rapid, safe and unhindered access
of humanitarian organizations throughout Syria
and immediate humanitarian assistance to reach all

S/PV. 8384

people in need in order to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people.
In that connection, we must recall what the Secretary
General stated in his report — that cross-border
humanitarian assistance provides an indispensable
lifeline for hundreds of thousands of people across
Syria. Cross-border aid is a vital and important part of
the humanitarian response in Syria, as evidenced by its
reach of 620,000 people in September.
We would also like to express our deep concern
about the horrible situation in Rukban, where more
than 45,000 people are suffering acute shortages of
food and humanitarian and medical supplies. Let us
heed the calls from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations system.
We call on all parties to facilitate immediate delivery
to Rukban. Anything short of delivery is unacceptable.
As co-penholders of the Syria humanitarian file and
some of the largest donors to the Syrian humanitarian
response plan, Sweden and Kuwait will ensure
that the Council closely follows the humanitarian
developments in Syria. Thirteen million Syrians still
need humanitarian assistance; more than 5 million of
them are children. Regrettably, it pains us to know
that the humanitarian catastrophe will continue in the
near and medium term. The humanitarian situation and
suffering will be alleviated only by achieving progress
on the political track through a political solution based
on resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Cohen (United States): I thank UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for his sobering briefing.
The timing of this meeting is especially important.
On Friday, we heard the Syrian representative issue a
chilling warning, in crystal clear terms, that the regime
will “fully recover Idlib when we deem it necessary.”
(S/PV.8383, p. 15). Later that day, we saw reports of
regime strikes on areas inside the Idlib zone.
What that means is that the window of opportunity
to prevent the slaughter of millions of Syrian civilians
living in Idlib, created by Turkey and Russia’s
agreement on a demilitarized zone, is closing. And
it can close fast. Once that window closes, as UnderSecretary-General Lowcock reminded us this morning,
a catastrophic humanitarian crisis will be on our hands.
Civilians will die. Thousands will be displaced. We
have seen this over and over again in this year alone

18-345015/21

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

with the Russian and the regime’s offensives in eastern
Ghouta, Yarmouk and Dara’a, and now Idlib.
While we were encouraged by the United Nations
assessment that Turkey and Russia’s creation of a
demilitarized zone in Idlib contributed to a reduction
of violence in the past month, we are gravely concerned
about the scale of the humanitarian crisis we would face
if and when Al-Assad decides that the Idlib ceasefire
has outlived its usefulness to him. That would likely be
the largest catastrophe yet in this already devastating
conflict. Syria and Russia have shown that they feel
absolutely no obligation to uphold de-escalation zones
in eastern Ghouta, Dara’a or even Idlib, based on recent
developments. We cannot trust them to uphold the
military agreement or basic humanitarian principles
in Syria.
The best way to ensure that the Council can prevent
another humanitarian tragedy from unfolding in Idlib
and the countryside in Syria is to show genuine and
urgent movement towards a political solution to the
crisis, fully consistent with resolution 2254 (2015).
The United States and the other members of the small
group — Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, and the United Kingdom — are exerting every
ounce of diplomatic effort to see the constitutional
committee launch as quickly as possible, while one
other Council member seeks to invoke what is has
called “artificial deadlines” to prolong the dangerous
status quo. But I think we all agree that, to support
the political effort, the Organization’s work to prepare
for the worst in Idlib remains absolutely essential.
The United States applauds the heroic efforts of the
United Nations and its partners for their brave work
to preposition humanitarian aid in Idlib and to ensure
that the international community is prepared to respond
should the regime break the ceasefire and trigger a
humanitarian catastrophe.
The United States urges Russia and Turkey to make
this ceasefire agreement durable, and for Russia to
prevent the Syrian regime from launching any military
offensive into Idlib. Provocations and disinformation
by Damascus must stop, including the regime’s and one
Council member’s continued attempts to falsely accuse
the brave humanitarian first responders — the White
Helmets — of planning chemical-weapons attacks
in Idlib province. That is especially ridiculous given
that independent mechanisms created in the Security
Council have found the Syrian regime to be the party
guilty of chemical-weapons use in Syria.
6/21

29/10/2018

Returning to the issue of humanitarian access, it
is no surprise that sustained humanitarian access from
Damascus remains elusive in far too many parts of
Syria. For the 3 million people living in Idlib alone,
cross-border humanitarian assistance is a vital lifeline.
United Nations cross-border deliveries are authorized
by resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2393 (2017), and must
be enabled by the parties to the conflict. To that end,
the United States strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment noted in the September report
(S/2018/845) that the renewal of the cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism of the United
Nations, as set forward by resolution 2165 (2014) and
subsequent resolutions, is vital for some 5 million
Syrians who currently depend on those cross-border
humanitarian deliveries.
In other areas like Rukban, the Syrian Government
has kept civilians under siege by denying humanitarian
aid to the camp. While we look forward to the arrival
of a joint United Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent
convoy reaching Rukban, we need to be clear that this
is only a first step in addressing the dire humanitarian
conditions people in Rukban face every day.
The United States has offered the United Nations
all the necessary security assurances to allow that
delivery to proceed. But a one-time delivery is not
good enough. A one-time delivery does not allow
for safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained access.
Moscow and Damascus must ensure that the United
Nations has regular and unimpeded access to provide
humanitarian assistance to Rukban and all areas in
need throughout Syria.
As the Secretary-General’s report also notes,
yet another month has gone by with no uptick in
humanitarian access, even to territories that are now
under regime control. Despite shifting battle lines and
territorial control, there has been no improvement in
the ability of relief organizations to reach those in need.
That is why the United States fully supports the
United Nations assessment that conditions in Syria are
not yet conducive to large-scale refugee returns. The
Al-Assad regime continues to do little to demonstrate
its willingness to create security and humanitarian
conditions on the ground that would allow people to
feel safe voluntarily returning to their homes. Reported
conditions of continued insecurity and regime reprisals,
arbitrary arrests and disappearances, such as in the
south-west of Syria, demonstrate that the international
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

standards for refugee returns — and indeed, the removal
of the cause of well-founded fears of persecution that
led refugees to flee in the first place — have not yet
been met.
Without the verifiable repeal of Law 10 and other
similar laws, Syrian refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) face credible fears over their ability to
return to their homes and rebuild their lives in safety
and dignity, without prejudice to the demographic
makeup of Syria. Syrian refugees and IDPs must be
allowed to make their own decisions about returns
that are safe, free and informed, and not premature or
under pressure.
The United States is the leading donor of
humanitarian assistance for the Syrian response,
providing more than $9 billion in aid throughout Syria
and to neighbouring countries, which have hosted
more than 5.6 million Syrian refugees since the start
of the crisis. The United States is proud of its longstanding and significant support for the people of Syria.
However, the responsibility for the safety, dignity and
well-being of Syrians belongs first and foremost to
the Syrian authorities, not to Syria’s neighbours, the
international community or donors. We therefore call
on the Syrian regime to uphold its most basic obligations
to the Syrian people under international law, as well as
their obligations to the Council, including by allowing
for sustained humanitarian access to territories under
their control. The regime’s excuses have never been
acceptable, but absent of the most basic signs of
progress, those excuses are increasingly implausible.
Finally, I want to reiterate that we must move
forward with the formation of the constitutional
committee as quickly as possible as a first step towards
an irreversible political transition, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). This is not an artificial deadline.
The years of suffering of millions of refugees and IDPs
argue strongly that the parties and the United Nations
must seize the closing window of opportunity provided
by the Idlib ceasefire and act now. We are talking about
saving people’s lives. A timeline that does so as quickly
as possible is not an artificial deadline; it is a moral
necessity and precisely why we have the Council and
the United Nations and why it is essential to act now.
The constitutional committee represents an important
opportunity to improve humanitarian conditions
throughout Syria by securing an end to the conflict.
We have no time to lose. We must not tolerate the
imposition of more artificial delays. We must see that

S/PV. 8384

committee launched. Shame on us all if we do not now
expend every effort to prevent another humanitarian
tragedy in Syria.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his everhelpful and informative briefing, and by commending
his tireless efforts, as well as those of his team, in
responding to the extreme humanitarian emergency
in Syria.
In the aftermath of the quadripartite summit that
President Erdoğan convened in Istanbul on Saturday
with President Macron, President Putin and Chancellor
Merkel, I would like to reiterate that the humanitarian
situation will be lastingly improved only with a longterm ceasefire and a credible political solution. That
was the challenge at the Istanbul summit, which we
thank the Turkish authorities for convening, and it
marked an important step in that direction. In their
joint statement, the four leaders demanded the full
and lasting implementation of the ceasefire in Idlib,
asked that the constitutional committee meet by the
end of the year and called for free elections to be held
under the supervision of the Untied Nations with the
participation of all Syrians, including members of the
diaspora. It is the implementation of that road map that
will bring peace and stability to Syria and put an end to
the suffering of the Syrian people, which has gone on
for too long.
At the summit, the Presidents of France, Turkey
and Russia and the German Chancellor recalled
the imperative that all humanitarian organizations
have quick, safe and unhindered access to all of the
populations that need assistance in Syria. That is not
the case today, as Mr. Lowcock pointed out, due to
the Syrian regime’s determination to manipulate and
politicize humanitarian aid. In concrete terms, in order
to relieve the suffering of Syrians and overcome this
challenge, we must remain mobilized around three
essential and complementary priorities: the protection
of civilians, the guarantee of humanitarian access,
which I just mentioned, and a lasting political solution
in Syria.
The first priority is the protection of civilians and
humanitarian and medical personnel. As Mr. Lowcock
pointed out, the Russian-Turkish agreement on Idlib
temporarily averted a bloodbath with an offensive that

18-345017/21

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

would have had disastrous humanitarian, migratory
and security consequences throughout the region.
The quadripartite summit on Saturday reaffirmed the
importance of that ceasefire not being a temporary
freeze in the situation, but rather a long-term solution
that allows us to stabilize the situation in Idlib. In
that context, the protection of civilians must be a top
priority for all stakeholders. All parties must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
We must also do everything to protect humanitarian
and medical facilities and personnel. It must be
hammered home that the attacks on hospitals and health
workers are war crimes and that the perpetrators will be
held accountable.
With regard to refugees, the conditions for
their safe, dignified and voluntary return are not yet
being met. The quadripartite summit identified those
conditions, of which there are three aspects, namely,
the need to be protected from armed conflict, arbitrary
arrests and political persecution, respect for the right
of ownership and access to basic services. We are far
from attaining that, and it is clearly down to the Syrian
regime. Despite announcing the repeal of Law 10, on
forced expropriations, the regime does not seem ready
to abandon its strategy of demographic engineering.
We must continue to strongly oppose that strategy,
which has serious and irreversible consequences and
is one of the main obstacles to the return of refugees
and displaced persons. Let us not be fooled by the
regime’s tale; it is not the absence of reconstruction
that is preventing the return of refugees. It is the lack
of credible progress in the political process, which is
an indispensable process in creating the conditions for
their return to be made possible within the framework
guaranteed by international law.
The second priority is the guarantee of safe,
complete and unhindered humanitarian access
throughout Syria. The Syrian regime incessantly
continues its strategy of the political instrumentalization
of humanitarian aid — which constitutes the height of
cynicism — by imposing unacceptable obstacles to
the delivery of aid and disregarding the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law. Access
to aid is essential for all parties, especially in hard-toreach areas. It is unacceptable that the regime has been
blocking inter-agency convoys for over two months
now and is putting in place a punitive strategy by
impeding the delivery of aid to the reconciled areas. In
addition to convoys, humanitarian actors must be able
8/21

29/10/2018

to access the most vulnerable populations throughout
the territory, based on the needs of those populations
and not the authorizations that are arbitrarily handed
out by the regime.
It is imperative that the entire population in need
benefits from humanitarian aid. We call on actors with
influence over the regime to ensure that all convoys can
travel safely and unhindered throughout the country,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law. I
wound mention in particular the extremely worrisome
situation in the Rukban camp, where 50,000 people are
living in nightmarish conditions with no humanitarian
convoy having been able to access it since January. I
refer as well to the people displaced from Afrin who
have taken refuge in the Tal Rifaat area, where they
have been living in deplorable conditions for months. I
am recalling these facts at a time when those people are
preparing to face the rigours of a sixth winter of war.
I would also like to recall the indispensable and
irreplaceable nature of cross-border humanitarian aid,
which provides vital support to hundreds of thousands
of people every day. More than 900,000 people were
able to benefit from such help last month. The Council
will soon be looking into the renewal of resolution 2165
(2014), and we call on members to demonstrate unity and
shoulder their responsibility so that that important gain
is preserved. We must be able to access populations in
need by the fastest and most effective means possible. I
emphasize in particular the magnitude and the urgency
of the needs of populations in the north-east who have
been liberated from Da’esh, where the coalition is
working to stabilize the area. The situation calls for the
United Nations to significantly and rapidly step up its
work in that area, including through the cross-border
delivery of aid. I formally call on the Organization to
do just that.
The third priority concerns the launching of a
sustainable political process, which is essential to
eliminating definitively the risk of any new horrific
escalation. As the Istanbul summit underscored,
the ceasefire in Idlib, which has enabled avoiding a
humanitarian disaster, also provides us with a window
of opportunity to launch a credible political process in
line with resolution 2254 (2015), which serves as our
common guiding light more than ever. The goal is to
create the conditions necessary for a virtuous cycle
with the improvement of the humanitarian situation
and the launching of a true political process, both
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

of which are inextricably linked. In that regard, the
calls of the international community are clear. On
Friday (see S/PV.8383), Council members together
with Mr. De Mistura called for the establishment
of a constitutional committee, for which the United
Nations has a mandate, as soon as possible, and, on
Saturday, the Istanbul summit communiqué called for
the committee, an initiative of two of its participants,
to be put in place by the end of the year. The formation
of a constitutional committee is a necessary first step
on the path of a credible political process that must
be followed by the holding of free and fair elections
under the supervision of the United Nations, with the
participation of Syrian refugees and displaced persons
in a safe and neutral environment.
Although the stabilization of areas liberated from
Da’esh by the coalition is a priority, help to rebuild Syria
is not on the agenda. There should be no ambiguity
concerning the fact that assistance with reconstruction
will be foreseeable only when an irreversible, credible
and inclusive political transition has begun. To proceed
otherwise would be to reward the intransigence of the
regime and to rebuild on sand.
Rest assured that France will continue to spare no
effort to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria
and open the way to a political solution to the conflict.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation is grateful for the convening
of this meeting and to Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his enlightening briefing.
After eight years of strife and a death toll of several
hundred thousands, no one can deny that the Syrian
people are exhausted by war, violence, permanent — and
sometimes forced — displacement and the uncertainty
of their future. When the Russian Federation and
Turkey signed the agreement establishing Idlib as a
demilitarized zone on 17 September, we, the members
of Security Council, lauded it because we believed that
that commitment, as well as the environment conducive
to peace that it would create, would allow for restarting
peace negotiations aimed at achieving a lasting solution
to the conflict. However, the demilitarization of Idlib
governorate should first of all improve the precarious
humanitarian situation of the almost 3 million civilians
living there and its surrounding areas. Despite the sharp
decline in military offensives, the presence of radical
terrorist groups jeopardizes attempts to stabilize that
part of Syria. In that regard, it is important to remind

S/PV. 8384

the parties that any further escalation in the conflict
would entail consequences inevitably causing harm
to civilians. We call on the parties to commit to the
demilitarization of the area and to implement it
in line with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
The situation in the Al-Rukban camp, on the
Syrian-Jordanian border, continues to be extremely
worrying despite the fact that the Security Council has
repeatedly called for it to be improved. As the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/947) underlines, that
camp hosts approximately 45,000 Syrians in terrible
conditions. In order to remedy that situation and provide
vulnerable people with protection and assistance,
there is no option other than to guarantee access to
humanitarian convoys in that area by the national parties
to the conflict. In addition, the necessary conditions
must be created to allow for the voluntary return of
the mass of internally displaced persons to those cities
and localities that have been liberated from the Islamic
State. Moreover, we agree with the Secretary-General
that in difficult-to-access areas, such as Deir ez-Zor
governorate, which is currently the target of military
attacks directed against the Islamic State, in Aleppo
and Idlib, the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic should spare no effort
to ensure cross-border assistance without restrictions
pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2393 (2017),
thereby allowing cross-border assistance to reach
those in need by the most direct routes so those who
are vulnerable continue to enjoy access to the vital
assistance they require.
With regard to Deir ez-Zor governorate, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that it is
necessary to avoid an increase in violence at all costs.
Where hostilities are already occurring, we must ensure
that the parties do everything possible to avoid the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas and that
combating terrorist groups is conducted in accordance
with obligations under international humanitarian law.
Moreover, it is essential to ensure that civilians who
want to flee to other areas can enjoy the freedom of
movement. No one, however, must be forcibly displaced
from their homes, and those who stay must never
become military targets.
The conflict in Syria cannot be resolved by military
means. We can achieve a robust, long-term armistice
only through a political process in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).

18-345019/21

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Mark
Lowcock once again for a clear and stark briefing, as
well as his entire team on the ground.
I would like to start by joining the representative
of Kuwait in expressing our deepest condolences to
the Government and the people of Indonesia for the
plane crash.
I also want to say that I thought the joint statement
delivered on behalf of Kuwait and Sweden earlier was
very powerful.
I should like to begin not immediately with the
humanitarian situation, but with the Istanbul summit
commitments as outlined by the French representative,
and I thank him very much for his briefing. I
completely agree with what the French Ambassador
said about the political process. The small group on
Syria is meeting now in London. As we all noted last
week (see S/PV.8373), we hope that that combination of
commitments and meetings will see some real, concrete
progress on both political and humanitarian tracks, but
I think that, concerning the political side and Idlib, I
would very much like to receive confirmation today
that the Idlib agreement between Russia and Turkey
will hold and that those 3 million civilians will be
kept safe. I would like to receive confirmation today
that the constitutional committee will indeed be set
up by the end of the year. And I would like to know
if that is something that both Syria and Russia agree
should happen. I also agree with what my United States
colleague about chemical weapons.
Turning to the humanitarian side, which is the main
purpose of the meeting today, I want to underscore what
the Under-Secretary-General said about humanitarian
principles and the aid needing to go to people in the
most need. It is very worrying that we do not have full
independent needs assessments. Proper refugee return
really cannot happen without that. I would be grateful
to know from the Syrian representative – but also from
the Russians – what has been done to address the United
Nations concerns on the independent needs assessment
on Rukban. I take the point that there may be a security
risk. I think it would be very good if the Council could
have more detail on what that security risk is and how
it might be overcome. I want to recall that United
Nations States Members are obliged to ensure safe and
sustained humanitarian access. As such, the Council
needs to hear that assurance today. It also needs to hear
that something will be done about security and that the
10/21

29/10/2018

United Nations convoys will be able to get through to
those desperate people. I think we keep ducking at that
issue in the Council. We keep raising the issue and have
not yet received a satisfactory answer. It would be very
good to get clarity on that today.
I also wanted to note that, with regard to
humanitarian access and refugee return, we need to
include the issue of security, freedom from political
persecution and from arbitrary arrest if communities are
to feel safe and secure about returning to their homes.
Finally, I want to endorse the five asks that the
Under-Secretary-General set out today. I want to echo
the call for unity on renewing resolution 2165 (2014). I
think that would be a very powerful signal of progress on
the ground. I want to speak again about the importance
of movement forward on the political process.
Mark mentioned the need for more generosity from
donors in terms of funding some of the United Nations
plan. I would like to say that, in response to the crisis,
the British Government has committed $3.47 billion
to Syria since 2012, and that includes $1.25 billion
actually spent inside Syria itself. Notwithstanding
that, I would like to echo what the French Ambassador
said about reconstruction. There is a difference
between humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
money. Reconstruction money will be available from
Western Governments only in the context of a credible,
sustainable political process that redresses and
addresses some of the underlying concerns in Syrian
politics today.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would also like to
thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his comprehensive briefing. We
support his five recommendations.
We have to acknowledge that the conflict in Syria
has resulted in violence and violations of international
law, including human rights law, and has brought
suffering to the civilian population of Syria on a
scale that is unique in today’s world. Despite reaching
unanimity in previously adopted resolutions — for
example, resolution 2401 (2018) — we are still lacking
substantial change on the ground. We understand that
any solution is not entirely in our hands, but still we
should try to do our utmost to find a possible way to
provide life-saving aid.
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

The agreement between Russia and Turkey to
establish a demilitarized area in the Idlib de-escalation
zone allowed us to avoid risk of a humanitarian
catastrophe. However, civilians across Idlib and
surrounding areas have continued to face a range of
protection threats, and massive humanitarian needs
have persisted. The situation of the 3 million people in
Idlib is a cause for very serious concern. We consider
the agreement between Russia and Turkey a right move
towards avoiding a humanitarian catastrophe. However,
at the same time, we urge all parties to the conflict to
ensure the full implementation of the agreement.
We reiterate our call to all parties to the conflict
to implement the ceasefire to ensure unhindered and
safe humanitarian access for all humanitarian actors
to the whole territory of Syria, including cross-border
delivery of humanitarian assistance, in particular in the
Rukban area, as well as areas that have recently changed
control. In that context, Poland would again like to
strongly emphasize the need for full compliance by all
the parties with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
We also underline the obligation of all parties to the
conflict to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The protection of civilians in armed conflicts should be
at the centre of our debate. We must put in place practical
measures to effectively prevent or minimize civilian
casualties and incidental damage to civilian objects.
Humanitarian assistance is by definition dependent
upon those who provide it, that is, humanitarian and
medical personnel. We must not forget that their safety
and security need to be prioritized. They must be
protected while performing their tasks.
We would like to reiterate our strong call to all
the parties with influence over the situation on the
ground, especially the Astana guarantors, to take all
the necessary actions to achieve a full cessation of
hostilities throughout the Syrian territory.
The scale of the Syrian crisis and humanitarian
needs remain enormous. In that regard, we are deeply
troubled by the severe situation of the most vulnerable
victims of this conflict — especially children, women,
members of religious minorities and internally displaced
persons. Those groups currently constitute half of the
current population of Idlib. If they are not protected, we
risk a humanitarian catastrophe that might also include
a serious threat of sexual violence.

S/PV. 8384

Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement remains the only way towards peace. In
that regard, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the establishment of the constitutional committee.
That requires a genuine political transition in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué,
(S/2012/522, annex), negotiated by the Syrian parties
within the United Nations-led Geneva process.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to say that we, as a country with a strong stance on
achieving a world free of terrorism and on promoting
dialogue among civilizations and religions, are deeply
shocked by the tragic shooting in a sacred place of
worship, the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh,
and on the holy day of the Sabbath. We offer heartfelt
condolences to the families of the 11 victims and wish
the injured a speedy recovery. Our hearts and solidarity
are with the Jewish community of the United States
and worldwide. My delegation strongly condemns such
acts of anti-Semitism, hatred and bigotry, which should
have no place in the twenty-first century, and therefore
calls for greater action to ensure peace, harmony and
mutual respect.
We also offer our condolences to the Government
and the people of Indonesia for the tragedy that cost
the lives of 189 passengers aboard Lion Air. We grieve
their loss with our deepest sympathies and solidarity.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for his comprehensive and informative briefing.
Kazakhstan welcomes the positive changes in Idlib
following the creation of a demilitarized buffer zone,
in particular, with the restoration of transport and
communications. We believe that the Sochi agreement
should be promptly implemented in full compliance
with the norms and principles of international
humanitarian law. This agreement will consolidate the
progress achieved and provide an opportunity to begin
political negotiations. At the same time, we condemn the
provocative actions of terrorist organizations, including
in Aleppo, that do not recognize the agreement. The
international community should not allow terrorist
groups to undermine these agreements.
Kazakhstan expresses its concern over the safety
and protection of civilians in Syria’s rural Deir ezZor governorate, where fighting has displaced more
than 30,000 people since July. We have been informed
that the internally displaced persons have settled in

18-3450111/21

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

makeshift camps in the governorate and are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance. We commend the
United Nations for its efforts aimed at ensuring that
there is sufficient food and nutrition and water, as well
as sanitation and hygiene assistance, to satisfy the
needs of the internally displaced people in the area.
Over the past month, many scores of civilians
have reportedly been killed and injured, while up to
10,000 civilians remain trapped inside the Hajin area.
Kazakhstan continues to urge all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
to take constant care to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including humanitarian personnel
and assets.
We also express our concern over a large number of
explosive devices left by Da’esh militants, and call for
support of the United Nations initiative to undertake
mine clearance in these territories. This will allow to
eliminate unexploded ordnance, launch humanitarian
operations and give refugees the opportunity to
return to their homes. The international community
should strengthen its efforts aimed at restoring
Raqqa’s infrastructure and at clearing the mines
in its neighbourhoods since such efforts will allow
hundreds of thousands of displaced people to come
home. International humanitarian organizations should
work more actively with local community structures
to ensure that the refugees returns are voluntary and
carried out safely and with dignity.
Kazakhstan calls upon the international community
to support all parties to the inter-Syrian negotiation
process aimed at achieving a peaceful solution to the
crisis, and to use the previously mentioned positive
progress to improve the humanitarian situation.
Moreover, all interested parties should cooperate with
the United Nations and its specialized agencies, and
give equal attention to the humanitarian situation in
all regions of the country. However, the humanitarian
crisis requires a holistic and comprehensive approach,
going beyond the simple delivery of aid.
Kazakhstan therefore offers its full support to
Mr. Lowcock and Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.
We highly esteem the contributions of the Special
Envoy in attempting to get the constitutional committee
established and in promoting dialogue between the
different formats on Syria.
Kazakhstan warmly welcomes the recent Istanbul
summit attended by the leaders of France, Germany,
12/21

29/10/2018

Russia and Turkey. As the first summit on Syria to bring
together the representatives of the small group and the
Astana process, it demonstrated that we may be close
to finding a solution to the crisis. As we noted earlier,
Kazakhstan strongly supports the dialogue of the
Astana format with other forums. This dialogue augurs
well for new approaches to addressing both political
and humanitarian issues. In this context, we encourage
the outcomes of the summit, including those relating
to the soon-to-be-created the Syrian constitutional
committee. Moreover, given that the situation in Syria
is gradually stabilizing, we hope that humanitarian
assistance will reach the population in need through
direct routes as quickly as possible.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes today’s briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
excellent briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the signing on 17 September
by the Russian Federation and Turkey of the agreement
establishing a demilitarized zone in the governorate
of Idlib. This agreement prevented the much feared
confrontation between the warring parties, thus
avoiding the unprecedented humanitarian disaster that
would have resulted. Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges all
parties to resolutely support the implementation of
the provisions of this agreement, in particular those
relating to the withdrawal of heavy weapons and armed
combatants from the demilitarized zone.
Indeed, the situation in Syria remains fragile,
particularly in the governorate of Idlib, where the risk
of renewed fighting cannot be ruled out. My country
therefore calls on the actors in the Syrian crisis to
exercise restraint and take the necessary measures to
ensure safe, unhindered and sustainable access for
humanitarian assistance to Syrian populations in need,
both in Idlib and throughout the country. Côte d’Ivoire
reminds the protagonists of the conflict in Syria of their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law
and the relevant provisions of resolution 2417 (2018).
It also welcomes the continued multifaceted assistance
of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to
populations living in areas affected by armed clashes.
My country would like to welcome the continuation
of cross-border humanitarian assistance. It also calls
for a renewal of the modalities set out in resolution
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions, so as to provide
cross-border assistance, which is essential in view of
the risks of a deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Idlib province.
My delegation remains convinced that a lasting
solution to the Syrian crisis can only be found through
a political process based on an inclusive dialogue
among all stakeholders. In this regard, it welcomes
the initiatives taken in the context of the Geneva and
Astana processes and the recent quadripartite summit
in Istanbul, all aimed at a cessation of hostilities and
the return of lasting peace and stability in Syria. My
country believes that there can be no lasting peace in
Syria without accountability for the serious human
rights violations in that country. It therefore urges
all parties, including the States, civil society and
United Nations agencies, to cooperate fully with the
international, impartial and independent investigative
assistance mechanism to ensure that armed persons or
groups responsible for war crimes are held accountable
before the competent international courts.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire wishes to reiterate
that a lasting solution to the current crisis in Syria
requires an inclusive political process as well as the
implementation of the conclusions of the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 and the provisions of the
Sochi Declaration of 30 January 2018.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
expresses its deep condolences for the victims on board
Indonesia’s Lion Air and expresses its sympathy to
their families.
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
for his briefing. We have taken note of the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on humanitarian relief efforts in
Syria (S/2018/947).
At present, the overall situation in Syria remains
calm. The memorandum of understanding between
Russia and Turkey on stabilizing the de-escalation zone
in Idlib is being implemented. The situation in Idlib
has been eased, the conflicts across the entire territory
of Syria are on the decline, and a more favourable
environment for improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria has therefore been created. At the same time,
years of conflict have resulted in massive humanitarian
demand in the country, featuring a large population in
need of assistance and severely damaged infrastructure.

S/PV. 8384

The international community should continue to
assist the Syrian people in cash and in kind, with the
current focus on preparation for winter. We have noticed
the gradual reopening of Nasib and other major crossing
points along the Syrian-Jordanian border. Major road,
power grid, water supply and other infrastructure
are gradually being restored, thus creating a more
favourable environment for the reconstruction of the
country and the return of refugees. Only by steadily
advancing the reconstruction efforts can expectations
of the Syrian people be met and normal life be resumed.
The international community should actively support
the reconstruction efforts of the Government and the
people of Syria, including enhanced efforts aimed at
clearing explosive remnants of war.
All parties in Syria should bear in mind the
future of the country and the well-being of its people,
follow the relevant Council resolutions, maintain the
ceasefire, halt all hostilities, settle differences through
dialogue and consultations and expeditiously improve
the humanitarian situation. The United Nations
and the international community should strengthen
communication with the Syrian Government and
provide assistance to all areas in need in Syria. At
the same time, humanitarian relief efforts in Syria
should be guided by the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and non-politicization and be based on
respect for Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity.
Terrorist groups continue to threaten Syria’s
security and hinder humanitarian-relief efforts. The
international community should be firm in combating
all terrorist organizations listed by the Council,
consolidate the results of counter-terrorism efforts and
restore stability in Syria.
China has been making tireless efforts to alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Syria. Last July,
President Xi Jinping announced new initiatives at the
eighth ministerial meeting of the China-Arab States
Cooperation Forum to provide humanitarian assistance
to Syria and its affected neighbours, which we will
actively implement. Not long ago, China delivered
power equipment, such as cables and transformers,
to Syria, which we believe will play a positive role in
improving Syria’s power infrastructure and ensuring
people’s basic livelihoods. China remains committed to
helping the Syrian people.

18-3450113/21

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Like others, I would like
to start by expressing our sincere condolences to the
people and the Government of Indonesia following the
plane crash.
We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his briefing. We express our
appreciation to the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners for their continued work to provide
humanitarian assistance in Syria.
As the Secretary-General stated in his report
(S/2018/947), we are witnessing a reduced level of
hostilities in a number of areas in Syria. Due to the
agreement reached between Russia and Turkey,
military activities have also dramatically decreased in
Idlib. In that regard, we appreciate the continued efforts
of Russia and Turkey and stress the importance of the
sustained implementation of the de-militarization
agreement, which averted a possible humanitarian
catastrophe in Idlib.
Despite those encouraging developments, we also
note with concern that the humanitarian needs in Syria
remain acute. There are some areas, such as Rukban
camp, where humanitarian conditions are grave. In
addition, humanitarian access remains a challenge
in providing aid to hard-to-reach areas, as well as to
places that have seen a change of control. Civilians
also continue to be affected by the direct or indirect
consequences of hostilities.
Amid those conditions, we appreciate that the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners have
reached out to millions, providing life-saving assistance
to those in need through regular programming and
cross-border assistance, which, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, remains an indispensable part
of the humanitarian response. As inter-agency convoys
have not been deployed since August, we encourage
the United Nations to continue its communication
and engagement with Syrian authorities to ensure
that humanitarian access to priority areas that change
control is ensured. Furthermore, the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners still require safe, rapid,
unhindered and sustained humanitarian access to
effectively respond to the continued needs of millions
of Syrians. The protection of civilians and civilian
facilities also remains imperative.
Finally, as we discussed last week (see S/PV.8383),
finding a comprehensive and inclusive political
solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015), is the best
14/21

29/10/2018

way to end the suffering of the Syrian people — hence,
our continued support to Special Envoy De Mistura
as he makes every possible effort to revitalize the
political process, starting with the establishment of
the constitutional committee in his remaining few but
critical weeks. In that regard, we welcome the outcome
of the Quartet summit held in Istanbul on Saturday,
which we believe could contribute to the relaunching of
the political process.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I,
too, would like to begin by extending condolences to
the Government and the people of Indonesia following
the tragic plane crash.
We welcome today’s meeting
Mr. Lowcock for his detailed briefing.

and

thank

We would like to underscore the considerable
reduction in the level of violence in Idlib and
surrounding areas following the agreement reached in
September between Turkey and the Russian Federation.
At the same time, we are concerned about the fact
that millions of civilians in Idlib and other areas in
Syria remain extremely vulnerable. As mentioned, the
humanitarian situation in Idlib is far from encouraging.
The detonation of improvised explosive devices
and other reprehensible acts of violence attributed
primarily to Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham continue to
claim lives and injure civilians. Malnutrition and the
spread of disease have increased. We believe that it is
necessary to prevent further deterioration and reverse
the humanitarian situation in Idlib and the rest of
Syria. The agreement brokered by Turkey and Russia
must be taken advantage of to more effectively and
sustainably protect civilians, in line with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We note that the situation in Rukban also requires
special attention. The 45,000 people who remain in the
camp endure uncertain living conditions, do not receive
medical care and find it very difficult to source water
and food. We would therefore like to underscore the
importance of providing access to the area for United
Nations and other humanitarian workers and highlight
the need to support their action in the coming months.
In addition, we welcome the fact that the return to
Raqqa is now possible and underscore the need for the
international community to continue working to reduce
the high risk posed by the presence of many improvised
explosive devices. We stress that the vulnerability
of millions of internally displaced persons requires,
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8384

among other urgent measures, the immediate, safe
and unhindered access of humanitarian assistance, in
particular cross-border assistance. It is also important
to ensure the right of refugees and internally displaced
persons to voluntarily return to their homes and
businesses, in a safe and dignified manner, according
to internationally agreed guidelines.

for distribution aid to those most in need. These are
crucial preconditions for the delivery of principled
humanitarian aid. We need access for the delivery of
aid, for the independent assessment of needs and for
monitoring the situation in the light of the protection
thresholds of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

We would like to conclude by praising the
tireless and courageous efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its staff to
provide an effective humanitarian response in Syria, as
well as by imploring all parties concerned to commit to
finding a political solution to the conflict, starting with
the establishment of a constitutional committee by the
end of the year.

The humanitarian needs in Idlib are among the
most serious in the country. Three million civilians
remain trapped between the Syrian Army and the
Turkish border. On the basis of the information that
Mr. Lowcock has just provided, it is clear that crossborder assistance is currently an indispensable lifeline
for civilians in Idlib. In September, more than 600,000
people received food aid from Turkey through that
mechanism. The message from the Council should be
clear that it is a matter of life and death to continue this
humanitarian channel until the end of the year. There is
no alternative to cross-border aid if we want civilians
in Idlib to survive.

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First of all, let
me join others in offering condolences to the families
of the victims of the terrible plane crash in Indonesia.
Let me thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his sobering
briefing. Let me also thank the humanitarian workers in
Syria for their tireless efforts to improve the lives of those
in need. Those colleagues from the United Nations, as
well as from international and local non-governmental
organizations, including the White Helmets, deserve
our deep respect, gratitude and support.
I will focus on three points: first, the need for
humanitarian and cross-border access; secondly, the
need for sustained de-escalation in Idlib and respect for
international humanitarian law; and, thirdly, the need
for a United Nations-led political process.
First, with regard to access, humanitarian needs
remain high throughout the country, after nearly eight
years of continuous warfare. We are deeply concerned
about the lack of access within Syria, even to areas now
in the hands of the Syrian regime. The regime does
not allow inter-agency convoys to reach those most in
need. It has not done so since 16 August. Several areas
to which access is being denied were previously in the
hands of the Syrian opposition. It is unacceptable that
civilians continue to be collectively punished by the
regime for living in former opposition-held areas. The
Syrian Government should not be allowed to continue
interfering in the delivery of life-saving aid. We cannot
accept a situation where so-called hard-to-reach areas
are only hard to reach because of artificial barriers
imposed by the Syrian regime. It has a responsibility
towards all its citizens. The Syrian regime must
guarantee access for objective needs assessments and

We are concerned about Mr. Lowcock’s report that
the convoy has not yet reached Rukban. The situation of
the 45,000 people in that camp on the Syrian-Jordanian
border is desperate and a long-term solution for them is
long overdue. We call on the parties involved to work
to come up with solutions, taking the dignity of those
trapped there into account.
My second point concerns the need for sustained
de-escalation in Idlib and respect for international
humanitarian law. As others have done, we welcome the
drop in violence in and around Idlib since the conclusion
of the memorandum of understanding between Turkey
and Russia. It has reduced the immediate risk of a
humanitarian catastrophe and brought the people
of Idlib a moment of respite. It is still essential to
preventing an all-out military offensive in Idlib. We
call on all the parties to translate the reduced violence
in Idlib into a sustainable ceasefire that can lead to a
negotiated solution for Idlib.
Respect for international humanitarian law is
an obligation for all parties to the conflict in Syria.
That includes protecting civilians and facilitating
principled humanitarian action. Civilians need to be
able to leave Idlib freely if they wish to do so of their
own free will. In addition, the existing de-confliction
measures should bring an end to the inhumane attacks
on hospitals that we have witnessed throughout the
war in Syria. However, de-confliction should not turn

18-3450115/21

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

into a thinly veiled mechanism for granting approval
for humanitarians and doctors to operate. In our view,
humanitarians and doctors must always be able to do
their work. The responsibility for any attack now lies
fully with the Syrian regime and its allies supporting
them from the air. Those responsible will be held
to account.
My third point has to do with support for a United
Nations-led political process. On Friday, when the
Council discussed the constitutional committee
(S/PV.8383), I stressed that the committee is not a goal
in itself but rather part of the broader United Nationsled political process based on the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). Peace
and stability in Syria can be found only through a political
solution that is inclusive of all Syrians. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands therefore strongly disagrees with
premature calls for reconstruction aid and the return
of refugees. There will be no reconstruction aid for
Syria from the European Union until a comprehensive,
irreversible, credible and inclusive political transition is
firmly under way. It should be negotiated by the Syrian
parties to the conflict on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communiqué. We see the role
of the United Nations, and especially that of Staffan de
Mistura and his successor, as crucial in this context. I
would once again like to draw the Council’s attention
to a statement by eminent jurists setting out clear
standards for reconstruction aid in Syria. They gave us
their legal opinion on 24 September that
“without adherence to these standards, the
provision of reconstruction assistance can facilitate
past, continuous or new violations of international
law, which would in turn give rise to complicity or
shared international responsibility”.
I should also underline that any transition requires
accountability for acts committed during the conflic,
which is also specified in the Geneva communiqué.
In order to achieve sustainable peace, those suspected
of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Syria
must be held to account. If the Council continues to
be blocked by a veto in referring the matter to the
International Criminal Court, we will continue our
accountability efforts elsewhere.
At the moment Syria is not ready for the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of refugees, which
can be facilitated only when the protection thresholds
16/21

29/10/2018

are in place, and UNHCR’s involvement is crucial to
monitoring the protection of Syrian civilians.
In conclusion, we fully support the five asks that
Mr. Lowcock presented just now. We need to see
rapid and meaningful improvements for humanitarian
access throughout Syria. Cross-border aid remains
essential to reaching civilians in Idlib, many of whom
are internally displaced and depend on humanitarian
aid for survival. We emphasize the points made by our
French colleague on the need for a sustainable political
solution. Meanwhile, let us make sure that the United
Nations can alleviate the needs of the civilians in Syria
who have suffered so terribly for so long already.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I too would like to
express our deepest condolences to the Government and
the people of Indonesia for the plane crash this morning.
The representative of Kuwait has already spoken
on behalf of Sweden as co-penholder, but after listening
to this morning’s statements, I want to take the floor
just to highlight a few issues on which I hear a broad
convergence of positions. Fortunately, those areas also
seem to overlap with the asks put forward this morning
by the Under-Secretary-General.
First, I want to touch on respect for humanitarian
principles and international humanitarian law,
including access to Rukban and other hard-to-reach
areas, as well as protection, including in Deir ez-Zor
and, more generally of hospitals and other healthcare facilities and schools. That also relates to the
importance of independent needs assessments and
monitoring for principled humanitarian action, as the
Under-Secretary-General discussed this morning. The
second point I want to highlight is the implementation of
the Russian-Turkish agreement on the ceasefire in Idlib
in order to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe there.
Thirdly, in the light of the above we need to renew the
modalities in resolution 2165 (2014) on humanitarian
access, including for ensuring its continued delivery
to more than 3 million civilians in Idlib and across
northern Syria.
Finally, it seems that we all agree that the
humanitarian situation can be alleviated only if we
make progress on the political track, through a political
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015). We hope
that Council members can come together around these
points in a serious effort to alleviate the enormous
human suffering in Syria.
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, of course, we want to express
our sincere condolences to the Governments and the
peoples of the United States and Indonesia in the wake
of their recent tragedies.
We thank Mr. Lowcock for his comprehensive
briefing. We very much appreciate the work of United
Nations humanitarian agencies, particularly when
it is conducted impartially in strict observance of
the United Nations principles for the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
Against a backdrop of the successful liberation
of large parts of Syria from terrorists, efforts are
continuing to restore normal life and return refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes. We
must unite to collectively and actively assist in those
processes and not to obstruct them on politicized pretexts
or with dozens of frankly incomprehensible conditions.
The Russian initiative to convene an international
conference on Syrian refugees was designed to help
unite those efforts. The authorities in Damascus have
given security guarantees to those who want to return
home and are working on a legal framework that would
facilitate their rapid reintegration.
The flow of Syrians returning from Lebanon is
increasing. We can see the effect that the opening of the
Nasib crossing has had on the Syrian-Jordanian border.
People on both sides of the border have been waiting
impatiently for several years for this transportation
artery, which supports regional, trade and human
links, to start functioning again. Such steps deserve
every encouragement for the contribution they make to
achieving a principle as fundamental to the stabilization
of the situation in the Middle East as the establishment
of good-neighbourliness.
The implementation of the memorandum of
understanding on stabilizing the situation in the
de-escalation zone in Idlib based on the high-level
Russian-Turkish agreement is proceeding successfully.
Our Turkish partners are doing everything they can to
get the armed groups and their heavy weapons out of
the demilitarized zone. However, the militias based
there continue to violate the terms of the agreement by
firing on nearby villages, and there are new reports of
suspicious movements of Al-Nusra Front members and
White Helmets with toxic substances. We should point
out that the de-escalation agreements were temporary
from the start, and no one has taken the job of eliminating

S/PV. 8384

the terrorist presence in Syria off the agenda. If the
provocations by radical elements continue, Russia
reserves the right to support effective action by the
Syrian Government to eliminate terrorist strongholds.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about
the disastrous humanitarian situation in Rukban. And
in general, the humanitarian situation in Syria would
improve if the coalition stopped violating the Syrian
Arab Republic’s sovereignty through its illegal presence,
by which I particularly have in mind the well-known
Al-Tanf military base in the south of the country and the
coalition presence east of the Euphrates. The economic
activity in those illegally occupied areas, without
coordinating with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, also raises numerous questions generally.
Leaders from Russia, Turkey, Germany and
France met in Istanbul on 27 October and adopted a
joint statement, and we are grateful to the President
of Turkey for that important unifying initiative. The
summit participants expressed a general disposition
to cooperate with a view to further normalizing the
situation in Syria, for which the conditions have been
established in the framework of the Astana format
through the efforts of Russia, Turkey and Iran. A
commitment was expressed to a political settlement
under the auspices of the United Nations in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015) and with full respect for
Syria’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. Incidentally, the question of collaboration
between the Astana process and the so-called small
group was also discussed at the Istanbul summit.
The importance of getting the work of a
constitutional committee started based the decision of
the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi was
acknowledged, and we hope that it will be able to start
before the end of this year, assuming that the conditions
are conducive. The professionals, however, realize that
it must be recognized as legitimate by all parties if
it is to be efficient and effective. It is important that
everyone understands that it is the people of Syria
who are responsible for its fate, and it is they who
must determine every aspect related to their State’s
structure during the course of the dialogue. After so
many years of war, the country will have to undergo a
process of national reconciliation, one way or another.
And Syria has always been distinguished by a high
level of national reconciliation. The United Nations,
the international community and Syria’s friends can
help, but imposing ready-made solutions, ultimatums

18-3450117/21

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

or deadlines on the Syrians is wrong and futile. And in
any case, the empirical evidence shows that trying to
impose solutions in any regional crisis does not work.
In answer to the numerous questions that have been
directed to us, I would like to inform the members of
the Council that the joint statement by the leaders who
participated in the quadrilateral summit in Istanbul will
be circulated as an official Security Council document
in the next few minutes, and I can assure the Council
that is contains exhaustive answers. I thank the Council
members who supported the joint statement and thereby
affirmed their willingness to work constructively in the
quest for a political settlement of the conflict in Syria.
I would like to bring to the attention of my colleagues
who continue to use terms such as “the Syrian regime”
the fact that such usage is contrary to all the relevant
Security Council resolutions, which speak only of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. A respectful
approach is needed, and it would also help to advance
the political process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Bolivia.
We would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his briefing.
My delegation reiterates its position that it will be
possible to reduce the violence throughout the Syrian
territory within the framework of resolution 2401
(2018). In that context, we want to emphasize the local
agreements and initiatives promoted by the Astana
guarantors, as well as the agreement between Russia
and Turkey that has enabled the establishment of a
demilitarized zone within Idlib province, helping to
reduce violence, evacuate those in need and facilitate
access for humanitarian assistance. We encourage
the agreements to continue with the aim of enabling
people to return to normal life and to their places of
origin. We want to remind all concerned that their
return must be voluntary and unhindered, ensuring
people’s full dignity and safe conditions. In that regard,
we urge that the clearing of unexploded ordnance,
explosive remnants of war and landmines in residential
areas continue.
We reiterate that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Syria. On the contrary, we emphasize
that the parties must respect international law and
18/21

29/10/2018

especially international humanitarian law, in regard to
which we want to highlight the agreements reached at
the meeting held on 27 October between the top-level
authorities of Turkey, France, Russia and Germany. The
meeting should help to reinforce the dialogue ensuring
the ceasefire in Idlib province, in order to protect the
lives of millions of civilians and prevent violence against
civil infrastructure such as hospitals and schools. We
urge the forthcoming high-level meetings to be held
in the next few weeks to strengthen those agreements
and enable lives to be saved and the humanitarian
situation to be improved. In that regard, we consider
that any effort made or action taken in the framework
of resolution 2401 (2018) that provides for combating
armed groups or groups designated as terrorist by
the Security Council should also take into account
the protection of civilians within the framework of
international law. We call on the Council’s permanent
members who have influence on the ground to exercise
it in that regard so that the fight against these terrorists
and armed groups does not involve the loss of more
innocent lives.
Lastly, we want to emphasize that the only way out
of this conflict is to find a sustainable, peaceful solution
through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people
in full respect for their sovereignty and territorial
integrity, within a framework of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva process, under the auspices of the
United Nations, as agreed in the Sochi declaration,
for which it is vital to continue the efforts aimed
at forming a credible, balanced and representative
constitutional committee.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would first like to join my colleagues in
expressing our condolences to the Government and
the people of Indonesia in the wake of the civilian
plane crash.
It is really astonishing that some Western
delegations of permanent members of the Security
Council deliberately insist on mixing humanitarian
and political issues and continue to obstruct honest,
transparent and non-politicized humanitarian efforts.
Those delegations brag publicly that there will be no
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian action in Syria without a response to their
countries’ interventionist political agendas. In fact, we
have heard today those same delegations set a number
of political preconditions that try to strip humanitarian
action of its meaning and politically invest in the
suffering of the Syrian people.
I recall that today’s meeting coincides with an
attack committed by the so-called coalition once
again against the Hajin region, in eastern Deir ezZor, using white phosphorus, which is prohibited
worldwide. That attack caused the death of an entire
family — a mother, a father and their children. The
Council’s meeting held on 24 October (see S/PV.8383)
coincided with a criminal terrorist attack carried out
by terrorist groups in Idlib against Aleppo, which
launched 40 missiles that killed dozens of civilians
and injured dozens more. The Council’s meeting held
on 17 October (see S/PV.8373) coincided with an attack
by coalition aircraft on Al-Soussa and Albubadran, in
Deir ez-Zor, also killing dozens of civilians. All of that
is not seen by the Western States that have talked about
humanitarian needs in my country or by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
United Nations humanitarian agency.
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
through you your friendly country, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, for wisely conducting the work of the
Security Council during the month of October. Your
presidency has carried out the task entrusted to it by
genuinely seeking to maintain international peace and
security while respecting the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations. Many Member States of the
Organization are therefore quite proud of that Bolivian
high performance.
During the various meetings held recently between
Syrian officials and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, the
need to coordinate joint actions between the two
parties for a better understanding and to remove
obstacles and develop the role of the United Nations
in the humanitarian realm in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 46/182, which governs OCHA, was
underscored — in spite of the difficulties caused by a
decrease in financing the United Nations humanitarian
action in Syria, which Mr. Lowcock mentioned today,
and due to unilateral coercive economic measures
undertaken by the United States and the States members
of the European Union and others against the Syrian
people. They claim that there are 10 million Syrians

S/PV. 8384

in need of humanitarian assistance, while those States
impose unilateral coercive economic measures against
23 million Syrians.
The Syrian Government is convinced of the
importance of the role that Member States attach to
the United Nations. Damascus continues to count on
that role to help Syrians who have suffered from the
terrorist war imposed against my country, Syria, a
role that preserves the credibility and effectiveness
of the Organization and respects the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. All 28 of the Council’s political and
humanitarian resolutions reaffirm the need to safeguard
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria and its people. Such a neutral, independent and
non-politicized role that does not yield to blackmailing
by certain States is of course based on the Charter and
United Nations resolutions.
We listened carefully to the briefing by
Mr. Lowcock, and we read with interest the report under
consideration (S/2018/947). Allow me to make some
comments that will no doubt respond to the questions
from some colleagues.
First, there is a crucial need to carry out a
transparent, objective and professional dialogue to
modify the reporting mechanism concerning the
humanitarian situation in Syria so that the goal of the
reports can truly be to provide assistance to the Syrians
in need of it. Continuing to submit these reports on a
monthly basis is a waste of time, money and human
resources. We stress that they should be replaced by
quarterly reports, because much of the information in
the current monthly reports is outdated. For example,
in the report before us we are told of what took place a
month or two ago, whereas we should really be looking
at what is taking place in the current month.
Secondly, there is an urgent need for a transparent,
objective and professional discussion on the content of
the reports so that they are not used by some to exert
political pressure and blackmail. It is unreasonable
when everyone has understood that a terrible terrorist
war has been taking place in Syria for the past seven
years, and after the confessions made by senior
officials of certain States that their Governments
financed and sponsored terrorism — not to mention
those who spoke before the Congress and the Senate, or
the previous Chief of Staff and the previous Minister of
Defence — and yet the authors of the reports continue

18-3450119/21

S/PV.8384

The situation in the Middle East

to draft them in a negative, politicized way against the
Syrian Arab Republic and its institutions, especially
given that everyone knows by now that the terrorist
groups continue to use civilians as human shields and
hospitals and schools as military bases from which to
launch their terrorist operations, and that the source of
lies targeting the Syrian Government are the terrorist
groups and their supporters.
That is all the more so given that the reports
include many errors and their authors deviate from
their mandated task, while also deliberately ignoring
the observations and comments provided to the
Secretariat by the Syrian Arab Republic. In fact, we
have submitted 56 formal responses to OCHA’s reports,
including clear answers to all of the questions, but those
comments were never reflected in subsequent reports.
We have been trying to establish cooperative links with
OCHA for years, and we provide OCHA with all the
necessary information. Nevertheless, our comments do
not arouse the interest of OCHA officials. The remarks
from witnesses and White Helmets — and yellow
helmets and red helmets — are taken by them, but not
the information provided by the Syrian Government.
Thirdly, it is surprising that the report claims
that the Syrian Government did not authorize the
humanitarian convoy plan for September and October.
What he heard today from Mr. Lowcock confirmed that.
But the truth is that my country’s Government asked
the United Nations to include the liberated areas in the
plan, which were already included in the assistance
plan for besieged and hard-to-reach areas. We have
requested that those areas be included in the periodic
programme plan for aid delivery. However, the United
Nations has not included those liberated areas in the aid
plan. Why? I do not know. Mr. Lowcock has the answer.
Fourthly, with regard to the aid delivery to the
Rukban camp, which, according to my geographic
information, is a camp in Syria, because certain
delegations have spoken as though it were a camp in
Somalia or the Maldives, I underscore that the Syrian
Government has given its approval to United Nations
agencies to send a humanitarian assistance convoy to
the camp. That would be done in cooperation with the
Syrian Red Crescent and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, directly from the Syrian Arab Republic.
However, having reached the 55-kilometre mark on
26 October, the United Nations convoy returned swiftly
to Damascus due to the deterioration of the security
situation and reports of an imminent Da’esh attack that
20/21

29/10/2018

was going to be carried out against the convoy from the
American-controlled zone, in spite of the assurances
provided by the United States to the United Nations
on the safety of the convoy. That is clear evidence that
the United States is basically impeding the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the Rukban camp and is the
main cause of the suffering of its civilian inhabitants.
We recall that Da’esh terrorists moved some time ago
from the Rukban area, which is under the control of
American troops, and towards Al-Suwayda, attacking
it and killing 300 civilians at dawn. Those terrorists
then went back from Al-Suwayda to Al-Tanf, in the
area of Rukban — that is apparently not in Somalia.
Fifthly, my country regrets that the authors of the
report promote cross-border assistance in conformity
with the directives of certain Western States, even
though it has proven to be ineffective and not guaranteed
to reach its intended civilians. That assistance is
indirectly helping terrorists who seize it and use it for
the continuation of their terrorist activities in Syria.
For months, the Government of my country has been
sending inquiries about the feasibility of that assistance,
even if it is monitored by the so-called third party. We
are still yet to receive answers in that regard.
Thanks to the safer and more stable situation on
the ground due to the victory over terrorism and the
Government’s continuous rehabilitation of the areas
that were destroyed by terrorists and a subsequent
return to normal life, the conditions are now in place
for the voluntary return of Syrian refugees who had
left their homeland due to terrorism and unilateral
coercive economic measures that deprived them of
their livelihoods. In fact, we are seeing the return of
thousands of Syrian refugees from abroad to Syria,
in spite of the attempts of certain Western States to
prevent them from doing so by intimidating them
with flimsy pretexts and politicizing an exclusively
humanitarian issue. Those States use this issue to
implement their political agenda by linking the return
of refugees to the political process. That is confirmed
by what we have heard today from the delegations of
certain Western States.
In conclusion, as we write the final chapter in the
Syrian crisis, Syrians — those who have remained in the
country and those who were forced to flee the country
due to terrorism — are determined to work together
to rid their country of the remnants of the terrorist
war and rebuild it with their own hands, capabilities
and expertise.
18-34501

29/10/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Pertaining to what certain delegations said about
the situation in the city of Idlib, I would like to remind
everyone in the Council that Idlib is a Syrian city. No
one has greater concern than the Syrian Government
for that city and its inhabitants, who have been used as
human shields by terrorist groups.
My country reaffirms its commitment to the
Sochi agreement of 17 September and welcomes
any initiative to stop the bloodshed of Syrians. We
welcome any initiative to bring safety and security to
all of the Syrian territories that have been struck by
terrorism. My Government also underscores that it will
continue to combat terrorism until we liberate the last
inch of Syrian territory from the clutches of terrorists

S/PV. 8384

and terrorism and from any foreign military force
illegitimately present on Syrian soil.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the United Kingdom has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to repeat
something that I have said before in the Chamber.
Criticizing the United Nations for doing its job should
not be the task of anyone speaking in the Chamber. I
know that we need to have free speech and I know that
we need to be frank. But the United Nations, including
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, has done an outstanding job in Syria.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

18-3450121/21
