UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/15
4 April 1996
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH/FRENCH/
RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3647th meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 April 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 29 March 1996 (S/1996/210*) submitted pursuant to its resolution
1035 (1995) of 21 December 1995, and the report of the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
annexed to the letter from the Secretary-General to the President of the
Security Council of 13 March 1996 (S/1996/190). The Council welcomes both
reports.
"The Security Council notes that, on the whole, the implementation of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Annexes thereto (collectively the Peace Agreement, S/1995/999, annex) is
proceeding according to the timetable established by this Agreement. It
also notes, in general, satisfactory compliance with the military aspects
of the Peace Agreement as confirmed in the most recent report to the
Council on IFOR operations (S/1996/215, annex and appendix) and stresses
that now the main emphasis in implementation efforts by the international
community and the Bosnian parties themselves should shift to the civil
aspects of the Agreement.
"The Security Council stresses that the responsibility for
implementing the Peace Agreement rests primarily with the parties to that
Agreement. It demands that they fully implement the Peace Agreement, and
demonstrate a genuine commitment to confidence and security-building
measures, regional arms control, reconciliation and the building of a
common future. In that context, it demands that the parties comply fully,
unconditionally and without any further delay with their commitments
regarding the release of prisoners, implementation of the constitutional
framework, withdrawal of foreign forces, ensuring freedom of movement,
cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
return of refugees, and respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. It calls upon the authorities concerned with the

96-08290 (E)

040496

/...

S/PRST/1996/15
English
Page 2

Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward vigorously on measures
to strengthen that Federation and, to that end, to implement in full the
Sarajevo Agreement concluded on 30 March 1996 (S/1996/244).
"The Security Council is particularly concerned at the failure to date
by all parties to comply fully with the provisions of the Peace Agreement
concerning the release of prisoners, in spite of the repeated commitments
by the parties to do so. The Council stresses that the obligation to
release the prisoners is unconditional. Failure to do so constitutes a
serious case of non-compliance. In this context the Council affirms its
support for the conclusions of the Contact Group Ministerial meeting of
23 March 1996 (S/1996/220) and notes the readiness of the High
Representative to propose measures to be taken against any party that fails
to comply.
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the High
Representative who is in charge of monitoring the implementation of the
Peace Agreement and mobilizing and, as appropriate, giving guidance to, and
coordinating the activities of, the civilian organizations and agencies
involved, in accordance with resolution 1031 (1995). It also expresses its
full support for the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), and other international institutions and organizations involved
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement. It affirms that the
implementation of the Peace Agreement must be strict, just, and impartial.
"The Security Council expresses its strong support for the UNMIBH’s
International Police Task Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UN-IPTF). It
notes that an effective United Nations civilian police operation is vital
to the implementation of the Peace Agreement and encourages the UN-IPTF to
implement its mandate as actively as possible consistent with Annex 11 of
the Peace Agreement as referred to in resolution 1035 (1995). The Council,
bearing in mind the agreement of the parties in Annex 11 of the Peace
Agreement not to impede the movement of the UN-IPTF personnel or in any way
hinder, obstruct or delay UN-IPTF personnel in the performance of their
responsibilities, calls upon the parties to allow UN-IPTF personnel
immediate and complete access to any site, person, activity, proceeding,
record, or other item or event in Bosnia and Herzegovina as the UN-IPTF may
request. It notes with appreciation the participation of Member States in
the staffing of the UN-IPTF and urges those Member States which have agreed
to provide civilian police to dispatch expeditiously fully qualified
personnel to enable the UN-IPTF to reach full deployment by mid-April. It
encourages the UN-IPTF to accelerate the deployment of police monitors,
consistent with maintaining their high quality. The Council also expresses
its strong support for the Mine Action Center of UNMIBH and encourages
States to contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Assistance in Mine Clearance.
"The Security Council recognizes that economic reconstruction and
rehabilitation throughout the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina are key
factors for the overall success of the peace implementation process,
reconciliation and reintegration. These tasks require the political will
of and consistent efforts by the Bosnian parties as well as substantial
/...

S/PRST/1996/15
English
Page 3

international assistance. The Council urges that priority be given to
projects aimed at facilitating the process of reconciliation and the
economic reintegration of the whole country. It notes with appreciation
the resources that have already been made available in this respect. It
calls upon States and international institutions to honour fully their
commitments regarding economic and financial assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Council recalls the relationship, as described in the
London Conference, between the fulfilment by the parties of their
commitments in the Peace Agreement and the readiness of the international
community to commit financial resources for reconstruction and development.
It affirms that it is the parties themselves that have the most important
role in re-establishing the economy of their country.
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern over recent
developments in the Sarajevo area which caused thousands of Bosnian Serb
civilians to leave their homes. The Council calls on the parties to make
greater efforts towards reconciliation and the reconstitution of a
multicultural and multi-ethnic Sarajevo, as a city of Bosniacs, Serbs,
Croats, and others, and as the capital and seat of the future common
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It further calls on the parties to
put in place additional measures to ensure security, freedom of movement
and conditions for the return of people affected in Sarajevo and all other
transferred areas. The Council calls on the parties to reverse the trend
of population movements and partition efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina
along ethnic lines.
"The Security Council pays tribute to all those who have given their
lives in the cause of peace in the former Yugoslavia and expresses its
condolences to their families, including to the family of the Secretary of
Commerce of the United States of America.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General and the High
Representative to continue to keep the Council regularly informed on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement."

-----
