96

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

structural socio-economic changes for the strengthening
of national independence and achievemei:it of t~e ultimate goals of social progr~ss and con~idered it ~ppropriate to study the experience of various countries
in this field,
Recalling that in resolution 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 th~ General Assembly reaffirmed the right
of every Stat~ to carry out fundamenta\ social and economic changes for the purpose ~f social progress an~
the necessity to continue the studies of national experience in this field,
Desirous of securing a speedy and complete removal
of obstacles to the economic and social progress of peoples, especially colonialism, ra~ism, racial. discrimination, apartheid, aggression, forei~n occupation_ or_ domination and all forms of inequahty and expl01tat1on of
peoples,
Convinced that peaceful coexist~nce and friend~y
relations among States would contribute to economic
and social development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General16
prepared on the basis of information received from
Governments on national experience in achieving farreaching social and economic changes,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of all nations to
pursue freely their econo_mic and social ?ev.elopment
and to exercise full sovereignty over all their nches and
natural resources;
2. Considers that the elimination of all forms of
subjugation and dependence such as aggression, foreign
occupation, colonialism, apartheid, racism and ~11. forms
of racial discrimination constitutes a prereqmsite for
social and economic advancement;
3. Emphasizes that the carrying out of internal ~asic
socio-economic changes designed to safeguard national
independence and to ensure speedy improvement of the
well-being of the population is of great importance for
the achievement of social and economic progress;
4. Re-emphasizes the advisability of holding, within
the programm~ of advi_sory services, regula~ interregional and reg10nal s_emmars to study the natlon_al e~perience of developmg and developed countries m
carrying out far-reaching social and economic changes
for the purpose of social progress;
5. Calls upon the Commission for Social Development, the Economic and Social Council and the regio~al
commissions to pay special attention, on a regular basis,
to studies and analyses of national experience in carrying
out far-reaching socio-economic changes for the purpose
of social progress;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through
the Commission for Social Development and/or the
Economic and Social Council, a comprehensive report
prepared on the basis of information received from
Governments on national experience in carrying out
far-reaching changes for the purpose of social progress;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress".
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
16 A/10166.

31/39.

Preservation and further development of
cultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 and 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December
1973,
Referring to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 17 in particular to article 15,
which reaffirms the right of everyone to participate_ in
the preservation and development of culture, and bemg
aware that one of the bases of international co-operation
in the cultural field is mutual respect for cultural integrity,
Considering that the cultural dimension of development is integral to the whole development process,
Convinced that the development of cultural values,
cultural exchange and co-operation contribute.to~ ?etter
understanding among States, peol?les an~ mdivi?uals
and contribute to the strengthemng of mternatlonal
peace and security, which is an important pre-condition
for socio-economic progress,
Stressing the need to evolve a harmonious blend of
the cultural values of the traditional civilizations with
developments in science and technology,
Profoundly convinced of the urgent need to develop
international cultural relations,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization on the subject of
the preservation and further development of cultural
values, 18
Noting with satisfaction the work of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in increasing awareness of the need for concerted
action in the field of preservation and further development of cultural values,
I. Requests the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to submit to the General Assembly early in 1978
a progress report on the implementation of Assembly
resolution 3148 (XXVIII);
2. Further requests the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to continue efforts and research in this
field and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Preservation
and further development of cultural values".
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/40.

Protection and restitution of works of
art as part of the preservation and further development of eultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
11 Resolution

2200 A (XXI), annex.
ISA/31/111, annex.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3187 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973 and 3391 (XXX)
of 19 November 1975,
Taking note of resolutions 17 and 24 adopted by the
Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to
19 August 1976,19
Convinced that the promotion of national culture
enhances a people's ability to understand the culture
and civilization of other peoples and thus has a most
favourable impact on international co-operation,
Convinced also that the protection by all means of
national culture and heritage is an integral part of the
process of preservation and future development of cultural values,
1. Invites all Member States to sign and ratify the
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership
of Cultural Property,20 adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization on 14 November 1970;
2. Calls upon all Member States to take all necessary steps to prevent, on their territories, any illicit
traffic in works of art coming from any other country,
especially from territories which were or are under colonial or foreign domination and occupation;
3. Affirms that the restitution to a country of its
objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, manuscripts,
documents and any other cultural or artistic treasures
constitutes a step forward towards the strengthening of
international co-operation and the preservation and
future development of cultural values.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/41.

Second World Black and African Festival
of Arts and Culture

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Referring to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 21 in particular to article 15,
which reaffirms the right of everyone to participate in
the preservation and development of culture,
Conscious of the need for agreement on a system
of values based on justice, equality, freedom and fellowship and on the recognition of the unity of mankind
with all its diverse peoples, races and cultures,
Convinced that contacts and exchanges between
different cultures on the basis of the equality and the
sovereignty of States can make a genuine contribution
to the enrichment of cultural values on a national,
regional and world-wide scale,
Conscious that the recognition of cultural identity
as an integral part of the mobilization of society is an
essential factor in the achievement and preservation
of independence, national sovereignty and development,
Convinced that the forthcoming Second World Black
and African Festival of Arts and Culture will contribute
19 See A/31/197, annex

IV.

. 2? United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organ-

JZahon, Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session,
vol. I, Resolutions, pp. 135-141.
21 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

97

immensely to the promotion of international co-operation and understanding,
l. Commends the efforts made thus far by the international community, including international organizations and the International Festival Committee, in
the preparations for the Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture;
2. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by
Nigeria in its capacity as host country for the Festival;
3. Appeals to all interested and concerned countries
to make all possible efforts at the national and international levels towards ensuring the success of the
Festival.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/77.

Implementation of the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it reaffirmed its resolve to
achieve the total and unconditional elimination of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Reaffirming that the policies of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid are flagrant violations of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
constitute serious violations of the obligations of Member States under the Charter,
Hearing in mind the vital importance of establishing
a new international economic order based on justice
and equality,
Noting that the realization of the national independence of the People's Republic of Angola and the
courageous action of the People's Republic of Mozambique in applying fully the United Nations system
of sanctions against the racist regime in Southern Rhodesia have contributed to the growing isolation of the
racist regime in South Africa,
Realizing the serious threat to international peace
and security resulting from the continued defiance by
the racist regimes in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia of the resolutions and the will of the international
community in relation to the abhorrent policies of apartheid and racial discrimination, the continued illegal
occupation of Namibia and the denial of the right of
peoples to self-determination,
Convinced that the Programme for the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination22
is a major undertaking in the fight against racial discrimination which deserves the full support of all Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations,
l. Condemns the intolerable conditions which continue to prevail in southern Africa and elsewhere, including the denial of the right to self-determination and
the inhumane and odious application of apartheid and
racial discrimination;
2. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of oppressed peoples to liberate themselves
from racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and alien domination;
22 Resolution

3057 (XXVIII), annex.
