A/56/PV.106

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

106th plenary meeting
Monday, 8 July 2002, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-Soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Republic of Korea)

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/56/999)
The President: I should like to invite the
attention of the General Assembly to document
A/56/999, which contains a letter from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the General
Assembly, in which he informs the General Assembly
that 18 Member States are in arrears in the payment of
their financial contributions to the United Nations
within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I should like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is
in arrears in the payment of its financial
contributions to the Organization shall have no
vote in the General Assembly if the amount of its
arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the
contributions due from it for the preceding two
full years.”
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/56/999?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 60 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Draft resolution (A/56/L.80)
The President: Before proceeding further, I
should like to inform members of a revision to the text
of draft resolution A/56/L.80. In view of the fact that
not all the candidates for the chairmanship of the Main
Committees and the vice-presidency for the fiftyseventh session are known at this point, the words at
the end of operative paragraph 3 of draft resolution
A/56/L.80 — “at least two months before the opening
of the session” — should be replaced by the words “as
early as possible”.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/56/L.80, as orally revised.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Chen (Under-Secretary-General for General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services): I should
like to inform members that the adoption of draft
resolution A/56/L.80 would not give rise to programme
budget implications, since no entitlement to support or
services would arise before the President-elect takes
office as President.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/56/L.80, entitled
“Amendments to rules 30, 31 and 99 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly”, as orally revised.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-46111 (E)

*0246111*

A/56/PV.106

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.80, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/56/L.80, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 56/509).
The President: Before we proceed to implement
the resolution we have just adopted, beginning with the
election of the President for the fifty-seventh session of
the General Assembly, I wish to make a few remarks.
The decision we have made today will bring
about a change that will have far-reaching implications
for the work of not only the General Assembly, but the
entire United Nations system. For the first time in the
history of this world body, the President and VicePresidents of the General Assembly and the
Chairpersons of the Main Committees will be elected
well in advance, rather than at the beginning, of a
session. This change does not merely represent a
procedural modification, but constitutes a major step
towards strengthening the General Assembly by
enabling its President to play his or her role in a much
more expeditious and efficient manner.
My personal experience — as was presumably the
case with my predecessors — attests to the need to
ensure continuity and a smooth transition between
presidencies, as well as to better prepare the future
President for his or her job. Although the most
important period in carrying out the duties of the
President is probably the first few months of the
session, that is the very time during the one-year term
when he or she is least experienced as President. As for
me personally, the events following the 11 September
terrorist attacks made it even more challenging for me
to adjust to the new job, as I had to deal with a number
of unexpected and unprecedented contingencies in
conducting the business of the General Assembly. That
experience convinced me that we should find a better
way of selecting and preparing the President of the
General Assembly.
The need to strengthen the role of the President
has long been discussed under the agenda items
entitled “Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly” and “Strengthening of the United Nations
system”. Last year in particular, my predecessor, Mr.
Holkeri, conducted a series of informal consultations
on this issue, which led to General Assembly resolution
55/285, containing reform measures such as the
clustering of agenda items.

2

Reflecting the desire of Member States to
continue this process, last April I announced a plan to
start a new round of informal consultations on the
revitalization of the General Assembly. So far, there
have been four meetings of the open-ended informal
consultations, at which we discussed the non-paper by
the President and reached agreement on the draft
resolution that was adopted this morning. An updated
version of the non-paper will shortly be distributed to
Member States will be forwarded to the President of
the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session for
continued discussion. I would like to remind members
that the effort to reform and revitalize the General
Assembly is an ongoing, long-term process, in which
we need to be steadfast and patient, progressing step by
step and building on past achievements.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
extend my deepest appreciation to the facilitators for
this process: Ambassador Gabriel Valdés of Chile,
Ambassador Hynek Kmoníček of the Czech Republic,
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani of Singapore,
Ambassador Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo of South
Africa and, in particular, Ambassador Jean-David
Levitte of France, who, in my absence, so successfully
chaired the meetings of the open-ended informal
consultations on my behalf.
My heartfelt gratitude also goes to the Chairs and
members of the Regional Groups for their active
participation and cooperation in this process, as well as
to the Secretariat for its valuable assistance.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 60.
Agenda item 4
Election of the President of the General Assembly
Election of the President of the General Assembly for
the fifty-seventh session
The President: In accordance with the provisions
contained in paragraph 3 of the resolution just adopted
by the General Assembly, I now invite members of the
General Assembly to proceed to the election of the
President of the General Assembly for the fifty-seventh
session.
May I recall that, in accordance with paragraph 1
of the annex to General Assembly resolution 33/138,
the President of the General Assembly for the fifty-

A/56/PV.106

seventh session should be elected from among the
Eastern European States. In that connection, I have
been informed by the Chairman of the Group of
Eastern European States for the month of June 2002
that the Group has endorsed the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Czech
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jan Kavan, for the
presidency of the General Assembly for the fiftyseventh session.
Taking into account the provisions of paragraph
16 of annex VI to the rules of procedure, I therefore
declare His Excellency Mr. Jan Kavan of the Czech
Republic elected by acclamation President of the
General Assembly for its fifty-seventh session.
I extend my sincere congratulations to His
Excellency Mr. Jan Kavan.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Czech
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jan Kavan, who has just
been elected President of the General Assembly for the
fifty-seventh session.
Mr. Kavan (Czech Republic): It is a great honour
and privilege for me to be elected President of the
General Assembly at its the fifty-seventh session. I am
really very grateful to all Member States, particularly
the group of Central and Eastern European countries,
for the confidence they have placed in my country and
in me in this election.
I would also like to highly commend the work of
the current President, Mr. Han, the facilitators and
other colleagues who worked tirelessly on the
resolution that the Assembly has just adopted. This is
truly a very important achievement that will ensure the
smoother transition of responsibilities of Presidents of
the General Assembly and will, of course, enable me,
and all future Presidents, to be far better prepared for
the demanding tasks ahead.
During my presidency I will be committed to
working towards the effective implementation of the
Millennium Declaration, the Monterrey Consensus and
the outcome of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development. I will pay special attention to the
foremost task of the United Nations: the maintenance
of peace and security, including conflict prevention
and, of course, the fight against international terrorism.
I am confident that regular consultations and mutual
cooperation among the principal United Nations organs

are crucial for the better functioning of the
Organization. I am obviously aware of the need to
build on the ongoing process of the revitalization of the
General Assembly.
The Czech Republic has always been a strong
advocate of the notion of the United Nations, and of its
values and its principles. As an active participant in
drafting the Charter of the United Nations,
Czechoslovakia, later the Czech Republic, witnessed
the evolution of the United Nations into an institution
whose role in maintaining international peace and
security, in cooperating in economic, social and
humanitarian areas and in promoting respect for human
rights is extremely important and, I believe,
irreplaceable.
With the support of the Vice-Presidents, of the
Chairmen of the Main Committees and of all my other
colleagues, I should like further to enhance our work to
facilitate dialogue and consensus-finding in the spirit
of constructive cooperation and mutual understanding.
I am convinced that I can count on the experience and
assistance — of which I want to make full use — of the
Secretary-General and his staff. I believe that, together,
we can make the work of the General Assembly much
more dynamic and results-oriented, the ongoing
process of United Nations reform more efficient and
the entire United Nations more coherent.
Let me conclude by saying that I look forward to
fruitful cooperation with all 189 — soon to be 191 —
delegations of Member States in the work of the fiftyseventh session of the General Assembly.
The President: I should like once again to extend
my heartfelt congratulations to the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Czech
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jan Kavan, on his
election as President of the fifty-seventh session of the
General Assembly for its fifty-seventh session. I intend
to make the most of the two months remaining until the
end of the fifty-sixth session to work closely with
President-elect Kavan in order to facilitate a smooth
and efficient transition between ourselves as well as
between our staffs. I hope that that will set a good
precedent not only for future sessions of the General
Assembly, but also for other institutions of the United
Nations system.
Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): I should like, on
behalf of the Group of Western European and other
States, to congratulate Deputy Prime Minister Jan

3

A/56/PV.106

Kavan on his election as President of the fifty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. He will undoubtedly
bring to that post a wealth of experience and skills and
a diverse background, including the positions he has
held at the very highest levels of Government. We have
every confidence that he will provide the leadership
and vision needed at this critical juncture in
international relations and in the work of the
Organization, and that he will be well placed to build
on the impressive legacy that you, Mr. President, will
leave from your tenure.
Mr. Huntley (Saint Lucia): On behalf of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, I wish
to join other speakers in expressing congratulations to
the Deputy Prime Minister of the Czech Republic on
his election to the presidency for the fifty-seventh
session. I should also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your work during your tenure and to pledge the
cooperation of our Group in the period ahead.
Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Group of African States, I wish to
congratulate the President-elect of the fifty-seventh
session of the General Assembly and to assure him that
the African Group will work hand in hand with him to
help him accomplish his noble task. The African Group
is convinced that his political experience and his
commitment — about which he spoke in his statement
before the Assembly — attest to the success that he
will enjoy in conducting the work of the fifty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. The African Group
will do everything possible to ensure that his work is
carried out under the best conditions.
Mr. Tomka (Slovakia): On behalf of the Group
of Eastern European States, I should like to
congratulate His Excellency Mr. Jan Kavan, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Czech Republic, on his election to the important post
of President of the fifty-seventh session of the General
Assembly. We are confident that, with his experience
both in the political field and as head of Czech
diplomacy, he will guide us in our future work and will
contribute greatly to the enhancement of the work of
the General Assembly. I should like to add that, as a
representative of the sister country of Slovakia, I am
pleased to see the representative of the Czech Republic
elected President of the General Assembly.
Mr. Hadjiargyrou (Cyprus): On behalf of the
Group of Asian States, I should also like to join

4

previous
speakers
in
expressing
heartfelt
congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Jan Kavan,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Czech Republic, on his election to this
most important post. We would like to assure him of
our full support as he carries out his important tasks.
We are certain that the long experience he brings to the
office of the President will go a long way towards
ensuring a most successful fifty-seventh session of the
General Assembly.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda and organization of work
The President: Before adjourning this meeting, I
should like to refer to the relevant provisions contained
in resolution 56/509 adapted earlier by the General
Assembly, in particular to paragraph 3 of the
resolution, concerning the election of the Chairmen of
the Main Committees for the fifty-seventh session of
the General Assembly.
In order for the Main Committees to take the
required action, it is necessary to reconvene the Main
Committees during the current session. May I therefore
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
reconvene the Main Committees during the current
session to take the required action to implement the
relevant provisions of resolution 56/509, in particular
regarding the election of their respective Chairmen for
the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly?
It was so decided.
The President: However, as I mentioned earlier,
not all the candidatures for the chairmanships of the
Main Committees and for the vice-presidencies of the
Assembly for the fifty-seventh session are known at
this point in time. The Main Committees and the
General Assembly will therefore meet at a later date to
take the required action, as provided for in resolution
56/509. Members are requested to consult the Journal
of the United Nations for the times and dates of those
meetings. It is my sincere hope that the Chairmen and
the other members of the Bureaux of the Main
Committees for the fifty-seventh session, as well as the
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly for the fiftyseventh session, can be elected as soon as possible.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.
