S/2018/1028

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 November 2018
Original: English

The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to resolution 2303 (2016), in which the
Security Council requested me to report to it on the situation in Burundi every three
months, including on any public incidents of incitement to hatred and violence. Since
my previous report of 25 January 2018 (S/2018/89), my Special Envoy for Burundi
has conducted several visits to Burundi and the region, held consultations with th e
African Union Commission for the Great Lakes Region, and provided briefings to the
Security Council on 10 and 24 May and 9 August 2018. My Special Envoy also met
with President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and former President of
Tanzania, Benjamin Mkapa, the mediator and the facilitator, respectively, of the East
African Community-led dialogue process.
2.
The present report covers political developments in Burundi since August 2018,
including regional initiatives and my Special Envoy’s efforts to help to revive the
inter-Burundian dialogue process, and contains information on activities conducted
by the entities of the United Nations system in Burundi.

II. Major developments
A.

Political developments
3.
The signing by the ruling party and various political parties allied to it of a road
map for the general elections to be held in 2020 and the appointment of new members
of the national independent electoral commission, la Commission électorale nationale
indépendente, are two notable political developments that have taken place in Burundi
during the period under review, both of which have been contested by the opposition
coalition. In addition, the convening of the fifth session of the inter -Burundian
dialogue in October was the main highlight of the reporting period.
4.
The facilitator of the East African Community-led inter-Burundian dialogue
held consultations from 20 to 22 October with civil society organizations, including
women, young people and members of the media and religious groups. Fr om 25 to
29 October, the facilitator held the fifth session of the dialogue process. The
Government, the ruling party, its political allies and civil society organizations
affiliated with it did not participate in either the dialogue or the consultations.

18-18915 (E)

191118

*1818915*

S/2018/1028

Developments within Burundi
5.
On 7 June, the new constitution was promulgated by President of Burundi Pierre
Nkurunziza, who also declared at the time that he would not stand for re -election in
2020. Subsequently, on 3 August, members of the Ministry of the Interior, Civic
Education and Local Development invited registered political parties to attend a
meeting in Kayanza province to discuss issues relating to the 2020 elections and to
seek agreement on themes such as peace consolidation, democracy, political
tolerance, inclusiveness and the promotion of human rights. Twenty-two of Burundi’s
32 registered political parties attended the meeting, which also featured a discussion
on the electoral code and legislation pertaining to political parties. At its conclusion,
20 of the 22 participants adopted a road map for the 2020 elections, including leaders
of the Union pour le progrès national (UPRONA) and other parties considered to be
affiliated with the ruling Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratie -Forces
pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD). The outcome document, known as
the 2018 Kayanza road map, has not been made public, however, participants at the
meeting shared that, in the road map, those who adopted it: (a) commended
government efforts to re-establish peace in Burundi; (b) urged investment in the
country; (c) called for free elections, freedom of political space and freedom of
expression; (d) called for political pluralism; (e) recognised that no political actor,
except those who were allegedly involved in the coup attempt of May 2015, was
subject to judicial proceedings; (f) encouraged the return of political actors and of
refugees; and (g) guaranteed the independence of the national independent electoral
commission. Signatories of the document noted that it would ensu re the return of
exiled politicians who were not under prosecution by the Burundian judiciary and
allow for the registration of the returnees whose names were missing from the
electoral registers compiled prior to the constitutional referendum of May 2018. On
25 September, during a radio talk show to discuss the Kayanza road map, the Assistant
Minister of the Interior stated that, with the new constitution in place, the
inter-Burundian dialogue was obsolete and that any further dialogue should be held
in Bujumbura.
6.
Representatives of both the Sahwanya-Front pour la démocratie du Burundi
(Sahwanya-FRODEBU) party and the Rassemblement national pour le changement
(RANAC) party attended the Kayanza meeting but declined to sign the document. A
Sahwanya-FRODEBU spokesperson stated that the meeting had no consensus and
that the road map had been prepared in advance by unknown actors. Separately, a
RANAC representative declared that the party would challenge CNDD -FDD in the
2020 elections. The opposition coalition Amizero y’Abarundi, led by Agathon Rwasa,
was invited to the Kayanza session but did not attend. Its members criticised the
process as lacking inclusivity, noting that many political actors had been excluded.
7.
The opposition coalition in diaspora, or the external opposition, Conseil national
pour le respect de l’Accord d’Arusha pour la paix et la réconciliation au Burundi et
la restauration de l’état de droit (CNARED), held an extraordinary session on
4 and 5 August 2018, in response to the promulgation of the new constitution, which
it indicated had effectively destroyed the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. In a further statement, on 28 August 2018, CNARED called for the East
African Community-led dialogue to urgently organise a “real round of negotiations,
as inclusive as possible, in order to put an end to the Burundian political crisis ”. On
14 September, the CNARED Chairperson addressed a letter to the facilitator in which
he listed issues and requirements that could facilitate the success of the upcoming
dialogue session, including: (a) compliance with the principle of inclusivity through
the participation of all parties and members of CNARED, including those who have
arrest warrants filed against them; (b) high-level representation of the Government of
Burundi; (c) presence of the mediator in the talks; (d) improved conditions for
2/12

18-18915

S/2018/1028

refugees in Tanzania; and (e) the continued engagement of the African Union and the
United Nations as partners with the East African Community in its facilitation.
8.
On 20 August, while celebrating the anniversary of his re -election in 2015,
Mr. Nkurunziza expressed his appreciation to those Burundians who had voted for
him in 2015 and welcomed “the peaceful, secure and calm climate across the
country”, noting the “total freedom” of the population. He reiterated his commitment
to reconciling Burundians and to promoting the values of love, complementarity,
discipline and mutual respect. The President also warned against an y attempt to
overthrow elected institutions, threatening those who should dare of “falling into their
own trap”.
9.
On 18 September, the President presided over the swearing-in ceremony of the
new members of the national independent electoral commission, whose selection had
been confirmed by Parliament on 29 August. The newly elected members swore
allegiance to the national unity charter, the Constitution and the law and pledged to
organise independent, impartial, free and fair elections with a “strong sense of
patriotism”. Members of the Amizero y’Abarundi coalition denounced the new
configuration as lacking inclusivity and objected to the fact that they had not been
consulted.
10. According to the new constitution, independent members of coalitions are no t
permitted to stand for election. As a result, prominent opposition figure Mr. Rwasa
announced the creation of his political party, Le Front national pour la liberté (FNL)
Amizero y’Abarundi, on 12 September 2018. The development was understood to
reflect his intention to run in the 2020 presidential race. In announcing the new party,
he appealed to other members of the Amizero y’Abarundi coalition, in particular those
from the non-recognized wing of UPRONA, to join it. Consequently, the leader of the
registered Forces nationales de libération (FNL) party, Jacques Bigirimana, filed a
complaint with the Ministry of the Interior against Mr. Rwasa for plagiarizing the
acronym FNL.
11. On 18 October, the president of the Sahwanya-Frodebu opposition political
party announced the party’s withdrawal from the CNARED opposition platform. The
decision was reportedly taken in order to attract to the party more supporters who
wished to see the democratic ideals of late President Melchior Ndadaye realized.
Sahwanya-Frodebu also called upon all political actors involved in the
inter-Burundian dialogue to work together to resolve the crisis in Burundi.
Inter-Burundian dialogue
12. At the nineteenth ordinary summit of the East African Community, held in in
Kampala on 23 February 2018, the facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue was
asked to “expeditiously conclude” the dialogue process; he subsequently made plans
to hold a fifth session of the dialogue in April 2018. The effort was hampered,
however, by the Government’s announcement that it would not participate in any
dialogue-related activity until after the constitutional referendum. After the
promulgation of the Constitution, the facilitator dispatched his team to consult with
the Government, political parties, the external opposition coalition, civil society
organizations, young people, women, religious groups and the media on the holding
of the fifth session and its agenda.
13. A delegation of the joint technical working group, comprising the East African
Community facilitation team and representatives of the African Union and the United
Nations, met in Bujumbura from 16 to 18 August to begin preparations for the fifth
session of the dialogue. During the visit to Bujumbura, the working group met with
members of CNDD-FDD and its political allies, who stressed that the country was
stable and that several items on the facilitator’s agenda had been resolved, notably
18-18915

3/12

S/2018/1028

the amendment of the Constitution and the issue of presidential term limits. They
nevertheless agreed to participate in the fifth session, on the condition that it would
be the last. CNDD-FDD noted that the 2018 Kayanza road map should be the basis
for the dialogue and called for the process to be moved to Burundi.
14. While in Burundi, the joint technical working group also met with
representatives of the Amizero y’Abarundi opposition coalition and other opposition
political parties. It was their view that there were several unresolved items on the
proposed agenda to be discussed during the dialogue, includin g the reconfiguration
of the national independent electoral commission and the emergence of a consensual
road map with a hybrid mechanism that could closely monitor its implementation.
They also concurred that the fifth session should be the final one.
15. From 6 to 8 September 2018, the joint technical working group visited Brussels
for consultations with the external opposition coalition. CNARED members
expressed a willingness to participate in the fifth session. They reiterated, however,
that they be invited as a bloc rather than as individuals, including those who have
arrest warrants filed against them. They also expressed their apprehension with regard
to the Government’s position that the fifth session should be the last.
16. Following the consultations in Bujumbura and Brussels, the joint technical
working group concluded that there was sufficient convergence of perspectives to
convene a meaningful session and began preparations to hold a meeting in Arusha.
The facilitation team also recommended to the facilitator that he convene a meeting
of representatives of civil society organizations, including women ’s, youth and
religious groups and the media, ahead of the plenary session.
17. On the basis of the findings of the consultations, the facilitator sc heduled the
fifth session of the dialogue to take place from 19 to 24 October. However, the
Government of Burundi requested that it be postponed until after 24 October to allow
for the commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the assassination of the
former President, Mr. Ndadaye, organized for 21 October. The facilitator therefore
rescheduled the session to take place from 24 to 29 October.
18. On 20 October, the facilitation opened consultations with representatives of
women’s, youth and religious groups and the media. The meeting was attended by
13 representatives from Bujumbura and outside Burundi. Civil society organizations
allied to the Government boycotted the meeting, however, despite having received
airplane tickets issued by the United Nations, noting that the facilitator had failed to
respond positively to the Government’s preconditions. Upon completion of the
consultations, on 22 October, participants submitted information on the outcome of
their discussions, with a list of recommendations and a road map for the 2020
elections.
19. On 19 October, the Government again requested that the dialogue be postponed,
this time until November, arguing that the month of October was a mourning period.
In a communiqué dated 23 October, the Government indicated that it would not
participate in the fifth session, citing the same reason. Government officials also
objected to the fact that certain preconditions had not been met, namely, that the fifth
session should focus solely on the 2018 Kayanza road map and that the list of
participants be shared ahead of the session. Following consultations with the mediator
and subregional leaders, the facilitator postponed the session by one day in order to
provide an additional opportunity for the Government, the r uling party and its allies
to attend.
20. On 25 October, the facilitator opened the fifth session of the inter-Burundian
dialogue, in the absence of the Government, the ruling party and its allied parties. The
session was attended by 41 representatives of political parties and political actors
4/12

18-18915

S/2018/1028

from within and outside Burundi, including two former Heads of State and six key
women political and civil society actors. In his opening statement, the facilitator
encouraged participants to provide a consensus document, taking into account the
2018 Kayanza road map that was developed by the Government, CNDD -FDD and
allied parties, the 2018 Entebbe road map drafted by the internal and external
opposition coalition during a joint meeting held from 21 to 23 September, and the
recommendations made by the representatives of civil society, women ’s and youth
organizations and the media and religious groups as a result of their meeting in
Arusha.
21. The fifth session was concluded by the facilitator on 29 October. In his cl osing
remarks, he emphasized that it was time to reassess his role and the facilitation
process as a whole. He thanked the facilitation team and the joint technical working
group for their excellent and serious work and for the support they had provided to
him throughout his tenure. He announced that he would develop a joint road map,
comprising the participants’ consensus road map and other previously drafted road
maps. The facilitator’s road map would include the principles and minimum standards
that he considered to be matters of consensus, in an effort to ensure the holding of
credible elections in 2020. He plans to present the document, as well as his final report
on the dialogue process, to the mediator and other Heads of State of the East African
Community, at the upcoming ordinary summit to be held on 30 November 2018, so
that they may consider the way forward.

B.

Security situation
22. During the period under review, the overall security situation remained
generally calm, amid the discovery by police of weapons and ammunition, as well as
reported cases of murder, arbitrary arrests and disappearances. A number of attacks
on villages and military positions by unidentified armed men were also reported.
23. Human rights organizations continued to receive allegations of human rights
violations and abuses, including killings, forced disappearances, ill-treatment, cases
of arbitrary arrest and detention and threats and restrictions on freedom of association,
expression and movement. The victims of most human rights violations are reportedly
predominantly members of opposition political parties, in particular FNL-Rwasa
members or members of opposition coalitions perceived as opponents to the regime
who voted against the amendment of the Constitution in the referendum held in May
2018. The national intelligence service, the police and the Imbonerakure are accused
by those organizations of being the perpetrators.
24. Several attacks by armed individuals were also reported. On 4 September 2018,
two unidentified armed individuals attacked Nkurubuye colline, in Gisuru comm une,
Ruyigi province, along the Tanzania-Burundi border. The attackers reportedly fled
towards Tanzania. No casualties were reported. At night on 15 September 2018, a
military post in Bujumbura province on the border between Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo came under attack by an unidentified armed group,
which had reportedly crossed into Burundi. Police reported that one assailant was
killed, one policeman was wounded, five vehicles were set ablaze and many
properties were destroyed. The Attorney-General of Burundi attributed the attack to
a group of bandits who intended to rob a bank. The murder of a local Imbonerakure
leader and his wife, on 19 September 2018 in Buyumpu zone, Kayanza province, near
the border with Rwanda, was attributed to members of an armed group that came from
Rwanda by the Ministry of Public Security; the group subsequently crossed back into
Rwanda. No intervention by the security forces was reported on the border. Rwanda
did not respond to the accusation.

18-18915

5/12

S/2018/1028

25. In Mukike commune, Bujumbura Rural province, four people were killed and
two others wounded on 3 August 2018 in clashes between national army soldiers and
unidentified armed men. Three of the alleged assailants were detained for
investigation. Clashes between members of the Imbonerakure and an army soldier
from the Mudubugu military camp were reported on 4 August in Bubanza province,
and they resulted in the death of one person and injuries to three others. A Burundian
military vehicle was reportedly ambushed during the night of 5 August in the area of
Rukoko forest, Bubanza province, along the border with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The attack resulted in the death of three soldiers and the injury of five
others. The spokesperson of the Burundian armed group Forces nationales de
libération-Nzabampema claimed responsibility for the attack and warned the
Burundian army away from venturing into the Rukoko area.
26. On 20 October in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Kivu province,
authorities reported clashes between the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (FARDC) and a Burundian armed rebel group in Kabunambo village on
the Uvira-Bukavu highway. Rebels had reportedly crossed the border along the Ruzizi
River and were heading to hills and mountains in the Uvira area. FARDC reportedly
killed one Burundian rebel and arrested five others. A village chief indicated that a
significant number of Burundian armed rebel groups had been seen moving to
Kirema, Bwegera and other villages in Uvira area, South Kivu province. Similar
incidents were reported on 23 October, resulting in the killing of four Burundian
rebels belonging to the Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi-Tabara armed
group and six others jailed in Uvira town. The incident occurred following armed
confrontations between FARDC and the rebels at the Rubarika locality. FARDC
confirmed having seized 22 AK-47s, 1 heavy gun and 1 mortar, which were reportedly
used by the Burundian rebels.

C.

Socioeconomic developments
27. On 22 August 2018 in Gitega commune and province, the Government launched
a 10-year national development plan aimed at bolstering the country’s economy. The
national development plan is anchored in the Sustainable Development Goals, with
36 key targets identified. It is aimed at promoting the development of the rural areas
in Burundi by 2027 through: (a) efforts to strengthen democracy, good governance
and the rule of law; (b) inclusive growth for economic resilience and sustainable
development; and (c) sustainable management of the environment and climate change
and land-use planning. The national development plan would require $2.5 billion to
be fully implemented. International donors have been advised by the Government of
Burundi to use it as a framework for providing assistance covering the various sectors
of agriculture and livestock, food security, support to infrastructure, development of
the mining sector, environmental management and climate change, health and social
protection. The President stressed that the national development plan would lead to
economic sustainability in Burundi. The Minister for Foreign Affairs invited members
of the international community and organizations to the launch event and requested
that they contribute to the financing of the national development plan.
28. On 5 October 2018, the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
held a meeting with a focus on socioeconomic development and the national
development plan. Its Chair, Jürg Lauber, shared his plans t o travel to Burundi from
4 to 7 November in order to convene a socioeconomic retreat and engage with the
Government on the national development plan. At the meeting, the resident
coordinator provided an update on the situation on the ground. He informed
participants that the United Nations country team was in the process of completing a
new United Nations development assistance framework, which would be aligned with

6/12

18-18915

S/2018/1028

the new national development plan. The resident coordinator highlighted some
positive recent trends, including improvements in health, education and agriculture.
He underlined that access to education had considerably improved. He stressed that
cyclical shocks had reversed some development gains and highlighted continued
humanitarian needs. He noted that some 56 per cent of children still suffered from
malnutrition.
29. The Peacebuilding Fund approved $7.1 million in September 2018 for the
promotion of expanding political space and strengthening good governance. The two
new Fund projects are aimed at empowering women and young people in political
processes, promoting localized conflict resolution and prevention support, alleviating
the consequences of displacement and return and strengthening the rule of law and
good governance.

D.

Humanitarian situation
30. The humanitarian situation remains fragile and is marked by high levels of
vulnerability and acute humanitarian needs in some sectors. Levels of food insecurity
and malnutrition have improved, compared with 2017, due to two consecutive
relatively good agricultural seasons. Some 1.7 million people are still food insecure,
a 35 per cent decrease compared with 2017. A slight reduction has been reported in
internal displacement of the population, with the number of internally displaced
persons estimated at 159,000 in August 2018, most of whom are displaced owing to
natural disasters, according to estimates of the International Organization for
Migration. However, an increase in displacement is expected, owing to the start of
the rainy season, which began in September.
31. On 27 September, the National Security Council of Burundi decided to suspend
all activities of international non-governmental organizations working in the country
for three months, pending compliance with the regulations guiding international
non-governmental organizations issued on 23 January 2017. The regulations require
that international non-governmental organizations provide the Ministry of Finance
with access to their finances, maintain a third of their budget in the State bank and
adhere to ethnic quotas in the recruitment of staff (60 per cent Hutu, 40 per cent Tutsi,
30 per cent women). As a result of the suspension, the voluntary repatriation programme
was put on hold, mainly because key activities, such as transport and logistics, transit
centre management, protection and health, had until that time been carried out by two
international non-governmental organizations. The suspension has had a critical
impact on programmes for the 70,000 Congolese refugees in four camps i n Burundi.
Refugees in camps and those in urban areas have also been affected by the
Government’s decision, and the services provided by those international
non-governmental organizations have been reduced to only essential activities.
32. On 17 October, Canada, Japan, Switzerland, the United States of America, the
European Union and the United Nations issued a joint statement in which they
stressed the importance of the work of international non-governmental organizations
in Burundi in, inter alia, fighting malaria, HIV/AIDS and malnutrition, supporting the
voluntary return of refugees and engaging in the agriculture, energy and
entrepreneurship sectors. They offered to support the negotiation efforts between the
non-governmental organizations and the Government.
33. As at 9 November, about 25 international non-governmental organizations have
received authorization from the Minister of the Interior to resume their activities, after
having presented the required documents. Another 40 have also submitted their
documents and should resume operations shortly. The Ministry of Agriculture has set

18-18915

7/12

S/2018/1028

up a commission to observe the recruitment of the staff of international
non-governmental organizations and their procurement practices.
34. During the period under review, almost 1,000 refugees per week returned from
Tanzania to Burundi under the Burundi-Tanzania-Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) tripartite agreement. As at 27 September 2018,
52,160 refugees had been repatriated to Burundi, mainly from Tanzania, but also from
Kenya. The number of Burundian refugees in neighbouring countries stood at
383,283, of whom 227,510 were in Tanzania. The United Nations Development
Programme, UNHCR and other United Nations entities are working on socioeconomic
reintegration activities for returnees. However, it is estimated that an additional
1,000 refugees leave Burundi per month. Continued advocacy for the full respect of
international standards guiding the right of asylum and voluntary nature of returns is
essential.
35 The level of humanitarian financing for Burundi remains low. The 2018
humanitarian response plan, the implementation of which requires some $ 142 million,
was 52 per cent funded as at 9 November.

E.

Human rights and judicial cooperation
Human rights violations and abuses
36. The human rights situation in Burundi remains a concern. During the reporting
period, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) continued to receive allegations of human rights violatio ns and abuses,
including killings, forced disappearances, ill-treatment, cases of arbitrary arrest and
detention and threats and restrictions on freedom of association, expression and
movement. At least 45 unidentified dead bodies were found throughout the country,
some bearing signs of having been subjected to violence. Persistent violations and
abuses of human rights contributed to a climate of intimidation in the country. In most
cases, targets of such violations were members of opposition political part ies or
coalitions, those suspected of opposing the Government or those who voted or were
perceived to have voted against the amendment of the Constitution in the 17 May
referendum. Members of the national intelligence service, the police, the army and
the Imbonerakure were reportedly the primary perpetrators.
37. The limited democratic space remains a critical concern in the context of the
constitutional referendum and as the debate for the elections to be held in 2020 begins.
Civil liberties, such as freedom of expression, association and movement continued
to be restricted, including the suspension of the activities of some local news networks
and human rights organizations. Individuals belonging to opposition political parties,
when seen together, are often accused of holding illegal meetings, arrested, detained
and later released. However, some of them are detained beyond the 14 -day legal time
limit, with reports of physical abuse. On 13 August 2018 in Gitega, human rights
defender and former head of Association burundaise pour la protection des droits
humains et des personnes détenues Nestor Nibitanga was accused of undermining the
internal security of the State and of rebellion and was subsequently sentenced to five
years’ imprisonment. He is the fifth human rights defender to be sentenced since
March 2018, following Germain Rukuki (32 years’ imprisonment) and three members
of the local non-governmental organization Parole et action pour le réveil des
consciences et l’é volution des mentalité s (10 years’ imprisonment each).
38. The ongoing political impasse has had a negative impact on the ensuring of
economic, social and cultural rights, which has seen little improvement. An increase
in unemployment and a rise in the prices of basic commodities and serv ices have
negatively affected the population, and children in particular; this has led to an

8/12

18-18915

S/2018/1028

increase in the school dropout rate and has hindered efforts to address severe
malnutrition.
Cooperation with human rights and judicial mechanisms
39. Contrary to the commitment of the Government of Burundi to resume full
cooperation with OHCHR, noted with satisfaction by the Human Rights Council in
its resolution 36/2, discussions on the new memorandum of understanding between
OHCHR and the Government have remained stalled. The Government has not
responded to the most recent note verbale, of 8 May.
40. In its report (A/HRC/39/63), the Human Rights Council-mandated Commission
of Inquiry on Burundi indicated that serious human rights violations, including crimes
against humanity, had persisted in Burundi in 2017 and 2018. Documented violations
included cases of summary execution, enforced disappearance, cases of arbitrary
arrest and detention, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, sexual
violence and violations of civil liberties, such as freedom of expression, association,
assembly and movement (ibid., paras. 10 and 77). Opposition and suspected
opposition members were cited as the primary targets, especially those who refused
to join the ruling CNDD-FDD party, refused to register to vote in the constitutional
referendum or refused to pay contributions. The key perpetrators were identified as
members of the Imbonerakure, the police and the national intelligence service. The
Government has once again refused any cooperation with the Commission of Inquiry,
despite the repeated requests and initiatives of the Commission.
41. Various government officials, leaders of political parties, and civil society
representatives deemed to be close to the ruling CNDD-FDD party, as well as the
Independent National Human Rights Commission, denounced the report of the
Commission of Inquiry. The Minister of Human Rights, Social Affairs and Gender of
Burundi accused the Commission of being at the centre of “an international
conspiracy against the Government”. On 11 September, both the National Assembly
and the Senate rejected the report, following briefings by the Ministers of Justice, the
Interior and Human Rights. The Speaker of the Senate accused the Commission of
collecting false information on social media and figures provided by insurgents and
by “putschists based in Rwanda”. The Speaker of the National Assembly said that the
report had been “drafted solely based on what the commissioners wanted” and had
failed to mention the Government’s achievements regarding justice, human rights and
security.
42. On 12 September, the Government declared the three members of the
Commission of Inquiry personae non gratae. The Government and allied civil society
organizations organized peaceful demonstrations on 15 and 22 September,
respectively, in Bujumbura and in several other regions of the country to protest
against the report. When the Commission of Inquiry presented its report to the Third
Committee of the General Assembly on 24 October, a representative of the delegation
of Burundi delivered a statement rejecting the report of the Commission and claiming
that the Commissioners were “remotely controlled by external forces”. The
representative of Burundi threatened the members of the Commission, stating that his
country “reserved the legitimate right to bring to justice the authors [of the report] for
defamation and destabilization attempt against Burundi ” as “criminal responsibility
was [considered] individual”. Allegations that the President had used hate speech was
also “a defamation that would not go unpunished”. In response, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights issued a statement, on 25 October, deeply regretting
Burundi’s belligerent and defamatory response to the findings of the Commission of
Inquiry and its members for the work they had done at the express request of the
Human Rights Council, of which Burundi is a member.

18-18915

9/12

S/2018/1028

43. Mr. Rwasa, leader of the Amizero y’Abarundi opposition coalition and Deputy
Speaker of the National Assembly, called upon the Ministry of Justice to prosecute
all perpetrators of human rights violations “in order to avoid providing the United
Nations with pretexts to make such accusations”. Members of his parliamentary group
and other opposition members meanwhile welcomed the report as “truthful and
necessary”. On 8 August 2018, 36 Burundian and international non-governmental
organizations addressed a petition to the Human Rights Council calling for the
renewal of the mandate of the Commission of Inquiry, deeming it “critically
important” to improving the human rights situation in the country. By its resolution
39/14 of 28 September 2018, the Human Rights Council extended the mandate of the
Commission of Inquiry on Burundi for an additional year and urged the Government
to cooperate fully with the Commission.
44. The suspension of the activities of international non-governmental organizations
operating in Burundi, on 27 September, has been interpreted as an effort to exert
greater control over them and their work at the community level, in particular in the
lead up to the 2020 elections.

III. Activities of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi and his Office
45. My Special Envoy travelled to Burundi from 3 to 11 September to continue his
engagement with national stakeholders, including on the inter-Burundian dialogue. In
the margins of the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, my Special Envoy
also interacted with stakeholders and partners concerned with the inter-Burundian
dialogue and the situation in Burundi. He travelled again for further consultations
from 2 to 11 November.
46. In Bujumbura, during his earlier visit in September, my Special Envoy met with
government officials, including the Minister for Foreign Affairs, representatives of
political parties, including the opposition, the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for the Great Lakes Region, women ’s
groups, religious leaders, former Heads of State, members of the diplomatic corps
and other members of the international community. The objectives of the visit were
to assess developments on the ground and to discuss the participation of all
stakeholders in the fifth session of the dialogue. With the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
my Special Envoy discussed the dialogue process, relations between the United
Nations and Burundi and the finalization of the status-of-mission agreement between
the Government and his Office in Bujumbura.
47. On 12 September in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, my Special Envoy briefed the
facilitator of the dialogue on the outcome of his meetings in Burundi with various
stakeholders, and further discussed the inter-Burundian dialogue process. At the
meeting, they exchanged views on the need to ensure that the appropriate preparations
are made before convening the fifth dialogue session, bearing in mind the substantive
divergences listed in the conclusions of the fourth dialogue session.
48. My Special Envoy held consultations with various stakeholders on the status of
the inter-Burundian dialogue, as well as prospects for holding its fifth session, in the
margins of the seventy-third session of the General Assembly in New York from 25 to
28 September. He met with the Prime Minister of Uganda, Ruhakana Rugunda, who
confirmed the commitment of the President of Uganda to assist in the advancement
of the East African Community-led inter-Burundian dialogue. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burundi, Ezéchiel Nibigira, affirmed to my Special Envoy his
Government’s commitment to participate fully in the fifth session of the dialogue. My
Special Envoy also consulted with a number of European permanent representatives
10/12

18-18915

S/2018/1028

and special envoys. In a meeting held in the margins of the seventy-third session of
the General Assembly, members of the international contact group on Burundi
recommitted themselves to support the fifth dialogue session.

IV. Observations and recommendations
49. The decision by the Government of Burundi, the ruling pa rty, and allied parties
to not attend the fifth session of the inter-Burundian dialogue has been received with
concern by various stakeholders and external partners. At meetings held in the
margins of the seventy-third session of the General Assembly in September, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs shared his Government’s concerns on the process but
also reiterated his Government’s commitment to participate in the upcoming session
of the inter-Burundian dialogue. While I took note of the Government ’s conditions
for attending the process, it is ultimately the responsibility of the authorities to create
a conducive environment in which the country can fulfil its potential and the people
of Burundi enjoy their rights and freedoms, including participation in credi ble and
inclusive elections. I believe that the East African Community-led inter-Burundian
dialogue can help to achieve that objective.
50. The political situation in Burundi continues to require the focused attention of
the international community in general, and that of the Security Council in particular,
as mistrust continues to run deep between the Government and the ruling party on the
one hand, and the opposition on the other. The lack of significant progress on the
inter-Burundian dialogue towards a lasting resolution of the 2015 crisis remains a
matter of serious concern, especially as Burundi prepares for the elections to be held
in 2020. Furthermore, grave concerns continue to be expressed with regard to
violations and abuses of human rights across the country.
51. I believe that President Nkurunziza’s declaration in June that he would not seek
another term in office could contribute to easing political tension and has the potential
to bring the parties together to reach consensus while the preparat ion for the 2020
general elections is under way.
52. I commend the East African Community mediator, Mr. Museveni, and the
facilitator, Mr. Mkapa, the African Union and my Special Envoy for their tireless
efforts to resume the inter-Burundian dialogue and encourage the concerned parties
to meet their obligations in putting an end to the political crisis in the country. I appeal
to the East African Community and to all the leaders of the region to redouble their
efforts in order to ensure that stability is restored in Burundi, while preserving the
gains of the historic Arusha Agreement for Burundi.
53. While the focus of the political dialogue is shifting towards the preparation of
the upcoming 2020 elections, all parties should be aware that lasting peace can only
be achieved and sustained if a spirit of compromise and the principles of the rule of
law are applied in the overall governance of the State. Therefore, in order to create
an environment conducive to a resolution to the crisis and to the holding of e lections,
the country needs to engage in strengthening the capacity of its security institutions
to make them more accountable and of service to the people.
54. I take note of the African Union Peace and Security Council discussion on
Burundi, held on 19 September, at which it adopted a number of decisions. The Peace
and Security Council reaffirmed its commitment to the spirit and letter of the Arusha
Agreement, and its support to the efforts of the East African Community -led
inter-Burundian dialogue. It also decided to reduce the number of African Union
human rights observers and military experts in Burundi, while extending their
mandate. I call upon the African Union to maintain its engagement in supporting

18-18915

11/12

S/2018/1028

Burundi and the East African Community as the country moves forward towards the
holding of the elections in 2020. The efforts of the East African Community can only
be made stronger with the endorsement and the support of the African Union and the
United Nations. The United Nations, in particular through my Special Envoy, will
continue its efforts in this regard.
55. I also take note that the security situation across the country continues to
improve, despite reported incidents, acts of violence and alleged incursions of armed
individuals. I urge the Government, however, to open up political space, ensure the
full respect and protection of human rights and quell acts of intimidation. Improving
the security situation in the country will greatly help to ensure the holding of credible
elections in 2020.
56. I am deeply concerned about continuous reports of human rights violations and
abuses and related crimes and call upon the Burundian authorities to conduct full,
impartial, independent, effective and thorough investigations into serious violations
and abuses of human rights so that all perpetrators are held accountable and all victims
are allowed access to effective remedies and adequate reparations.
57. I call upon the Government to fully resume, without further delay, cooperation
with all United Nations human rights mechanisms. I encourage it to conclude the
discussions with OHCHR towards the discharge of its full mandate in Burundi and
the signing of the required memorandum of understanding.
58. I urge the Government to give due consideration to the reco mmendations made
by the Commission of Inquiry mandated by the Human Rights Council and to
implement them. I strongly encourage the Government to engage in dialogue with the
Commission for the sake of the Burundian people and the neighbouring countries
affected by the instability in Burundi.
59. I am deeply concerned by the precarious socioeconomic situation in Burundi,
which is an outcome of the political crisis. Addressing the economic challenges will
require a renewed effort to restore confidence and trust between the Government of
Burundi on the one hand and the donor community and development partners on the
other. I welcome the launching of the national development plan for Burundi, which
has the potential to offer new avenues of engagement. I call upo n the Government of
Burundi and its development partners to forge closer ties and work together to
implement the national development plan.
60. I also urge the Government to work with my Special Envoy to expedite the
finalization of the status-of-mission agreement.
61. I call upon all relevant regional and international partners, including members
of the Security Council, to engage in a thorough discussion following the summit of
the Heads of State of the East African Community, to be held in late Novembe r, in
order to take stock and agree on the way forward. In the light of the situation in
Burundi, I will propose a set of options for the role of the United Nations in Burundi,
following close consultations with key international partners, including the Ea st
African Community and African Union.
62. I appreciate the determined efforts of my Special Envoy and the entities of the
United Nations system in Burundi. The United Nations continues to be a partner to
Burundi and will do its utmost to support the country in finding solutions to its
political and socioeconomic challenges.

12/12

18-18915
