190

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

39/18. Universal realization of the right of peoples
to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights, of the universal realiza­
tion of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and embodied in the
International Covenants on Human Rights, 22 as well as in
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colo­
nial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to self­
determination by peoples under colonial, foreign or alien
occupation and their emergence into sovereign statehood
and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of
foreign military intervention and occupation that are
threatening to suppress, or have already suppressed, the
right to self-determination of an increasing number of sov­
ereign peoples and nations,
Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the
persistence of such actions, millions of people have been
and are being uprooted from their homes as refugees and
displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need for
concerted international action to alleviate their conditions,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the viola­
tion of the right of peoples to self-determination and other
human rights as a result of foreign military intervention,
aggression and occupation, adopted by the Commission on
Human Rights at its thirty-sixth, 23 thirty-seventh, 24 thirty­
eighth,25 thirty-ninth26 and fortieth sessions, 27
Reiterating its resolutions 35/35 B of 14 November
1980, 36/10 of 28 October 1981, 37/42 of 3 December
1982 and 38/16 of 22 November 1983,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 28
I. Reaffirms that the universal realization of the right
of all peoples, including those under colonial, foreign and
alien domination, to self-determination is a fundamental
condition for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights and for the preservation and promotion of
such rights;
2. Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign mili­
tary intervention, aggression and occupation, since these
have resulted in the suppression of the right of peoples to
self-determination and other human rights in certain parts
of the world;
3. Calls upon those States responsible to cease imme­
diately their military intervention and occupation of for­
eign countries and territories and all acts of repression, dis­
crimination, exploitation and maltreatment, particularly
the brutal and inhuman methods reportedly employed for
the execution of these acts against the peoples concerned;
4. Deplores the plight of the millions of refugees and
displaced persons who have been uprooted by the afore­
mentioned acts and reaffirms their right to return to their
homes voluntarily in safety and honour;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to con­
tinue to give special attention to the violation of human
rights, especially the right to self-determination, resulting
22 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

23 See Official Records of the Economic and Soc,al Council, I 980, Supple­
ment No. J (E/1980/13 and Corr.I), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
24 Ibid., 1981, Supplement No. 5 (E/1981125 and Corr.I). chap. XXVIIJ.
sect. A.
25 Ibid., 1982, Supplement No 2 (E/1982112 and Corr. I). chap. XXVI.
sect. A.

from foreign military intervention, aggression or
occupation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
issue to the General Assembly at its fortieth session under
the item entitled "Importance of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights".
71st plenary meeting
23 November 1984

39/19. Status of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and
ratification the International Convention on the Suppres­
sion and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its
subsequent resolutions on the status of the Convention,
Reaffirming its conviction that apartheid constitutes a
total negation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, a gross violation of human rights
and a crime against humanity, seriously threatening inter­
national peace and security,
Convinced that the implementation of the objectives of
the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Dis­
crimination proclaimed by its resolution 38/14 of 22
November 1983 and of the Programme of Action adopted
by the Second World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination 29 will contribute to the final eradi­
cation of apartheid and all other forms of racism and racial
discrimination,
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued policy of
apartheid and its continued illegal occupation of Namibia,
as well as its repeated acts of aggression against sovereign
African States, which constitute a manifest breach of inter­
national peace and security,
Condemning the continued collaboration of certain
States and transnational corporations with the racist
regime of South Africa in the political, economic, military
and other fields as an encouragement to the intensification
of its odious policy of apartheid,
Underlining that the strengthening of the existing
mandatory arms embargo an·d the application of compre­
hensive mandatory economic sanctions under Chapter VII
of the Charter are vital in order to compel the racist regime
of South Africa to abandon its policy of apartheid,
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the
oppressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid,
racism and colonialism and for the effective implementa­
tion of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence demands more than ever all necesssary sup­
port by the international community and, in particular,
further action by the Security Council,
Underlining that ratification of and accession to the
Convention on a universal basis and the implementation
of its provisions without any delay are necessary for its
26 Ibid.. /983, Supplement No. 3 (E/1983/13 and Corr.I), chap. XXVII.
sect. A.
27 Ih1d., /984, Supplement No. 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.I), chap. II. sect. A.
18 A/391505 and Add. I.
29 See Report of the Second World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, l-12 August 1983 (United Nations publica­
tton. Sales No. E.83.XIV.4 and corrigendum), chap. 11.
