S/PV.8255

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8255th meeting

Monday, 14 May 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar
(28 April to 2 May 2018)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-14604 (E)
*1814604*

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

joined the 300,000 others already displaced before the
mass displacement of 25 August 2017.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to
Bangladesh and Myanmar (28 April to
2 May 2018)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bangladesh and Myanmar to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the security Council shall hear
briefings by the co-leads of the Security Council
mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar from 26 April to
2 May, that is, the representatives of Kuwait, Peru and
the United Kingdom.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Alotaibi.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I believe
it goes without saying that first and foremost I would
like to thank the Governments of Bangladesh and of
Myanmar for their assistance and logistical support
throughout our visit. The visit was short — somewhat
of a whirlwind. Without the assistance provided with
both Governments, the visit would never have been as
successful as it was. I would therefore like to thank all
the members that facilitated our mission, as well as my
fellow co-leads. I will focus on the visit to Bangladesh.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like to
thank Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of Bangladesh,
who went to great pains to meet with us despite the
fact that she had just returned from travelling abroad on
the very morning of our meeting with her. In fact, the
protocol services organized a meeting with her before
she began her very busy day of work following her travel,
That gave us an opportunity to hear Bangladesh’s keen
determination to find a solution to the Rohingya crisis.
On 28 April, the members of the Security Council
arrived in Cox’s Bazar to assess for themselves the tragic
plight of the more than 1.2 million persons who are in
need of humanitarian assistance. This is the most rapidly
growing crisis of its kind in the world. Approximately
677,000 refugees from the Rohingya minority had
2/20

14/05/2018

We held two major talks: first with United Nations
working group in Cox’s Bazar and, secondly, with
representatives of the Government of Bangladesh,
represented by Mr. Mohammed Shahriar Alam, MP,
Minister for Affairs of Bangladesh, and the personal
representative of the Prime Minister. During that latter
meeting, it became abundantly clear that the conditions
for the safe, dignified and voluntary return of displaced
persons and refugees were not yet in place.
The working group called for more international
support in the Rohynga crisis. While the humanitarian
response plan has been established, calling for funding
in the amount of $950 million, only 25 per cent of it
is funded.
The Council mission expressed its concern about
potential regional repercussions caused by the refugee
crisis and the sheer size and magnitude of the refugee
camps. It was made abundantly clear to us that the issue
of citizenship needed to be addressed before refugees
and displaced persons could return to Rakhine.
Our meeting with the Foreign Minister and other
senior officials of the Bangladeshi Government made
it clear that they stood ready to continue to provide
humanitarian assistance where they could and to do all
they could to prepare the refugee camps to withstand
the forthcoming monsoon season.
The members of the Security Council then held a
meeting with the Prime Minister to take stock of the
tragedy from the Bangladeshi perspective. We heard
that the international community will continue to assist
Bangladesh in its efforts to try to aid the refugees. On
her part, the Prime minister of Bangladesh expressed
her gratitude to the members of the Security Council,
who throughout their visit voiced their support for
Bangladesh. The Prime Minister underscored once
again that she and her Government would continue to
provide assistance to the refugees and displaced persons
and do all they could to ensure that they could return
in a voluntary and dignified manner when appropriate
and safe.
We then visited a refugee camp, where Council
members were able to see at first hand the scale of the
tragedy besetting the refugees and displaced persons
upon arrival at the border. We met with refugees and
saw their conditions along the zero line demarcating
18-14604

14/05/2018

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

the two countries. We saw many thousands of refugees
and were able to see and hear for ourselves the sorry
state of affairs of those who had lost their homes and, in
the most tragic cases, members of their families.
The border guards of Bangladesh reported the
arrival of a group of refugees, many of whom were
injured, in recent days. The also shared with us images
of victims who had obviously been injured by bombing
and shelling before fleeing to the refugee camps. We
also met local people who said that they were refugees
from Myanmar having arrived earlier but with no
national identity cards. They also reported that the
Myanmar authorities were not upholding their rights,
including those to freedom of movement, education,
access to health care and employment — all of that, in
addition to a national identity card, was being denied
to them.
We then travelled to the largest refugee camp in
the world — the Kutupalong camp, which hosts more
than 600,000 refugees, half of them children. Council
members met with victims of sexual violence, with
orphans and with those who had fled scenes of their
families being massacred and the razed remains of
their villages. We heard first-hand accounts of the
atrocities suffered by those people, and the horrors they
had witnessed.
We also met with civil society and non-governmental
organizations. Council members held two press
conferences during our time in Bangladesh, in Cox’s
Bazar and Dhaka, where we answered questions from
local and international journalists.
In my national capacity, I should now like to
share a few observations and comments on the visit
to Bangladesh and Myanmar. I promise to be brief,
and will make further comments during the informal
consultations scheduled to follow the present meeting.
First, we appreciate the cooperation provided by the
Governments of Bangladesh and of Myanmar and all
that they did to ensure that the Council’s mission was
a success. We look forward to enhanced cooperation
between those two neighbouring countries to address
and resolve the issue of Rohingya refugees.
We agree with the findings of the United Nations
working group with regard to the potential widespread
repercussions if the conditions in the camp deteriorate
further. The Security Council must take measures to
prevent the further exacerbation of the crisis and a

S/PV. 8255

deterioration of conditions, as they pose a direct threat
to international peace and security. That is not only our
own assessment but also that of the working group.
We encountered many women and children at the
border. What made a true impression on me were the
cries of those children who were still seeking their
parents, having fled the violence in Rakhine state.
Their sobs and cries will stay with me.
The Rohingya refugees shared with us that they
had been refused national identity cards. We support
their legitimate call for citizenship and recognition,
and we call on the Government of Myanmar to address
the issue beginning first of all with the question of
citizenship being denied the Rohingya people.
The sheer scale of the destruction of villages in
the north of Rakhine state shows that there were clear
acts of organized and systematic violence targeting a
minority that has committed no other crime than to be
Muslim and a minority. We saw destruction, not just of
a single house or three or four houses here and there,
but large-scale destruction — the razing of houses and
buildings. We think that, given the scale, it could very
well amount to ethnic cleansing.
Those are the comments I wanted to make
for the time being. As I said, I will make further
comments and recommendations when we move to the
informal consultations.
The President: I thank Ambassador Alotaibi for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Meza-Cuadra.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
important meeting on the recent visit by the members of
the Security Council to Bangladesh and Myanmar. Peru
considers it necessary for the international community
and the Council follow the situation of the Rohingya
Muslims in those countries with special attention.
As President of the Council in April, Peru had
the honour of leading the visits, in conjunction with
Kuwait and the United Kingdom. We would also like
to acknowledge the role played by Poland, under whose
presidency the trip we are reporting on today ended.
It was a privilege to work with all of them. We owe
special thanks to the Governments of Bangladesh and
Myanmar for their warm welcome, to the United Nations
country teams in both countries, to the Secretariat for its

18-146043/20

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

unflagging assistance and to the Government of Kuwait
for its generous logistical support, which facilitated the
execution of our ambitious programme.
Following the briefing by my colleague the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait on the activities
in Bangladesh after a brief visit to his country, I will
report on the main activities carried out on 30 April
in Naypyidaw. We had an opportunity to meet with
Myanmar’s most senior officials and to convey the
Council’s positions in line with presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22, adopted unanimously by the Council
last November (see S/PV.8085), as well as in line with
the agreed terms of reference for the trip.
At our meeting with State Counsellor Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, she expressed her desire for a
prompt return of the refugees from Bangladesh to
Myanmar before the monsoon season. In that regard,
in her opinion, the process was being neglected due to
complications with the required administrative forms.
The State Counsellor stressed the importance for her
Government of implementing the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, which is
the second-poorest region in Myanmar. She recognized
the need to draft legislation like the 1982 citizenship
act, but indicated that the process would take time. The
State Counsellor also pointed to the need to create a
climate of trust between communities to facilitate
access for humanitarian agencies. She noted that the
focus on Muslim minorities had led to a perception of
discrimination against other communities.
During the dialogue, the members of the Council
expressed their willingness to support the Government
of Myanmar both in the process of voluntary refugee
returns and in addressing the root causes of the crisis.
It was also stressed that the Government of Myanmar
had to allow full access to the United Nations and
humanitarian agencies and collaborate with the new
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The State
Counsellor was also informed, among other things,
of the urgency of respecting the human rights of the
Rohingya community, of resolving the issue of their
citizenship and of allowing independent investigations
in order to provide for accountability for crimes
committed, and thereby promote reconciliation.
We then met with General Min Aung Hlaing,
Commander-in-Chief of the Myanmar Armed Forces,
who argued that the violence in Rakhine state
was generated by attacks by the Arakan Rohingya
4/20

14/05/2018

Salvation Army and affected all communities in that
region. With respect to the role of the armed forces,
he said that they protected the country from external
threats under direction of the civilian Government. In
response to allegations of human rights violations, he
said the armed forces had respected their international
obligations and that internal accountability processes
had been followed.
Council members stressed the need to ensure
security in Rakhine state to allow for the voluntary
return of refugees, who are still afraid to return. In
that regard, the importance of cooperation with the
United Nations, including with the Special Envoy,
and with Bangladesh was stressed. The need for
transparent investigations and the establishment of an
independent accountability mechanism supported by
the international community to address human rights
violations in Rakhine state were also noted.
Also on 30 April, we met with the members of the
Committee for Implementation of Recommendations
of the Advisory Board on Rakhine State, who
presented various initiatives to promote the economic
development of the region. With regard to the return of
refugees, the members of the Committee stressed that
they were working on the issue and that the problems
encountered should be resolved in bilateral cooperation
with Bangladesh. They also made reference to the
negotiations taking place for a memorandum of
understanding with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme. Finally, we also held
important meetings with the United Nations country
team and civil society organizations.
Peru notes with deep concern the dramatic
situation of vulnerability of Rohingya Muslims in
both Myanmar and Bangladesh. We also stress the
need for the international community to intensify its
attention and assistance to this humanitarian crisis. We
must also underline the need for an independent and
transparent mechanism to ensure accountability for
the numerous allegations of human rights violations,
including numerous cases of violence and sexual abuse.
We support the initiatives and efforts undertaken in
that regard.
Finally, we stress the importance of strengthening
the rule of law and democratic transition in Myanmar
with a view to building confidence in its institutions,
18-14604

14/05/2018

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

reducing intercommunity tensions and promoting
sustainable peace in Myanmar and the region.
The President: I thank Ambassador Meza-Cuadra
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Pierce.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the first
time I personally take the floor this month, I would like
to congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
your new role. I would like to join my Peruvian
colleague in thanking the Governments of Myanmar
and of Bangladesh, but also our Kuwaiti colleague,
for all the excellent arrangements for our trip. Without
them, we would not have been able to cover so much.
And like my Kuwaiti and Peruvian colleagues, we
really did appreciate everything we saw through the
United Nations teams on the ground and from the help
we had from the Secretariat. If I can speak for the whole
Security Council, I think all members found it a very
productive and interesting, if difficult, visit.
I will speak about what we did on the third day,
with our field visit to northern Rakhine. We had a
briefing by the Chief Minister of Rakhine state, and we
took a helicopter trip over northern Rakhine. We were
accompanied by the Union Minister for International
Cooperation, U Kyaw Tin, and the Chief Coordinator
of the Union Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development in Rakhine, Mr. Aung
Tun Thet. The members of the Security Council flew
over an area that showed widespread devastation of land
and villages. It was clear that they had been burned out.
We saw physical arrangements for return being
prepared by the Government of Myanmar, including
a reception centre and a transit centre at Hla Phoe
Khaung, which was intended to accommodate up to
30,000 people. We met members of local communities
in northern Rakhine. We had a town hall meeting with
Rakhine Muslim and Hindu groups. We met community
members who had seen their families become victims
of attacks by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
(ARSA). We also met a Rohingya community whose
homes are being rebuilt by the authorities. We were also
able to hold a meeting with members of civil society
at Sittwe airport, although, unfortunately, our time
was brief.
As my colleagues just did, I would now like to offer
the Council some reflections on what we saw.

S/PV. 8255

First, we saw the sheer scale of the devastation.
I have only ever seen one camp like it before in my
professional life. I was very struck by the magnitude
of what the refugees face, as well as the Government
and the United Nations as they try to return the people
home. We saw widespread devastation from the air,
and that was, obviously, one reason for the scale of the
refugee camps in Bangladesh.
Secondly, the Burmese authorities need to increase
the scale of their response and allow the United Nations
in with unconditional access to assist them. Only the
United Nations has the technical expertise and knowhow to deal with an event of that magnitude. Myanmar
has two reception centres. Together they can receive,
at best, 300 people a day. There are approximately
900,000 refugees. The scale is nowhere near what
would be required to bring so many refugees home. As
I said, the United Nations needs to be involved because
it is the only institution in the world that has the ability
to provide assistance at the scale required.
Thirdly, we did not receive enough information
about the prospect for long-term solutions. Council
members heard that refugees would be housed only
temporarily in the transit centre, but there was no
convincing explanation about how they would actually
return to their villages and in what time frame. We
noted that the camps for internally displaced persons
in Sittwe had been there since 2012, and I think the
Council was struck by that fact.
Fourthly, there must be emphasis on the physical
arrangements and development, as opposed to
the underlying political issues. Council members
heard about the plans for the Union Enterprise
for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement and
Development in Rakhine, which are privately financed,
and about the physical arrangements for repatriation.
I would like to make two points to that end though,
if I may. There are risks to private financing, and
anything delivered without Rohingya participation
risks reinforcing displacement, not resolving it. I think
that we accept that the Myanmar authorities are deeply
concerned about development issues in Rakhine state
as a whole, and the Council believes that it is one aspect
that will need to be addressed. But it is not the foremost
aspect in getting the Rohingya to start going back to
their homes in safety and security. I was particularly
struck again by the contrast between what is being
offered on the ground in Myanmar and the scale of
the problem.

18-146045/20

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

There was little progress on tackling the political
issues, as my two colleagues noted in the meetings they
described. Many of those political issues were raised
in the Annan Commission recommendations. They
centre around community reconciliation, regularizing
citizenship status of the Rohingya, human rights — such
as freedom of movement and access to education and
livelihoods — and holding the perpetrators of violence
to account.
Again, we heard from some of the other villagers
and officials about attacks on them by ARSA. Speaking
in my national capacity, it is clear to me that there
needs to be an accountability mechanism for all alleged
violations and abuses of human rights committed in
northern Rakhine. But again, I start from the point that
it is the Rohingya that the Council went to examine, and
they are overwhelmingly the largest part of the problem.
In recent days we have been very concerned by
reports that Myanmar security forces threatened
Rohingya villages not to talk openly with the Security
Council delegation, and tolde them that the people who
did so were now being looked for by security forces.
It is obviously unacceptable that anyone should feel
intimidated to speak to the Security Council, which,
after all, undertakes these missions on behalf of the
international community. I would be most grateful if
the Myanmar authorities could clarify that as a matter
of urgency.
I would like to make one last point in conclusion,
if I may. I was very struck by the unity of the Council
throughout the trip, and I think that my colleagues were
as well. We would all like to find a way to preserve
that unity as we go forward under your direction,
Madam President.
The President: I thank Ambassador Pierce for
her briefing.
On behalf of the Council, I should like to express
appreciation to all the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat who participated in the
mission for the manner in which they discharged their
important responsibilities.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleague from the United
Kingdom in congratulating you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
6/20

14/05/2018

this month. China also thanks you for convening this
open meeting. I listened attentively to the briefings
delivered by our colleagues from the United Kingdom,
Kuwait and Peru.
With the concerted efforts of the Council members
and in close consultation with the countries concerned,
members of the Council recently visited Bangladesh
and Myanmar. They held conversations with leaders,
officials at various levels and the general public of both
countries, where they also made field visits.
China deeply appreciates the reception the Council
received by Bangladesh and Myanmar during its visit.
The visit demonstrated the commitment and actions
of the parties to resolve the issue through dialogue
and cooperation, and set an example of unity and
collaboration in the work of the Security Council. It
played a positive role in the pursuit of a solution to
the issue of Rakhine state. Through the visit, Council
members gained an intimate and deeper understanding
of the issue of Rakhine state, and its gravity
and complexity.
Council members have all expressed concerns
about the humanitarian situation of the displaced
persons. At the same time, they saw the sincere efforts
of Bangladesh and Myanmar to resolve the issue.
Bangladesh has made enormous efforts to respond
to the humanitarian crisis, and the Government of
Myanmar is ready for the return of the displaced
persons. China has noted that, following the Council’s
visits, the countries concerned have made active efforts
to further alleviate the situation.
The statement by State Counsellor Aung San Suu
Kyi on 1 May made it clear that the Government will
sign a memorandum of understanding on the return
of the displaced persons with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Development Programme as soon as
possible. The State Counsellor herself visited Rakhine
state. Myanmar has built transit sites and reception
centres and settlement villages, and taken a host of
measures to improve the conditions in Rakhine state.
Recently, the Government of Myanmar also sent a
high-level delegation to Bangladesh to meet with the
displaced persons and encourage them to return. The
active efforts made by the countries concerned to launch
the repatriation process should be fully recognized.
Living conditions in Cox’s Bazar could worsen in
the wake of the imminent monsoon season. We must
18-14604

14/05/2018

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

pay close attention and do everything possible to
prevent a massive humanitarian crisis. The pressing
task is to push for substantive steps by Myanmar and
Bangladesh to implement the bilateral arrangement,
facilitate the timely return of the largest possible
number of displaced persons and credibly improve
the humanitarian situation of displaced persons in
Bangladesh. We hope that Myanmar and Bangladesh
will resolve any issues that might arise in implementing
the bilateral arrangement through bilateral dialogue
and consultations. The concerted efforts of Bangladesh
and Myanmanr to resolve the relevant issues are not
only in the fundamental and long-term interests of both
countries, but also in the interests of the countries in
the region.
Going forward, the international community
should increase humanitarian assistance to Myanmar
and Bangladesh. United Nations agencies should step
up consultations with the Governments of the countries
concerned and sign the relevant memorandum of
understanding as soon as possible. We should work
together to move forward the early implementation
of the bilateral arrangement to facilitate the return of
displaced persons. Efforts should be made to create
an enabling external environment for the countries
to properly resolve the issue through the bilateral
channel and ensure that it does not drag on, become
increasingly complicated or escalate.
This past week, the Security Council’s press
statement (SC/13331) on its visit to Myanmar and
Bangladesh reaffirmed the Council’s firm commitment
to the sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and unity of Myanmar. It welcomed the signing
of the memorandum of understanding and the relevant
arrangement on the return of displaced persons from
Rakhine state between the Governments of Myanmar
and Bangladesh and the commitment made by State
Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi on 1 May. It urged the
Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh to step
up consultations and cooperation and implement the
bilateral arrangement as soon as possible. The Council
should continue to encourage Myanmar and Bangladesh
to ramp up consultations and cooperation for the early
implementation of the bilateral arrangement.
As a friendly neighbour of both Myanmar and
Bangladesh, China has been following the situation
in Rakhine state very closely. We have been working
actively in response to emerging issues and have
provided emergency humanitarian relief for the proper

S/PV. 8255

settlement of displaced persons. The three-phase
solution to address the issue of Rakhine state proposed
by Wang Yi, State Councillor and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of China, during his visit to Myanmar and
Bangladesh in November 2017 has been endorsed
by both countries, and its implementation is well
under way.
China will continue to play a constructive role in
seeking a proper settlement to the issue of Rakhine
state, which involves a complex historical, ethnic and
religious background. Its solution requires long-term
efforts. The international community should play a
constructive role in creating the external conditions
needed for facilitating consultations and dialogue
between Myanmar and Bangladesh, thereby resolving
real problems, maintaining long-term stability and
achieving prosperity and development for Rakhine
state. Now is the time for action.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I
congratulate you once again, Madam President, on your
presidency. I thank our colleagues from Kuwait, the
United Kingdom and Peru for their work in arranging
the visit. I also thank the Governments of Kuwait,
Bangladesh and Burma for hosting the Security Council.
It was absolutely critical for the Security Council
to see at first-hand the crisis in Rakhine state and the
challenges facing Rohingya refugees. One of the main
reasons for the trip is the continuing disheartening
response from the Burmese Government. Judging
from the reaction of the Government and the Burmese
military, it seems as though they have failed to
acknowledge their role in the crisis. That is unacceptable
and unsustainable if we are to make any progress in
ending the violence in Rakhine state.
We are thankful to the Government of Bangladesh
for everything that it has done to support the Rohingya
refugee population and for its willingness to work with
the relevant United Nations agencies to meet their needs.
International support for humanitarian assistance to the
refugees in Bangladesh is more critical now than ever
before. We must continue to support them. More than
that, we must have the will as a Council to do something
now. Time is not on our side.
The monsoon season has already begun and is
putting hundreds of thousands of refugees at further
risk. We must continue to work with Bangladesh and
United Nations agencies to ensure that the refugees
have what they need as the rain begins to fall, while

18-146047/20

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

flooding the land beneath their feet and eroding
the hills in which they shelter. We cannot allow the
refugees to remain in unsafe and unsanitary conditions.
The ultimate solution does not lie in Bangladesh. It is
for the refugees to return to their homes and their own
land. We, the Security Council, must remain focused on
creating the conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified
and sustainable return of the Rohingya people and
of all displaced communities to their places of origin
in Burma. We were glad to see some cooperation
between the Governments of Bangladesh and Burma
in achieving that goal, but the ultimate responsibility
for creating such conditions rests squarely with
Burmese authorities.
We appreciate the transparency of the Burmese
Government demonstrated during the visit. However,
Burma must do far more to accept its responsibilities
and take the steps needed to end the crisis. Burma
must work with the international community to focus
on real solutions. That means focusing its energy on
working with the United Nations and others to create
the conditions on the ground that will reassure the
Rohingya who fled that they will be safe to return in a
dignified and voluntary manner.
Justice is an essential precondition for the voluntary
return of refugees. It is important for Burma to cooperate
with credible, independent investigations into reports
of atrocities. There needs to be accountability for the
perpetrators, including those in the security services.
Impunity cannot continue to be the order of the day.
As part of that effort, the Burmese Government should
allow access to the United Nations fact-finding mission
and restore access for the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Burma.
Burma must also demonstrate respect for the
fundamental human rights of the Rohingya, including
respecting their freedom of movement and freedom of
religion. It must address the conditions that are causing
people to continue to flee Rakhine state. Burma needs
to do more to address the root causes of the crisis by
comprehensively implementing the recommendations
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State,
including those related to citizenship.
Burma also needs to recognize the scope of the
physical and logistical challenges involved in creating
the proper conditions for the safe, dignified, voluntary
and sustainable return for more than 1 million refugees.
No country could handle that challenge alone, and
8/20

14/05/2018

Burma should accept the expert help that the relevant
United Nations-mandated agencies have offered.
The United States stands ready to support Burma in
addressing both the immediate crisis as well as a longterm solution. A democratic, pluralistic Government
that protects the rights of all minority communities,
including the Rohingya, is the only sustainable solution.
As a sign of good faith, Burma should immediately sign
the memorandum of understanding with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme.
Burma should also allow the United Nations and all
other humanitarian partners immediate and unhindered
access into Rakhine state. That is critical to building
the confidence of not only the international community,
but of the refugees.
As well, the Burmese Government should provide
the media with immediate and unhindered access to
Rakhine state, and provide for the protection of press
freedoms, including the safety of journalists. We once
again call on the Government of Burma to release the
two Reuters journalists who remain jailed and on trial
simply for reporting and documenting atrocities in
Rakhin state.
The active involvement of the Security Council is
essential to bring an end the Rohingya crisis. We know
what we need to do. We cannot allow politics and shortterm economic interests to keep us from doing what
is right. We have unique tools to encourage Burma to
take real steps towards resolving this crisis, and we
must use them. We should move quickly to adopt a
draft resolution that institutes real steps to resolve this
enormous and growing humanitarian and human rights
crisis. That, too, will be a challenge, as some members
of the Council have kept us from taking action for
cynical and self-interested reasons. Some undermine
the unity of the Council demonstrated during the trip
with unhelpful edits that only weaken the Council’s
message. We have all heard horrifying accounts of
what the Rohingya people have suffered, what ethnic
cleansing means to those on the ground. Now members
of the Council have seen with their own eyes what the
crisis has wrought. That leaves us with no choice but to
act now.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
begin by thanking the co-leads for organizing this
important and timely mission. Allow me to also thank
the Governments of both Bangladesh and Myanmar
18-14604

14/05/2018

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

for their cooperation, as well as the Secretariat and the
United Nations country teams for their support.
The Council’s visit allowed members to see for
themselves the massive refugee crisis sparked by the
widespread violence that has taken place in Rakhine
state since last August, to hear at first-hand from
those who fled the violence, as well as those who have
remained in Rakhine, and to assess the situation in
Myanmar and the possibility for voluntary, safe and
dignified returns.
What the Council saw during its visit left an indelible
mark. There was shock at the stories of the brutality
suffered by the Rohingya. There was appreciation for
the open and generous reception that refugees received
in Bangladesh. And, there was alarm at the scale of the
crisis and the response necessary. Ensuring the full
implementation of the Council’s presidential statement
of 6 November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22) remains
relevant and urgent. The Council’s visit demonstrated
our determination to make sure that happens. The
appointment by the Secretary-General of Christine
Schraner Burgener as his Special Envoy for Myanmar
is another step in that regard. We would like to express
our strong support for the Special Envoy and her work.
The Council’s visit serves to underline the need
to remain seized of the situation and to increase our
efforts to find a solution to the crisis. Several matters
must now be urgently addressed.
First, we need to urgently respond to the needs of the
refugees. We commend the efforts of the Government
of Bangladesh and the communities hosting Rohingya
refugees. As witnessed by the Council members, the
immensity of the crisis means that they must have
support to sustain the response needed. The upcoming
monsoon rains will likely further exacerbate the
difficult situation for the refugees. We encourage all
States to continue and increase their support.
Secondly, we need to ensure that the conditions for
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable returns are
created. It is clear that, for the process of returns to
begin, conditions that allow for returns to be voluntary,
secure and dignified, in line with international law
and the principle of non-refoulment, must exist. It is
essential that the root causes that led to the violence
and displacement in the first place be addressed in
full. During the Council’s visit, it was clear that there
exists an urgent need for security, reconstruction and
livelihood programmes that benefit all communities in

S/PV. 8255

Rakhine. The implementation of the recommendations
of the report of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State must be stepped-up, in close cooperation with
international and regional partners, including seriously
addressing the issue of citizenship.
Refugees told the Council that those who do decide
to return voluntarily want to be able to do so to their
place of origin. When conditions do allow for return,
it is important to avoid setting up new internally
displaced person camps or camp-like arrangements
in Rakhine. Transition and reception centres need
to be temporary. We encourage the Governments of
Myanmar and Bangladesh to expedite the ongoing
bilateral consultations and efforts, and to implement
the memorandum of understanding and agreement in a
timely manner. International actors should continue to
support the efforts to that end. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
with its global mandate as the international refugee
agency, must be associated with the process.
The stories Council members heard of sexual
violence were harrowing. Particular attention must be
given to the perspectives and special needs of survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence, including
protection needs in the return process.
Thirdly, United Nations access and engagement is
essential. It is time for the Government of Myanmar
to grant the United Nations, as well as other domestic
and international non-governmental organizations,
full and unhindered access to Rakhine state. We
welcome the United Nations leadership on Rakhine
under the Resident Coordinator. The memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations Development
Programme and UNHCR should now be concluded as
soon as possible. Access is also essential to support
the implementation of the Advisory Commission’s
recommendations. In that regard, we welcome the
renewed commitment to implement the Commission’s
recommendations and to work with the United Nations,
as set out in the State Counsellor’s press release of
1 May following her meeting with members of the
Security Council.
Finally, numerous reports, including testimonies
heard by Council members themselves, of systematic,
widespread and coordinated acts of violence strongly
indicate that crimes against humanity have been
committed. Impunity for such crimes cannot be
tolerated, and those responsible must be held to

18-146049/20

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

account. All States have a responsibility to address
and prevent violations of international law, including
human rights violations and abuses. In this case the
primary responsibility lies with the Government of
Myanmar, which must genuinely address the issue of
accountability. Otherwise, the international community
will need to assist and look seriously into the possible
mechanisms available for that purpose. We are aware
of the ongoing process at the International Criminal
Court. Without true accountability, the trust needed
for refugees to return will be hard to garner. We fully
support the work of the fact-finding mission, which
should be given full and unhindered access to do its
work. Evidence-gathering at Cox’s Bazar could also
prove to be an important contribution.
The visit was a demonstration of solidarity with the
refugees sheltering in the camps in Bangladesh. There
was a strong and clear call from the refugees for the
Council’s ongoing support and action. We must not let
them down. The visit also represented solidarity with
the Government of Bangladesh and the Bangladeshi
host communities, whom we must continue to support.
The visit also represented commitment to supporting
the Government of Myanmar to create the conditions
for return and to build peace and prosperity for all
people in Rakhine state. We invite them to fully engage
with the United Nations agencies on the ground and
with other regional and international partners. Sweden
stands ready to continue to support Myanmar on its
path towards democracy and peace.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by warmly thanking Kuwait, Peru and
the United Kingdom for their efforts in organizing
and conducting this mission, which was a particularly
important moment for all of us. I also thank Bangladesh
and Burma for their hospitality.
The field visits, in particular to the zero line,
Kutupalong camp and northern Rakhine, and the
various interviews allowed Council members to
determine for themselves the severity of the suffering
of the Rohingya, the extent of the destruction in
northern Rakhine and the complexity of the crisis and
the urgency with which it must be resolved. I should
like to give an overview of what France took away
from the visit and the priorities that we believe should
guide international action, in particular by the United
Nations, in support of Rohingya refugees.
10/20

14/05/2018

In Bangladesh, we witnessed the admirable efforts
and generosity of the Government and of the local
population, which, in all, are hosting more than 1 million
Rohingya refugees, who are particularly vulnerable
and live in very precarious conditions. That exemplary
hospitality must be sustained. We also noted that the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and all the relevant United
Nations and humanitarian agencies and organizations
are doing an outstanding job in that regard. For France,
the immediate strengthening of international support
would mean action on three fronts.
First, the funding rate for the humanitarian response
plan must be increased, as it remains well below that
required to meet current needs. According to the most
recent assessment provided by UNHCR, the rate stands
at 16 per cent.
Secondly, there is an urgent need for appropriate
measures and steps to be taken to meet needs and protect
the Rohingya in order to prepare for monsoon-related
security and health risks in refugee camps. Such
measures, which the Government of Bangladesh has
started to take, include the reinforcement and relocation
of shelters.
Thirdly, we must continue to assist Bangladesh,
humanitarian workers and local host communities in
ensuring that the living conditions of the Rohingya
refugees are as bearable as possible, while preserving
the promising national goal of economic development
for Bangladesh. It is essential that specific attention
be paid to the needs of children, including with
regard to education, and of women who have suffered
unspeakable violence.
Interviews in Burma served to reiterate the
expectations of the Security Council to civil and
military authorities, which are very clearly expressed
in the presidential statement of 6 November 2017
(S/PRST/2017/22). France’s priority remains the full
implementation of that statement. Commitments have
been made, but that is not enough, as the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom just underscored.
France therefore calls upon the Burmese authorities to
take the following measures.
First, it is important to address the root causes of
the crisis by fully cooperating with the new Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and by committing to
implementing all of the recommendations in the Annan
report. The Rohingya, whose nationality the Burmese
18-14604

14/05/2018

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

Government has withdrawn based on a law adopted in
1982, make up the largest group of stateless persons in
the world. There can be no just or sustainable solution
for their plight, or assurance of the rule of law in
Burma, if they are not recognized as Burmese citizens
and allowed to fully enjoy their rights and fundamental
freedoms. That will be achieved only when their
citizenship is restored.
Secondly, the Burmese authorities must conduct
investigations and prosecute those who commit
systematic human rights abuses in Rakhine state,
including sexual violence, and cooperate with the
United Nations on the issue. The testimony heard by the
members of the delegation on the violence and abuse
suffered by the Rohingya is harrowing. The destruction
observed in northern Rahkine state of homes, mosques
and villages burned to the ground speaks for itself.
The Rohingya are victims of ethnic cleansing; there
is no other word for it. Prosecuting the perpetrators of
such crimes is a moral, legal and political imperative.
Starting today, the Burmese authorities can send a
positive sign by agreeing to cooperate with the Human
Rights Council’s fact-finding mission, establishing an
on-site office of the High-Commissioner for Human
Rights and cooperating with him.
Together we must also reflect on the best way to
collect and protect evidence, which, when the time
comes, will enable the perpetrators of such atrocities to
be prosecuted in a fair and just trial with full respect for
the law. France recalls that the forced displacement of
people constitutes a crime against humanity under the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and
we note that Bangladesh is party to it.
Thirdly, restoring immediate, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access is imperative. It is essential that
the Burmese authorities sign the memorandum of
understanding with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme so as to demonstrate
their commitment to respecting international standards
on refugees. The onus is on the Burmese authorities
to create conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees who, regrettably,
are not all in the same location. Accepting technical
assistance and expertise from the specialized agencies
of the United Nations is the best way to achieve that
goal. The challenges are real. Under no circumstances
can inaction be justified. Specific commitments with

S/PV. 8255

regard to the points I just mentioned will serve to create
the necessary conditions.
This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration on Human Rights, which I recall
was adopted following the genocide and massacre of
the Second World War to prevent the recurrence of such
a tragedy. Let me conclude by citing article 1.
“All human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason
and conscience and should act towards one another
in a spirit of brotherhood.”
I urge the Council to see reason and appeal to its
conscience because the plight of the Rohingya
underscores that respect for the most fundamental
principle of the Charter of the United Nations is at
stake. Its Preamble reaffirms faith in fundamental
freedoms, dignity and the worth of the human person.
The Security Council and we, the Members of the
United Nations, are duty-bound to ensure respect for
those principles.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I join others in thanking
the three co-leads — the Permanent Representatives
of Peru, Kuwait and the United Kingdom — for their
detailed briefings on the Security Council mission
to Bangladesh and Myanmar. I would like to express
special gratitude to the Government of Kuwait for
its generosity in providing flight arrangements and
logistical support to the Security Council delegation.
The mission would not have been possible without the
joint efforts of the Governments of Bangladesh and
Myanmar and of the United Nations country teams and
other member States of the Council that worked very
hard to make it happen.
On behalf of the delegation of Kazakhstan, I express
gratitude to the host Governments for their assistance
in organizing meetings with Government officials,
as well as other stakeholders, including civil society
representatives. It was a very special opportunity indeed
to hold discussions with the highest authorities of both
Governments on the issue of Rohingya refugees — the
world’s greatest and worst refugee crisis today.
The Security Council mission to Bangladesh and
Myanmar was a vivid and stark revelation and an
opportunity to obtain direct and first-hand experience
of the true plight of the Rohingya people. Being on the
front lines presented a glaring and shocking reality and

18-1460411/20

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

awakened our conscience, prompting us to act more
robustly and collectively.
During the visit to the refugee camps in Cox’s
Bazar, we were able to witness a severe humanitarian
catastrophe that affects the entire region. We would
like to commend the Government of Bangladesh on its
generous hospitality in receiving such a large number
of refugees and providing them with shelter and other
forms of assistance. We hope that the Government of
Bangladesh, as well as the United Nations and other
humanitarian partners, will continue to undertake
monsoon-preparedness activities to mitigate the
effects of the rains on refugees and prevent a high
number of human casualties. That is especially relevant
given that 60 per cent of the Rohingya refugees are
children, including 41 per cent who are under the
age of 12, and therefore particularly vulnerable to
emergency situations.
We noted the efforts of the Government of Myanmar
to find a solution to the issue of Rohingya refugees and
its preparations for their repatriation. We understand
that the crisis cannot be solved overnight and will
be an arduous process that will demand the active
participation of all stakeholders. Given the magnitude
of the problem, the repatriation of refugees will be
a most formidable task and will require concerted
efforts on the part of many organizations, countries
and actors. We therefore hope that the Government of
Myanmar will continue to cooperate with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Gradually, other relevant United Nations agencies,
international donors and partners should be able to lend
the necessary support. We see the beginning of efforts
by Myanmar and would encourage that they be directed
at establishing the rule of law and good governance.
One of the most critical problems is ensuring the
safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their homes in Rakhine
state. As underlined by my delegation during previous
meetings on the issue, there can be no lasting solution
for the Rohingya issue without addressing the root
causes of the crisis. They include primarily the issues
of citizenship for the Rohingya people, the restoration
of their rights and freedoms, poverty alleviation and
development, access to education, employment and
freedom of movement.
12/20

14/05/2018

It is hoped that the visit by the Security Council
will pave the way for closer cooperation and finding
long-term solutions through truth, reconciliation and
transitional justice, as occurs after every conflict.
With the United Nations fact-finding mission at
work, we realize that justice is a precondition for
re-establishing trust among all communities and
deterring future violence.
Unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
to the affected population is crucial. We hope that the
goodwill created by the visit will result in unfettered
and safe access to United Nations agencies offering
emergency assistance and seeking to alleviate suffering,
in particular of children, women and the elderly.
The Red Cross Movement, which has been providing
humanitarian assistance in northern Rakhine at the
request of the Government, cannot meet all the needs.
We therefore call on the Government of Myanmar to
allow full and safe access to Rakhine for the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organizaiton,
UNICEF and other United Nations agencies to
effectively deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance.
We are encouraged by the commitment of the
Government of Myanmar to working with the United
Nations, and to endorsing and implementing the
recommendations of the Rakhine Advisory Commission
in order to restore intercommunal harmony, sustainable
peace, stability and prosperity. We are confident that
the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, will bring
new impetus for enhanced cooperation with the United
Nations, and we hope that Naypyidaw will fully support
the Special Envoy in discharging her mandate.
My delegation is committed to joining efforts to
find a sustainable solution to the plight of the Rohingya
refugees and people affected by the recent crisis and
mass displacement.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, our delegation would
like to express its deep gratitude and appreciation
to Peru, Kuwait and the United Kingdom, through
their Ambassadors Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Mansour
Alotaibi and Karen Pierce, for the briefings they have
just presented and for organizing the very important
mission to visit Cox’s Bazar, Dhaka, Naypyidaw and
Rakhine state. The mission enabled the members of the
Security Council to see and hear first-hand the reality
18-14604

14/05/2018

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

of the situation of the Rohingya refugees in the places
we visited, through direct interaction with refugees, the
political and military authorities and members of civil
society and the United Nations system in Bangladesh
and Myanmar. I would also like to place on record
our gratitude to the Government of Kuwait for the
important and helpful logistical support it provided to
the mission, which went a long way to ensuring that
it was carried out under good conditions and within
the time available. We also express our appreciation
to the Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar and
the United Nations system for all their support to the
mission. I would also like to thank Mr. Filippo Grandi,
High Commissioner for Refugees, for his detailed and
informative briefings during the mission.
While I do not want to sound too melodramatic, I
have to say that what I experienced, observed and heard
during our visit to the zero line, both inside Myanmar’s
territory and in Cox’s Bazar, left a deep impression on
me, as I had never seen first-hand a situation of human
suffering comparable to that in both places, where
hundreds of thousands of the more than 1.2 million
refugees were crowded together like sardines in tins
and in very precarious conditions with regard to health
care, food and accommodation. Our exchanges with
refugees and members of the United Nations agencies
opened our eyes to the extent of the tragedy that these
refugees have continued to endure since their departure
from Rakhine state.
The humanitarian tragedy is not limited to the
refugee population but is also having a broad impact
on the people of Bangladesh who are hosting the
refugees. Despite the fact that their meagre means of
livelihood and their environment have been severely
damaged, they have nevertheless the burden with grace
and generosity. In that connection, I would like to pay
a well-deserved tribute to the people and Government
of Bangladesh for taking that on and for the sacrifices
they have made in spite of their own precarious
situation. I would also like to take this opportunity to
make an urgent appeal to the international community
to support the Government of Bangladesh with all
means necessary to address the critical situation that
both its own people and the Rohingya refugees are
facing, which threatens to deteriorate even further with
the upcoming rainy season.
As we already mentioned in our talks with the
political and military authorities of Myanmar, and in
line with the Council’s press statement of November

S/PV. 8255

2017 (S/PRST/2017/22), we would like to reiterate
our call for every effort to be made to ensure the
dignified return of all Myanmar citizens who have
been forced to flee to Bangladesh. After what we
have seen, experienced and heard, we in the Council
must find better solutions so that the hope that our
visit gave the refugees can be transformed into reality
through ongoing contact with both Governments to
facilitate the necessary agreements, memorandums
of understanding, mechanisms and procedures for
returning the refugees to the places they were forced
to leave. In that regard, we hope that the Government
of Myanmar will cooperate and resolutely support
Special Envoy Christine Schraner Burgener, and will
allow United Nations agencies access to every region
of the country, especially Rakhine state, so that they
can support the repatriation and resettlement process
for refugees.
In conclusion, I would like to sincerely thank all of
the United Nations agencies and the staff of the Security
Council Affairs Division for the effective support they
provided throughout the development of the mission.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council mission to Myanmar
and Bangladesh was very timely and useful. Council
members were able to personally assess the situation
in Rakhine state and its surroundings, as well as the
efforts that have been made to stabilize the situation.
We would like to thank the authorities of Bangladesh
and Myanmar for their efforts. We are also grateful to
both the Polish and Peruvian presidencies, as well as
Kuwait, without whose logistical support we could not
have fully carried out our programme. It was extremely
important that as a result of the mission, the Council was
able to agree on a consensus press statement (SC/13331),
which outlines the Security Council’s position with
regard to the crisis and the priority measures that the
parties involved should take to overcome it.
We note that while the situation in the region
remains difficult, in general it is under control. However,
I would like to note the constructive attitude that
Naypyidaw and Dhaka have shown in addressing this
difficult situation, as well as their openness to dialogue
and cooperation with the international community.
All of us, without exception, have expressed our
wholehearted solidarity with the Government and the
people of Bangladesh, who have been dealing with
unprecedented humanitarian crises and challenges, and

18-1460413/20

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

yet who have opened their doors and hearts to hundreds
of thousands of people in dire straits.
I would also like to note that the Myanmar authorities
did not try to conceal anything or avoid uncomfortable
discussions. On the contrary, they demonstrated
exceptional transparency. The Council was able to visit
the most problematic areas and to talk openly with all
parties, as I hope all my Security Council colleagues
will confirm. The repeatedly expressed commitment
of Myanmar officials to fully implementing the
recommendations of the Rakhine Advisory Commission
led by Kofi Annan and the provisions of the bilateral
agreement with Bangladesh on the return of refugees is
also grounds for some optimism.
Separately, we should also to underscore the
readiness of Naypyidaw to cooperate with United
Nations humanitarian agencies and its partners, and
the signing of a memorandum of understanding with
the United Nations Development Programme testifies
to that. Another positive fact is the expansion of access
to Rakhine state to foreign observers. We would also
like to commend the Myanmar authorities’ systematic
efforts to deal with the area’s socioeconomic problems.
As I have already said, we greatly appreciate the efforts
of the Government of Bangladesh in taking on a very
heavy burden and hosting hundreds of thousands
of refugees from Myanmar in an extremely timely
demonstration of solidarity. In that connection, the
international community must provide appropriate
support to the Dhaka authorities so that they can contain
the acute humanitarian consequences of the crisis. Nor
should we forget that Myanmar will also require similar
support as refugees return. For its part, in 2018 and
2019 the Russian Federation will allocate resources to
both countries through the World Food Programme. We
believe that humanitarian assistance to forced refugees
should not be provided by imposing political conditions
but rather should in strict accordance with United
Nations principles, as defined by General Assembly
resolution 46/182.
First and foremost, we believe that this crisis must
be resolved through bilateral negotiations between
Myanmar and Bangladesh. Considering its scale, a rapid
solution is unlikely. There are many sides to the complex
and deep-seated problems in Rakhine state, which can
be resolved only through exclusively peaceful political
and diplomatic means, by establishing a dialogue
between the Naypyidaw and Dhaka authorities and
involving representatives of every faith and nationality.
14/20

14/05/2018

The international community should focus on
helping the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
to find practical solutions. It will be very important
to ensure that Myanmar and Bangladesh consider
accusations of sexual violence and abuses of human
rights in the legal arena, based not on statements in
the media or on social media but on evidence that both
countries must come up with. More than once during
the Security Council’s visit, the Myanmar authorities
stated that they had no intention of ignoring such
issues or protecting the guilty. In order to expedite the
related legal proceedings, Naypyidaw has proposed
that refugees submit their claims to the courts in
Myanmar, and they are ready to closely coordinate
efforts with Dhaka to do that. We believe that is a step
in the right direction and would be a concrete, practical
measure towards combating impunity that will need the
international community’s support.
Politicizing the refugee crisis should be avoided.
Any attempts by external actors to exploit it in order
to achieve unrelated political aims are unacceptable.
It is important to help Naypyidaw and Dhaka to reach
a settlement that takes their concerns into account,
including with regard to fighting extremism and
terrorism, and that was our mission’s main task. It will
be crucial to create conditions that will enable the safe
and dignified repatriation of refugees to their homes,
and we believe that will be possible only through the
constructive involvement of the authorities of both
States in the process. In our view, it is essential to
offer assistance to the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh in dealing with the Rakhine state crisis in
a spirit of equality and mutual respect. We hope that all
concerned will act responsibly and prudently in order
to ensure that the crisis does not escalate once again.
We are all well aware that the situation in the region
is extremely precarious and that monsoon season is
right around the corner, which could complicate things
even further. However, we believe firmly that the
ground has been prepared for a successful solution to
the crisis. We have Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener,
recently appointed as Special Envoy by SecretaryGeneral Guterres, who must be given time to get things
done. We have the understanding that Naypyidaw and
Dhaka have expressed of the importance of joint efforts.
Lastly, we have a unified Council, as expressed in our
press statement. Bearing all of that in mind, I believe
that in the course of the visit we were able to lay a pretty
good foundation for the Bangladesh and Myanmar
18-14604

14/05/2018

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

authorities to start actively resolving their problems
with the concerned and constructive cooperation of the
international community as a whole and the Security
Council in particular.
I would like to underscore that to do that it will
be important to cherish and strengthen the unity of
the Security Council, which enabled us to agree on a
press statement fairly quickly. I hope that all Council
members understand that and will not be tempted to
use the situation to pursue their own domestic political
aims. That would definitely not help to resolve the
refugee crisis.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands):
I would like to start by thanking the Permanent
Representatives of Kuwait, Peru and the United
Kingdom for their briefings on our joint Security
Council visit to Bangladesh and Myanmar, and to join
others in thanking them for organizing and co-leading
the visit. We were also glad to do our part during the
March presidency of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to
facilitate discussions to make the visit to both countries
possible. It provided an opportunity to assess the
progress made in implementing the Council’s November
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22) and to inform
the Council’s further engagement. We are grateful to
the Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar for their
hospitality and willingness to engage with the Council.
I would also like to warmly thank all the United Nations
staff who were involved in organizing the visit and
producing the briefings. I would like to address three
aspects of the issue, starting with the impressions we
had from the visit; secondly, the immediate steps to be
taken; and thirdly, the urgent need for accountability
for crimes against the Rohingya.
The visit left a deep impression on us all. We were
particularly shocked by the scale of the crisis, the
number of refugees and the extent of the destruction
of their villages. In Cox’s Bazar we heard horrifying
accounts from survivors of the violence. We met a
woman holding a 16-day-old baby who looked as if she
did not know what to do with it. She had been raped the
night that her husband was killed and did not know who
the baby’s father was. We met an elderly woman who
saw members of her family being raped and was then
raped herself. We met a girl aged seven or eight with
deep scars on her skull inflicted by knives and cuts.
Imagine doing that to a child. We met a girl about 12
years old whose upper thigh had been ripped open by
a bullet and who was now paralysed and unable to go

S/PV. 8255

to school. We met children who had no dreams for the
future, just the past to deal with. Several of them had
lost their parents and had to cope with that alone.
We also witnessed the hospitality of the people
and the Government of Bangladesh in hosting almost
1 million Rohingya refugees. Their generosity deserves
our deep appreciation and support. At the same
time, with the monsoon season almost upon us, the
challenges in the camps should not be underestimated
by any of us. Swift action is required to prepare the
camps for the imminent possibility of floods and
landslides. The United Nations joint response plan is
seriously underfunded. It is therefore essential that the
international community step up its aid.
The second aspect is the immediate steps to be
taken. Coming back from the visit, we cannot conclude
other than that the outlook for a swift solution to the
crisis remains bleak. Much needs to be done before
the Rohingya can return safely and in a voluntary and
dignified manner. The Council’s presidential statement
of November, which was reaffirmed in a press
statement (SC/13331) following the visit, is far from
being implemented.
Quick steps can be taken to show that Myanmar is
truly committed. We call on the Myanmar authorities to
allow full access to the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations. The swift conclusion of talks on a
memorandum of understanding with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the United Nations Development Programme would
be an encouraging first step. Furthermore, initial
efforts to implement the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State — the Annan
Commission — need to be followed up with meaningful
and concrete steps — steps towards recognition,
protection and citizenship for the Rohingya.
The third aspect is the need for accountability. For
every member of the Rohingya community with whom
I spoke, justice featured high on their list of needs for
them to feel safe enough to return. Without addressing
the crimes committed against the Rohinyga, the
decades-old cycle of violence and discrimination cannot
be broken. We welcome the expressed commitment of
the Myanmar authorities to facilitate independent and
credible investigations.
As a first step, we call on Myanmar to allow access
to the fact-finding nission, as well as to the Special
Rapporteur. Furthermore, we call on Myanmar to

18-1460415/20

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

become a party to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court or to accept the jurisdiction of the
Court in accordance with paragraph 3, article 12, of the
Rome Statute. We hope for swift and decisive action in
that regard. Otherwise, it will be up to the international
community to shoulder its responsibility and to consider
further steps to bring about accountability, including
referral to the International Criminal Court.
The visit has made it clear to all of us that the
continued engagement and support of the international
community is needed, including through the newly
appointed Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands stands ready to play its part
and to support the decisive engagement of the Council
through a draft resolution that reflects the large scale
of the crisis.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
Allow me to start by thanking our colleagues the
Ambassadors of Kuwait, Peru and the United Kingdom
for their very comprehensive briefings and for their
efforts in organizing the visit. I would also like to
express my gratitude to the authorities of Kuwait for
their generosity and for facilitating our mission, and
to the authorities of Bangladesh and Myanmar for
their hospitality.
The Security Council visit to the region should
really be seen as the success of the two or so previous
Council presidencies. Thanks to their commitment,
we were able to witness the humanitarian situation on
the ground. What we saw in Cox’s Bazar was a true
eye-opener. The scale of the crisis is horrifying, and
it will not change in any way for the better during the
monsoon season. There is a race against the clock in the
refugee camps, and we are collectively losing it.
We believe that the Council’s visit can serve as
a trigger for more robust Council action. Council
members are obliged to take action and to respond
with concrete solutions followed by thorough financial
and material support for not only the refugees but also
the host communities in Bangladesh. In that regard,
I want to thank the authorities of Bangladesh and the
host communities for their efforts in easing the heavy
burden of the Rohingya refugees.
We call on the Myanmar authorities to grant full
and unhindered access for United Nations agencies to
Rakhine state and to develop close cooperation with
16/20

14/05/2018

the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development
Programme. We further call for Myanmar to
commit to addressing the recommendations of the
Annan Commission.
Lastly, we hope that after voluntary repatriation,
the Rohingya community will be properly reintegrated
into society with unrestricted access to health-care
services and basic education for all, including women
and children.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation wishes
to congratulate you, Madam President, on Poland’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We have full confidence in your wisdom
and able leadership. I assure you of our full support
and cooperation.
My Government welcomed the visit of the members
of the Security Council to Myanmar in the hope that the
visit would help them to better understand the situation
on the ground so that we can further strengthen our
cooperation with the United Nations in our efforts for
the safe, dignified and voluntary return of the displaced
persons. We believe that we will be able to overcome
the serious challenges that we face today by working
in partnership with the United Nations. We trust in
its constructive engagement and cooperation based
on the principles of objectivity, mutual respect and
understanding. We also hope that the visit will give
strong impetus to our bilateral efforts with Bangladesh
for the implementation of the repatriation process.
We facilitated the Security Council’s visit to the
fullest extent possible within the available time frame
of the Council. The State Counsellor saw the visit
as an important turning point. She reaffirmed the
commitment of the Myanmar Government to bringing
about peace, stability and development in Rakhine state.
In resolving the current issues relating to Rakhine
state, we all agree that the most urgent task right now
is to start the repatriation of the displaced persons in
accordance with the bilateral agreements. We have
repeatedly stated that we want to start the repatriation
process as soon as possible, as we are ready to receive
the returnees. Recently, on 8 May, the Ambassador
of Bangladesh to Myanmar, Mr. Manjurul Karim
18-14604

14/05/2018

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

Khan Chowdhury, was summoned to Nay Pyi Taw
and reminded of Myanmar’s readiness to commence
the repatriation of verified displaced persons before
the monsoon, as agreed by the two Governments.
The Ministry for Foreign Affairs once again urged
Bangladesh to implement the bilateral agreement
and to repatriate those who are already verified so
that they can return to their villages in Rakhine. The
Ambassador was also reminded to send the lists of
displaced persons, using the right forms, as agreed in
the physical arrangement for repatriation.
The forms used by Bangladesh were not those
prescribed in the physical arrangement. They did
not contain the signatures, fingerprints and proper
photographs necessary for the proper verification and
assurance of consent. We had already requested the
Bangladesh side, on three separate occasions through
diplomatic channels, to forward the duly completed
prescribed forms that would enable displaced persons
to be repatriated under the principle of voluntary, safe
and dignified return.
Prior to the Security Council visit to Myanmar, the
Minister for Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement
of Myanmar visited Cox’s Bazar refugee camps and
met with the displaced persons. He explained the
resettlement programme for returnees to them and
provided information on the repatriation process. To our
surprise, they were not at all aware of the repatriation
process. Apparently, they had not been notified by
the Bangladesh authorities about the current bilateral
arrangements or provided any of the forms required for
the repatriation process. During the visit, the Minister
could not meet the persons whom we have verified for
repatriation, despite our request that such a meeting
be arranged.
While we are trying to solve the issue in good faith
through bilateral cooperation, it is most regrettable
that, instead of fulfilling its commitment for the
repatriation of the displaced persons as per the bilateral
agreements, the Bangladesh side has deliberately
made one excuse after another to stall the repatriation
process. Bangladesh has been distorting the facts and
telling the whole world that Myanmar is not willing to
accept the return of the displaced persons. Bangladesh
is altering the truth and vilifying the Government
and the people of Myanmar to solicit international
condemnation and exert maximum political pressure
on Myanmar. We need the full and sincere cooperation

S/PV. 8255

of the Government of Bangladesh if the repatriation
process is to be successful.
In that connection, I would like to refer to the
remark made by the Permanent Representative of
Kuwait concerning the illegal occupation on both
sides of the international border. Human habitation
and the building of any structure within 150 feet of
the international border is prohibited by our bilateral
border agreement. We have therefore filed our objection
with the Bangladeshi side regarding the construction of
bunkers and houses in the restricted areas on their side
of the border. We have also learned that the Bangladesh
side is helping illegal occupants on our side of the border
in building shelters, which is a violation of Myanmar’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We notified them
that such actions should cease immediately.
Allow me to turn to the matter of accountability.
The Government of Myanmar has stated time and again
that no violation of human rights will be condoned.
Allegations supported by evidence will be investigated
and action taken in accordance with the law. You may
recall, Madam President, that, during your meeting
with State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, she
condemned all violence and reassured you of our
readiness to take actions on the alleged human rights
violations in Rakhine if the necessary information is
provided. She reiterated that security assurances would
be given to anyone who wishes to bring to court in
Myanmar cases regarding violations of rights.
Moreover, the Commander-in-Chief also told the
members of the Council that the Tatmadaw would
welcome any alleged survivor of sexual violence who
could bring hard evidence of the crime committed so
that the perpetrators can be held accountable. He also
mentioned that the Tatmadaw has adopted a zerotolerance policy against any sexual violence committed
by members of the armed forces.
When it comes to human rights abuses and
violations, we should not forget the fact that the
current humanitarian problem was the result of Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA) terrorist attacks
on 30 border guard posts in northern Rakhine. The
root cause of the latest crisis and the brutal killings
and atrocities committed by the terrorists on innocent
ethnic Hindu, Rakhine Buddhists and other minority
tribes had been ignored by the Western media. The
truth has been suppressed by incessant sensational
arguments and Muslim victimhood narratives. Only a

18-1460417/20

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

balanced and constructive approach can lead us to the
right solution of the extremely complex and politically
sensitive problem of Rakhine state.
During the Security Council visit to Maungdaw on
1 May, approximately20 Rakhine, Mro, Maramar and
Hindus waited for the Council members at the township
administrative office for an opportunity to testify as to
their experience of ARSA terrorist atrocities. Due to the
limited time, only one Rakhine woman and one Hindu
woman were able to talk about human rights abuses and
atrocities perpetrated by ARSA terrorists. Sadly, many
tragic stories of the ethnic people in Rakhine have
fallen on the deaf ears of some who wanted to listen to
only one side of the story of their choosing.
Those people witnessed the atrocities committed
by ARSA terrorists, including the killing of seven
Mro ethnic people in Khon-Taing village of Maungtaw
township on 28 August 2017 and the subsequent
torching of 2,625 houses in the area. They also testified
as to the horrific discovery of a mass grave found near
Yebawkya village on 28 September 2017, where 45
bodies of Hindus were discovered among the hundred
kidnapped by ARSA. Those ethnic people in Maungtaw
area are traumatized by these brutal terrorist acts. They
all feel insecure as minority groups in their own land as
a result of the fear instilled by ARSA. ARSA must also
be held accountable for atrocities committed against
the civilian population in Rakhine. The investigation
of violations must include cases of terrorist atrocities
as well.
We are seriously concerned that Bangladesh is
unwittingly allowing extremism to rear its ugly head
in that part of the region. ARSA already has a foothold
in the camps, which soon will become a stronghold of
terrorism and extremism. Recently, on 9 May, a group
of four to six terrorists entered one of the refugee camps
in Balukali and dragged 46-year-old Mohamed Faisal
Ulhaq out of the camp and stabbed him to death. He
had reportedly been advocating returning to Rakhine
among his fellow displaced persons.
We have made every effort to put in place an
environment conducive to the return of displaced
people. Convinced that the engagement of United
Nations agencies in Rakhine will strengthen our ability
to ensure safe, dignified and voluntary repatriation, we
are in the process of active discussions on a memorandum
of understanding with the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
18/20

14/05/2018

Commissioner for Refugees. Those agencies will be
working alongside Myanmar ministries concerned and
the Union Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development for the good of all
communities in Rakhine.
At the same time, we shall also be dealing with the
root causes of the recent violence. The recommendations
of the Annan Commission set out practical measures
necessary to achieve development for all communities
in Rakhine. Of the 88 recommendations by the Annan
Commission and the 48 by the national investigation
commission, many overlap. Fifty-seven will be
fulfilled very soon, while 31 are still being processed.
The first report of the Implementation Committee was
issued in February 2018, and the second will appear in
May. Since the submission of Mr. Annan’s final report,
three camps for internally displaced persons have been
relocated, and another four will be closed very soon.
With regard to the issuance of national verification
cards, false information has been spread to discourage
people from complying with requirements in that
regard. In reality, cards constitute the first step for
citizenship verification. Card holders who meet
requirements in accordance with the existing law will
become Myanmar citizens within a few months. All
persons residing in Myanmar have to go through the
same process of verification, myself included.
We will continue to implement the recommendations
of the Annan report at the fullest extent, in keeping with
the situation on the ground, to bring long-term peace,
harmony and development to the people of Rakhine.
The international community, including the
United Nations, should work together to create an
environment conducive to restoring peace, harmony
and development for all people in Rakhine state. Hate
narratives that promote deep-rooted mistrust must stop.
The prevailing hostile attitude towards the Myanmar
Government will not contribute to building peace and
harmony in the country. We have just heard a few very
hostile and hateful remarks with respect to my country.
That is very unfortunate. Discriminatory treatment and
one-sided support will lead only to further polarization
and escalation of tensions among different communities
in the region.
Bangladesh must cooperate fully and sincerely
with Myanmar in the implementation of the bilateral
agreement for the repatriation of displaced persons.
We are confident that we will be able to resolve the
18-14604

14/05/2018

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

S/PV. 8255

present humanitarian problem and the issues of longterm peace and development of Rakhine state if
Myanmar and Bangladesh work hand in hand in a spirit
of mutual respect, genuine desire to help the displaced
persons and a spirit of good-neighbourliness. In that
connection, I am pleased to inform the Council that the
joint working group for the repatriation of the displaced
persons will meet in Dhaka on 17 May to expedite the
implementation of the agreed repatriation process.

conveyed four expectations to the Council, which I
now paraphrase: first, continued and decisive action to
ensure the safe and sustainable return of the Rohingya;
secondly, adoption of a Security Council draft resolution
building on the presidential statement adopted last year
(S/PRST/2017/22); thirdly, prevailing on Myanmar to
unconditionally implement the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State; and, fourthly,
ensuring accountability and justice.

I would like to conclude by expressing my
delegation’s sincere appreciation to the members of
the Council that have been extending their support
to Myanmar at this challenging time of transition to
democracy. We also thank our four neighbours for
accepting our invitation to travel to Myanmar with the
Council members. We believe that mutual understanding
and constructive cooperation will ultimately bring
about the positive result to which we all aspire.

We note that the Council’s press statement adopted
following the visit (SC/13331) makes reference to some
of those issues. For those of us used to the dynamics of
the intergovernmental processes at the United Nations,
it may be somewhat comprehensible that a consensusbased press statement can be circumscribed in its
aspirations. However, it is difficult to explain such
dynamics to the hundreds of thousands of Rohingya who
unequivocally voiced their concerns and expectations
to the visiting Council members.

I would like to reassure the Council that,
notwithstanding all the daunting challenges we are
facing, the Government of Myanmar will spare no
effort to bring peace, harmony and development to all
people in Rakhine state.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this briefing and for giving us
an opportunity to take the floor.
We appreciate the efforts made by the Security
Council to visit Bangladesh and Myanmar to witness
at first hand the evolving Rohingya humanitarian
crisis. It has been generally acknowledged that the
visit left indelible impressions on those who were part
of the team. The Council reaffirmed its custodianship
of this issue through its meaningful engagements and
pronouncements during the visit. We thank in particular
the Permanent Representatives of Kuwait, Peru and
the United Kingdom for leading the visit and for their
respective briefings this afternoon.
Our Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina
reaffirmed Bangladesh’s steadfast commitment to
providing humanitarian assistance to the Rohingya and
to remaining engaged with Myanmar in good faith to
implement the bilateral agreements concluded between
our two Governments. Yet, mindful of the limits of our
bilateral engagement with Myanmar under the present
circumstances, the Prime Minister and other dignitaries

We are aware of the Council’s scheduled
programme to hold consultations immediately after this
briefing. I shall therefore limit myself to making four
specific points.
First, there should not be any doubt that the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of the Rohingya to
their homes in Myanmar’s Rakhine state is an objective
shared among all Member States. But voluntary
repatriation does not only entail the formation of a few
high-profile committees without any demonstrable
outcome and the erection of some reception centres
almost in the middle of nowhere. In their briefings, the
Permanent Representatives of Kuwait and the United
Kingdom clearly alluded to the prevailing uncertainty.
The issue of incomplete forms shared with the Myanmar
side is but one manifestation of that.
The Rohingya need to get concrete answers to
some of the fundamental questions about the Myanmar
authorities’ immediate-to-long-term plans with regard
to their citizenship, freedom of movement, human rights
and socioeconomic development. It would facetious to
claim readiness for repatriation to start at the soonest
while there is no plausible response yet for the ways the
Rohingya can be assured of an end to their systematic
persecution, dehumanization and dispossession in
Myanmar. The aerial views of large tracts of burned
villages and obliterated homes in nearly 400 villages
in northern Rakhine state hardly evoke confidence
among the Rohingya about the prospect for return

18-1460419/20

S/PV.8255

Briefing by Security Council mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar

to their homes in Rakhine state. On their behalf, the
relevant United Nations agencies should be able to
vouch for a situation conducive to their safe, dignified
and sustainable return.
It is crucial that the provisions of the bilateral
arrangement between the Government of Myanmar
and the relevant United Nations agencies are
transparently shared with the Rohingya and other
affected communities. It is crucial that the 4,000 to
5,000 Rohingya taking shelter along the border, which
Council members witnessed, be repatriated and that
the existing camps for internally displaced persons be
dismantled in order to generate confidence among the
Rohingya regarding their safe and dignified return.
The Myanmar Minister for Social Welfare, during
his visit to the camps in Cox’s Bazar, added to confusion
among the Rohingya about prospects for their so-called
resettlement and verification. It is also worth noting
that the Myanmar side refrains from mentioning the
real ethnic affiliation of those it has claimed to have
verified. It is typical of the Myanmar authorities to shift
the blame by twisting narratives. It is unfortunate that
the Permanent Representative of Myanmar continued
that trend today regarding the question of developments
along the border. He also shared some fabricated
narratives about the presence of terrorists and violent
extremists in the camps, which could be considered
evidence of the ongoing attitude of the Myanmar
authorities towards the forcibly displaced Rohingya.
Secondly, the international concern over the
impending monsoon and its potential adverse impact
on the forcibly displaced Rohingya is indeed timely
and useful. We shared with Council members a brief
account of the preparedness measures undertaken so
far. In addition to the 5,800 acres of land allocated for
the Rohingya so far, our Government has allocated
500 acres for the relocation of extremely vulnerable
members of the group. The Government is in the
process of finding more land for safe relocations,
and the local administration remains seized with that
issue. A total of 480 Rohingya have been trained as
volunteers by the cyclone-preparedness programme for
emergency response.

20/20

14/05/2018

Thirdly, on the question of accountability, we hear
the voices being raised loud and clear. We are following
with interest the request by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for a ruling from
the Court’s Pre-Trial Division on the ICC’s jurisdiction
over the forced deportation of the Rohingya to a State
party to the Rome Statute. In view of the obstruction
being faced by the Human Rights Council’s Special
Rapporteur and the fact-finding mission, there is a
suggestion gaining ground in favour of setting up
a so-called triple-I mechanism — an international,
impartial and independent mechanism — to undertake
an independent and impartial investigation and gather
evidence in a coordinated fashion.
It is evident that the Rohingya have a legitimate
demand for breaking the culture of impunity as a critical
confidence-building measure. My Council colleagues
who visited the camps recently will perhaps recall the
numerous lost, traumatized and emaciated faces they
witnessed on people holding placards and banners
calling for justice and accountability for the egregious
crimes committed against them. We believe that they
would have listened to the Council today about the
Myanmar authorities’ invitation to submit allegations
of crimes committed against them to Myanmar courts.
However, that invitation raises the question of how the
Rohingya would be able to gain access to the judicial
system in Myanmar when the issue of their citizenship
remains unresolved.
Fourthly, and lastly, it is perhaps high time for the
Council to consider working towards a resolution on the
situation in Myanmar. The way the crisis has evolved
so far makes it abundantly clear that the Council
should remain engaged with this issue on a regular and
periodic basis. The Myanmar leadership has reportedly
underscored the need for time to address the underlying
root causes of the crisis in Myanmar’s Rakhine state.
The Council should certainly recognize the importance
of having a resolution to accompany Myanmar in that
process, including by voicing its support for the work of
the Secretary-General’s newly appointed Special Envoy
on Myanmar. We urge Council members to seriously
reflect on this possibility during its consultations later
this afternoon.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-14604
