United Nations

A/RES/65/150

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 February 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 20

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2010
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/65/436 and Corr.1)]

65/150. Protection of coral reefs for sustainable livelihoods
and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 1 and
Agenda 21, 2 the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, 3 the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 4 the Mauritius
Declaration 5 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, 6 the United Nations Millennium Declaration 7 and the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, 8
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

6F

7F

Reaffirming the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 9 which
provides the overall legal framework for ocean activities, and emphasizing its
fundamental character, conscious that the problems of ocean space are closely
interrelated and need to be considered as a whole through an integrated,
interdisciplinary and intersectoral approach,
8F

_______________
1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
5
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
6
Ibid., annex II.
7
See resolution 55/2.
8
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
9
Ibid., vol. 1833, No. 31363.

10-52154

*1052154*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/150

Recalling the Convention on Biological Diversity 10 as an important instrument
in the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity,
9F

Recalling also biodiversity-related conventions and organizations, including
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and
Flora, 11 the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as
Waterfowl Habitat, 12 the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of
Wild Animals, 13 the Convention for the Protection, Management and Development of
the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Eastern African Region, 14 the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
10F

1F

12F

13F

Recognizing the role of national legislation in the context of the protection of
coral reefs and related ecosystems within national jurisdictions,
Recalling its annual resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea and on
sustainable fisheries, including resolution 61/105 of 8 December 2006, its resolution
63/214 of 19 December 2008, entitled “Towards the sustainable development of the
Caribbean Sea for present and future generations”, its resolution 64/73 of
7 December 2009 on the protection of global climate for present and future
generations of humankind, its resolution 64/203 of 21 December 2009 on the
Convention on Biological Diversity and its resolution 64/236 of 24 December 2009,
in which it decided to organize, in 2012, the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, and other relevant resolutions,
Taking note of the Manado Ocean Declaration, adopted by the World Ocean
Conference on 14 May 2009, and the Jakarta Mandate on Marine and Coastal
Biological Diversity of 1995, 15
14F

Noting the work of the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity
on marine and coastal biodiversity, in particular on coral reefs and related
ecosystems, and the outcome of the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties
to the Convention, held in Nagoya, Japan, from 18 to 29 October 2010, including in
relation to the updating and revision of the strategic plan for the post-2010 period, 16
15F

Noting also the request made by the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity, at its tenth meeting, to the Executive Secretary
of the Convention 17 to prepare, subject to the availability of financial resources, a
report on the progress made in the implementation of the specific workplan on coral
bleaching adopted by the Conference of the Parties in its decision VII/5, 18
16F

17F

Recognizing that millions of the world’s inhabitants depend on the health of
coral reefs and related ecosystems for sustainable livelihoods and development, as
they are a primary source of food and income, add to the aesthetic and cultural

_______________
10

Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
Ibid., vol. 993, No. 14537.
12
Ibid., vol. 996, No. 14583.
13
Ibid., vol. 1651, No. 28395.
14
Available from www.unep.org.
15
See A/51/312, annex II, decision II/10.
16
See UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27.
17
Ibid., annex, decision X/29, para. 74.
18
See UNEP/CBD/COP/7/21, annex, decision VII/5, annex I, appendix 1.
11

2

A/RES/65/150

dimensions of communities and also provide for protection from storms, tsunamis
and coastal erosion,
Expressing grave concern about the adverse impact of climate change and
ocean acidification on the health and survival of coral reefs and related ecosystems
around the world, including through sea-level rise, the increase in the severity and
incidence of coral bleaching, rising sea surface temperature and higher storm
intensity, combined with the synergistic negative effects of waste run-off,
overfishing, destructive fishing practices, alien invasive species and coral mining,
Maintaining that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change is the primary international, intergovernmental forum for negotiating the
global response to climate change, and calling upon States to take urgent global
action to address climate change in accordance with the principles identified in the
Convention, including the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capabilities,
Acknowledging that, in many countries, indigenous and local communities
have a distinctive relationship with marine and coastal environments, including
coral reefs and related ecosystems, and in some cases ownership thereof, in
accordance with national legislation, and that such peoples have an important role to
play in the protection, management and preservation of those reefs and related
ecosystems,
Acknowledging also the leadership role in tropical marine ecosystem
management provided by the International Coral Reef Initiative, a partnership of
Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations, and
its twenty-fifth general meeting, held in Samoa from 8 to 12 November 2010 under
the co-chairmanship of Samoa and France,
Welcoming regional initiatives, including the Coral Triangle Initiative on Coral
Reefs, Fisheries and Food Security, the Micronesia Challenge, the Caribbean Challenge,
the Eastern Tropical Pacific Seascape project, the West Indian Ocean Partnership,
the West African Conservation Challenge and the Regional Initiative for the
Conservation and Wise Use of Mangroves and Corals for the Americas Region,
Welcoming also the efforts of the agencies, programmes and funds of the
United Nations system in the field of the protection of marine biodiversity and, in
particular, coral reefs and related ecosystems,
Urges States, within their national jurisdictions, and the competent
1.
international organizations, within their mandates, given the imperative for action,
to take all practical steps at all levels to protect coral reefs and related ecosystems
for sustainable livelihoods and development, including immediate and concerted
global, regional and local action to respond to the challenges and to address the
adverse impact of climate change, including through mitigation and adaptation, as
well as of ocean acidification, on coral reefs and related ecosystems;
Also urges States to formulate, adopt and implement integrated and
2.
comprehensive approaches for the management of coral reefs and related
ecosystems under their jurisdiction, encourages regional cooperation in accordance
with international law regarding the protection and enhancement of the resilience of
coral reefs, and in that respect calls upon development partners to support such
efforts in developing countries, including through the provision of financial
resources, capacity-building, environmentally sound technologies and know-how on
mutually agreed terms, as well as the exchange of relevant scientific, technical,
socio-economic and legal information, to enable developing countries to take all
3

A/RES/65/150

action necessary for the protection of their coral reefs and related ecosystems, as
appropriate;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the importance of
protecting coral reefs and related ecosystems for sustainable livelihoods and
development, including an analysis of the economic, social and development
benefits of protecting coral reefs, in the context of the themes and objectives of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012, for consideration
by the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session and for the information of other
forums;
Also requests the Secretary-General, taking into consideration existing
4.
reports in preparing that report, to identify potential actions consistent with
international law needed to protect coral reefs and related ecosystems, including
proposals for coordinated and coherent action across the United Nations system,
taking into account the views of Member States, the agencies and programmes of
the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme, and relevant
international organizations, including the International Coral Reef Initiative and the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, as well as the outcomes and decisions
of relevant multilateral environmental agreements.
69th plenary meeting
20 December 2010

4
