S/PV.9217

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9217th meeting

Monday, 12 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj/Mr. Ravindran

(India)

Members:

Albania
Brazil
China
France
Gabon
Ghana
Ireland
Kenya
Mexico
Norway
Russian Federation
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Ms. Miley
Ms. Nyakoe
Mrs. Jiménez Alegría
Ms. Syed
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Wickremasinghe
Mr. Mills

Agenda
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Note by the Secretary-General on the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals (S/2022/583)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-74229 (E)
*2274229*

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals
Note by the Secretary-General on the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (S/2022/583)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Graciela
Gatti Santana, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Chief Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention Council members
to document S/2022/583, which contains a note by
the Secretary-General on the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
I now give the floor to Judge Gatti Santana.
Judge Gatti Santana: It is a great honour and
privilege to appear before the Security Council
today and present the twenty-first progress report of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I do so in my new capacity as President of
the Mechanism. Mindful of this unique opportunity, I
wish to express my gratitude for the trust placed in me
and to pledge to lead in exemplary and effective ways. I
follow in the footsteps of my predecessor, Judge Carmel
Agius, whom I want to publicly praise. His generosity
of spirit, combined with his able stewardship and
pragmatic approach to solving problems, should serve
as an example for our discordant times.
I am happy to report that the Mechanism, one entity
with two branches, remains strong and continues to
deliver tangible results in the fulfilment of its mandate
and is becoming a truly residual body. Institutions are
only as effective as the individuals who constitute them.
2/23

12/12/2022

In my first five months, I have witnessed at first hand
the tireless efforts of judges and staff alike, all working
tirelessly to make further significant progress in
relation to the Mechanism’s pending judicial caseload.
In that regard, after disposing of the contempt case in
Prosecutor v. Fatuma et al. on 29 June, in line with
the original projection, we are left with only two main
cases, both relating to core crimes.
I refer first to the trial against Mr. Félicien Kabuga,
which commenced at The Hague on 29 September and
is proceeding apace. Before the Mechanism’s end-ofyear judicial recess, which starts on 26 December,
the Trial Chamber expects to have heard 20 of the
approximately 50 witnesses who will testify in Court
for the prosecution. The innovative conduct of this
case shows excellent inter-branch coordination and
the determined will of the Trial Chamber to move trial
proceedings along as expeditiously as possible, with
full respect for due process and the fair-trial rights
of the accused. In addition to The Hague court room,
witnesses and counsel can securely participate from
the Arusha Branch and the Kigali Field Office, and the
accused is able to attend the trial in person or remotely
from the United Nations Detention Unit. The judges
are supported by a dedicated team of lawyers working
from across all duty stations. I have appointed a reserve
judge to ensure continuity should one of the judges on
the bench become unavailable. The projection for the
completion of the trial phase of this case remains by
September 2024.
Equally, the appeals procedure in the case
Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović,
over which I have presided since July, continues to
be on track. The next status conference will be held
on 19 January, and the in-person appeal hearing has
now been scheduled for 24 and 25 January. With those
key hearings in place, and with the full support of the
judges on the bench, I am confident in confirming that
the appeal judgment will be delivered by June. Notably
in this case, all of the judges on the bench, except for
me, carry out their work remotely.
In addition, the mechanism made important strides
with respect to its other continuous judicial activities
arising from functions such as the protection of victims
and witnesses, assistance to national jurisdictions and
the monitoring of cases referred to national courts, as
well as the enforcement of sentences. Those matters
regularly call for decisions by Mechanism judges or
the President and require sustained effort and resources
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

to see the full cycle of justice through to the end. The
recent in-person plenary session of judges held from
28 to 30 November provided a suitable forum for
discussing those matters in greater depth.
Earlier this year, the Security Council reviewed
the progress of the work of the Mechanism, resulting in
the adoption of resolution 2637 (2022) in June. Review
processes and evaluations present unique opportunities
for improvement and self-calibration. Having the
resolution in place from the very start of my mandate
has helped me to define the priorities of my presidency
and other important areas of focus, and I would like to
make a few remarks in that connection.
First, the resolution contains a strong call on
all States to cooperate fully with the Mechanism.
It is a compelling call to action that applies to all
crimes enumerated in article 1 of the Statute of the
Mechanism. Contempt is among those crimes, as it is
not a mere violation of procedural discipline, despite
one delegation’s previous suggestion. Respect for the
proper administration of justice constitutes an integral
part of our system and a sine qua non for the existence
of the rule of law. Interference cannot be tolerated.
It threatens the bedrock of the international justice
system and the legacy of our court. In the Jojić and
Radeta case, the Republic of Serbia has an unequivocal
obligation to cooperate with the Mechanism. The
national authorities recently informed me that they
have no intention of complying with the order issued
on 13 May 2019 by the Single Judge, which the Appeals
Chamber confirmed on 24 February 2020. Let me say
that, while I am disappointed, I am not discouraged.
I will continue to raise the matter in the expectation
that Serbia will ultimately fulfil its international duties
under the Charter of the United Nations, as it has
done on a number of occasions in the past relating to
contempt of court.
Another serious matter on which the Security
Council has called on all States to cooperate with
the Mechanism and render it the necessary assistance
concerns the eight relocated persons who have been
acquitted or completed their sentences. The best
way to resolve the situation would be for the existing
agreement between the United Nations and the Niger
to be observed. The fact that this has not happened has
resulted in those persons living under de facto house
arrest, despite the fact that they are now free men. The
Mechanism, and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) before it, have brought the urgent need

S/PV.9217

to resolve the matter of acquitted or released persons to
the attention of the Security Council time and again. A
year ago, in this Chamber, my predecessor announced a
breakthrough, in the belief that the matter had reached
a conclusion (see S/PV.8927). At the time he praised
the representative of the Niger, who was serving as
President of the Security Council in December 2021,
for his country’s acceptance of its duty to relocate those
persons on its territory. A year later, our collective
inability to find a durable solution reflects negatively
not only on the Organization but on the credibility of
international justice as a whole. State assistance in
identifying and implementing an acceptable solution to
this crisis will go a long way to helping the Mechanism
to move ahead with its transition plans.
Secondly, the Council has requested that the
Mechanism provide options regarding the transfer of
its remaining activities in due course. We have taken
that request seriously and that is why developing a
strategy for the future has become one of the priorities
of my presidency. Last Friday, I presented the Security
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals with a road map for developing a Mechanismwide scenario-based workforce plan. The road map lays
out the remaining residual functions with preliminary
projections involving three drawdown phases. The
first phase would correspond to the period in which ad
hoc judicial activity and the tracking of fugitives are
expected to be completed. The second phase would
correspond to the period during which the Mechanism
will focus exclusively on discharging its continued
residual functions, which require more complex and
long-term consideration. Finally, in the third and final
phase, it is anticipated that our continuing residual
functions will have a greatly reduced workload, for
which specific projections are not available at present.
The Mechanism will continue to work collaboratively
on crafting options for any transfer of functions, as
well as timelines for expected durations. With the road
map as a first point of reference, the Mechanism will
provide updates on the development of a comprehensive
strategy to guide the Mechanism’s continued transition
to a truly residual court.
As the Council has previously noted, there can be
no exit without a strategy. While that is true, I would
underscore that our planning for the future is dependent
on addressing the challenges of the present. Any delay
on that front will have an impact on our transition plans.
One clear example is the enforcement of sentences.

22-742293/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Compared to other international courts and tribunals,
we have the largest number of convicted persons — 51
in total — serving the lengthiest sentences, including
17 life sentences. To date, 13 States have gone above
and beyond to demonstrate their strong commitment
to international justice by willingly assuming their
additional and weighty responsibilities for enforcing
sentences. Their ongoing support and cooperation are
critical to the Mechanism’s ability to carry out that
aspect of its mandate, and I commend and sincerely
thank them. I urgently appeal to other States to follow
their lead in sharing the burden of enforcing the
sentences of people convicted by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda or the
Mechanism. Unless additional States come forward,
the Mechanism will struggle to continue to fulfil its
duties in that important area.
Finally, I want to discuss the Council’s continued
emphasis on ensuring that our residual tribunal
remains guided by the premise of operating as a
small, temporary and efficient structure. The ability
to appreciate what “residual” truly means has become
clearer now that we are dealing with our final trial
and appeal proceedings. The reality, however, is that
the scope of our responsibilities and the volume of
our activities extend far beyond what was envisaged
back in 1993 and 1994 when the ad hoc tribunals were
established. In that sense, the term “residual” should
not give the impression that we no longer matter. On the
contrary, our mandated residual functions, including
judicial functions, remain essential. Indeed, that is why
the institution was created in the first place. Even after
the completion of our pending caseload, we will be left
with a number of valuable, long-term responsibilities
aimed at consolidating our achievements and results. I
refer to the enforcement of sentences, the preservation
of archives, the protection of witnesses, assistance to
national jurisdictions and other judicial activities. I
therefore urge the international community to remain
steadfast in its commitment to fighting impunity,
to embrace the reality that justice does not end with
final judgments and to acknowledge that our residual
functions require continued efforts to ensure that the
legacy of the ICTY, the ICTR and the Mechanism is
not derailed.
I would also underscore the need to redouble our
efforts to counter genocide denial, revisionism and
the glorification of war criminals. By defending and
4/23

12/12/2022

disseminating the truth, we can help prevent genocide
and other heinous crimes from occurring again. The
information centres envisaged by the Security Council
in resolution 1966 (2010) are geared to that, and as
demonstrated by the existing centre in Sarajevo, will
play a vital role in making our work more comprehensible
and accessible to the communities affected. For that
reason, the international community is encouraged
to work with Rwanda and the countries of the former
Yugoslavia and to support the establishment of those
valuable platforms.
Through the establishment of the Residual
Mechanism, more than a decade ago, the Security
Council sent a strong message about impunity — that
high-ranking fugitives indicted by the ICTY and the
ICTR cannot escape justice and that the legacy of those
two courts must be protected. Justice and peace are the
most pressing needs of today’s world. I can say without
any doubt that we have done our part. The Mechanism
is proud of its contribution and should be considered
one of the best investments of the United Nations.
The President: I thank Judge Gatti Santana for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank members of the Security
Council for this opportunity to brief them once again
on the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, the details of which are set out in our report.
I will mention some of the most important points and
priorities today. At the outset, I would like to congratulate
President Gatti Santana on her appointment. I look
forward to working with her and her Office, where she
has already started in an excellent way.
The Mechanism now has only two core crime
cases remaining — the Kabuga trial and the Stanišić
and Simatović appeal. We are satisfied with the swift
progress in the presentation of our evidence in the
Kabuga case. Since the first witness was called on
5 October, the testimony of 12 of the 54 witnesses has
already been heard, and hearings are being held in
person and remotely, which has so far proceeded very
well from the Mechanism’s different locations. With the
encouragement of the Trial Chamber, our team has made
extensive use of the available rules to present evidence
in writing, which reduces the amount of in-courtroom
time we require. Subject to further developments, we
hope to be able to complete the presentation of our
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

evidence in the prosecution case in the second quarter
of next year. In relation to the Stanišić and Simatović
appeal proceeding, the prosecution team is preparing
for oral arguments, which are currently scheduled for
the end of January. I would like to highlight my Office’s
important work under its mandate to investigate and
prosecute contempt-of-court crimes.
At the end of June, the Appeals Chamber announced
its judgment in the Fatuma et al. case. The Appeals
Chamber granted our appeal in its entirety, dismissing
all defence appeals. My Office is satisfied that Augustin
Ngirabatware’s attempt to influence witnesses in
order to overturn his genocide convictions was
detected and halted. Five accused, including a defence
investigator, were convicted and punished for those
crimes. The effective investigation and prosecution of
contempt of court and breaches of witness-protection
measures are essential for protecting witnesses and
maintaining the integrity of the proceedings conducted
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the Mechanism. We trust that,
by prosecuting those crimes now, we will deter others
from similar attempts in the future.
Turning to the search for the remaining fugitives,
only four remain at large. Our top priority is Fulgence
Kayishema, who was indicted for the murders of more
than 2,000 women, men, children and elderly refugees
at Nyange Church in April 1994. As I previously
reported to the Council (see S/PV.9062), since 2018
the investigation had been significantly impeded by
challenges in obtaining cooperation from South Africa.
However, I am pleased that cooperation with South
Africa is now moving in a very positive direction.
Thanks to the support of the President of South Africa,
a dedicated national investigative team was established
to work directly with our tracking team at an operational
level. The two teams have met regularly and undertaken
coordinated investigations over the past six months.
Important results have already been achieved, and our
investigation in South Africa is progressing quickly.
Looking forward, my Office will continue to need
extensive support from national partners. Our tracking
team is now in contact with a number of other countries
in Africa, Europe and North America, and we trust that
we will receive a positive response to our requests. As
always, we continue to receive excellent support from
the Government of Rwanda, including the Minister
of Justice, the Minister of National Unity and Civic

S/PV.9217

Engagement, the Inspector General of Police and my
colleague the Prosecutor General.
In that respect, I would like to take this opportunity
to brief the Council on an issue that is important to
victims and survivors of the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda. Today there are still more than 1,000
fugitives wanted by Rwandan prosecutors for crimes
committed during the genocide. They organized,
encouraged, led and assisted mass killings at the local
level, including as members of the army, police and
civilian leadership. In order to escape justice, they lied
about their past and abused the refugee process in order
to find sanctuary in countries around the world. In
their new homes, many continue to promote genocide
ideology, encouraging hatred between Hutus and Tutsis.
While tracking our ICTR fugitives, my Office has
discovered some of the other fugitives who are enjoying
impunity in third countries. We will work with those
countries’ national authorities, who are responsible
for extraditing or prosecuting those individuals. States
should be concerned that suspected génocidaires may
be living in their territory, and the refugee process
needs to be protected by ensuring that those who abuse
it are detected and appropriately dealt with. My Office
will continue to track the remaining ICTR fugitives.
While bringing the four fugitives to justice is a critical
step, Rwanda will continue to need assistance from the
international community to account for the many other
fugitives suspected of genocide.
In recognizing that national courts are continuing
the work of the ICTR and the ICTY, the Security
Council mandated my Office to respond to requests for
assistance from domestic investigators and prosecutors
around the world. Meeting that mandate continues to be
our priority. As my Office moves closer to completing
our last cases and accounting for the final fugitives,
it is important to remind ourselves that thousands of
cases remain to be completed in national courts. As
I just mentioned, the Prosecutor General of Rwanda
still seeks to prosecute more than 1,000 fugitives
for genocide.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia,
there are still more than 3,000 suspected perpetrators of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide who
have yet to be investigated and prosecuted. My Office’s
assistance remains essential for completing that work.
Our confidential evidence collection contains more
than 11 million pages of testimony, reports and records.
By providing access to that evidence and the expert

22-742295/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

knowledge of our staff, we directly support more justice
for more victims. That is also reflected in the numbers
of requests for assistance that we receive every year. Ten
years ago, we received approximately 100 requests for
assistance per year. In the past five years, an average of
362 requests per year were submitted to our Office. We
anticipate that such trends will continue for a number
of years to come and that such requests will increase in
complexity and significance.
Yet, despite the support that we provide, national
prosecutors continue to face other critical challenges.
In the former Yugoslavia, the most significant issue
remains regional cooperation among prosecution
offices. Cooperation among prosecutors in the
region is essential because today the victims and the
perpetrators often live in different countries. In order
to achieve meaningful justice, cases must therefore be
transferred from the country investigating the crime
to the country that can prosecute the suspect. As my
written report details, there are important signs of
positive progress in cooperation among Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia. However,
prosecutors in the region report that they do not
receive the cooperation they need from Croatia in cases
involving Croatian suspects.
I have discussed that matter extensively for the
past six years with Croatian Ministers of Justice and
other interlocutors. As Croatian authorities informed
me earlier this year, they believe the investigation and
prosecution of their nationals is a national security issue.
Such a stance turns justice into a political matter, when
it should involve only an impartial judicial assessment
of the evidence and the law. I was informed recently
that a few requests from Bosnia and Herzegovina have
been unblocked. Yet the backlog remains immense,
and even more requests will be submitted in the future.
The coming period will show whether there has been
meaningful change, and we hope that there will be
progress as well.
In that context, non-governmental organizations
and human rights mechanisms have raised further
concerns about justice in Croatia. They note that the
large majority of cases in Croatia are in absentia trials
of Serbian nationals, while notable crimes against
Serbs have not yet been addressed. Unfortunately,
few victims consequently receive meaningful justice.
Prior to joining the European Union, Croatia was at the
forefront of promoting justice and effective regional
cooperation. Regrettably, it is no longer playing that
6/23

12/12/2022

role. My Office will continue to engage with Croatian
authorities to find mutually acceptable solutions, as our
goal is to ensure that more victims receive justice. More
broadly, my report once again covers issues related to
the continuation of the denial of war crimes and the
glorification of convicted war criminals in the countries
of the former Yugoslavia.
In Croatia, the President has continued to question
whether genocide was committed in Srebrenica. In
Republika Srpska, senior officials, including the Prime
Minister, have praised convicted ICTY war criminals. In
Serbia, civil society embraces the atmosphere of denial
and glorification created by political leaders — more
than 150 murals of Ratko Mladić have been counted
in Belgrade alone. Those are not the words and acts of
people on the margins, but of those at the political and
cultural centres of the region’s societies. Glorifications
of war criminals and revisionist denials of recent
atrocities have been mainstreamed. My Office will
continue to call on all officials and public figures
in the region to act responsibly and put the victims
and the suffering of civilians at the forefront of all
their activities.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
that my Office remains firmly focused on its mandated
functions. Our prosecutions of the final Mechanism
cases are moving forward expeditiously, and we are
actively investigating the current whereabouts of the
four remaining ICTR fugitives. We are also providing
critical assistance to the national authorities that
now have primary responsibility in continuing the
accountability process for crimes committed in Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia. In all our efforts, we remain
grateful for the support of the Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Brammertz for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for your initiative in
organizing today’s meeting on the progress report of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I would also like to thank the President of
the Mechanism, Ms. Graciela Gatti Santana, and the
Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz, for their briefings
in the context of the twenty-first progress report
on the work of the International Mechanism for the
period from mid-May to mid-November. I welcome the
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia to today’s meeting. And, as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, I would like to reiterate our congratulations
to the President of the Mechanism on her appointment.
We commend the efforts made by the Mechanism
during the reporting period to carry out its residual
functions in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010),
despite the many challenges it has encountered since
the health crisis caused by the coronavirus disease
began. We welcome the strategy implemented by the
Office of the President, which is essentially aimed
at strengthening the Mechanism’s efficiency and its
working methods. In our view, that approach appears
to be the right one for enabling a targeted transition
towards the Mechanism’s completion of its residual
functions in accordance with resolutions 1966 (2010)
and 2637 (2022).
To that end, we welcome the road map and all
measures taken to achieve that objective. We encourage
the Office of the President to use that strategy to raise
awareness within the international community, primarily
the Security Council, on salient, complex issues such
as the tracking of fugitives, the trial proceedings of
highly sensitive cases, technical assistance to national
courts, the monitoring and execution of sentences and
the protection of victims and witnesses as well as of
the archives. Significant progress has been made in the
context of pending judicial proceedings, notably the
conclusion of the Marie Rose Fatuma et al. case, which
serves to encourage us to redouble our efforts to settle
the two remaining and ongoing trials, concerning the
cases of Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga and Prosecutor
v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović, whose
complexity we acknowledge.
The Mechanism has now reached a crucial phase, and
its credibility and effectiveness will continue to depend
largely on the assistance that States provide, especially
their support to the Prosecutor to facilitate the arrest of
the fugitives at large. If they are not arrested and then
tried according to the required legal procedures, the
Mechanism’s purpose and effectiveness will be called
into question. The fight against impunity must remain
an imperative for the international community. We
encourage the States concerned to cooperate closely
with the two branches of the Mechanism in order to
maximize the collection of the evidence needed to
begin the difficult criminal investigations that can

S/PV.9217

determine the facts of the serious crimes that have
been committed.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support to the
Mechanism and call for mobilizing serious efforts to
ensure that its important work will continue unhindered
and with the effective collaboration of the international
community. In addition to fulfilling its essential
mandate, its work is dedicated to the quest for truth
and justice and constitutes a moral bulwark against
arbitrary action and mass atrocities.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks President Santana and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings.
During the reporting period the Security Council
adopted resolution 2637 (2022), by which it decided
that the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals should continue to operate for another twoyear term. In accordance with resolution 2637 (2022),
the Mechanism should set timetables for all its activities,
in particular the processing of cases, and strictly
adhere to them. It should further reduce its costs and
propose alternatives for the transfer of its remaining
activities in due course. China hopes that the Residual
Mechanism will carry out its work in accordance with
its mandate and the requirements of the Council and
looks forward to progress being made in that regard as
soon as possible. The progress of the Mechanism’s trials
on core cases in the past two years has been slow, due
to the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
the health of those indicted, among other things. China
hopes that the Mechanism will complete the remaining
two cases efficiently and in strict accordance with the
estimated timetables outlined in the report.
Given the diminishing number of cases and judicial
functions, the Mechanism should continue to reduce
its expenditures and further rationalize the allocation
of budgetary resources to focus on judicial activities.
Practical and effective cooperation between the
Mechanism and the countries concerned is particularly
important for its completion of its mandate and
advancement of its work. With regard to issues such
as tracking the remaining fugitives, relocating those
who have been acquitted and released and transferring
cases between the Mechanism and the countries
concerned. China hopes that the Mechanism and the
parties concerned will strengthen communication,
enhance mutual trust, accommodate each other’s
legitimate concerns, draw on the successful practices

22-742297/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

of international criminal tribunals to find appropriate
solutions and cooperate in the fight against impunity.
In accordance with the relevant Council resolutions, the
Mechanism should be a small, temporary and efficient
structure whose functions and size diminish over time.
China hopes that the Mechanism will continue to carry
out its activities in accordance with its mandate under
the relevant Council resolutions and implement the
recommendations of the Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals and the Office of
Internal Oversight Services.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank Gabon, as Chair of the Council’s Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and the
Office of Legal Affairs for their efforts in coordinating
the work of the Council in collaboration with
the Mechanism.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate Judge
Graciela Gatti Santana on her appointment as President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. In addition to her qualifications and extensive
experience, we believe that her appointment is a positive
step towards increasing women’s representation in
leadership positions in United Nations bodies. I would
also like to thank President Gatti Santana and Chief
Prosecutor Brammertz for their valuable briefings. I
express our appreciation to Judge Agius for his tireless
efforts as President of the Mechanism since 2019. I also
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of the
representatives of Serbia, Rwanda, Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates its support for
the mandate of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and welcomes its progress
report. The Mechanism plays a pivotal role in achieving
justice and protecting the rights of the victims of war
crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing, as well as
in combating impunity for the serious violations of
international law perpetrated in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. We have followed the progress of the
Mechanism in carrying out its core functions. We take
note of the start of trial proceedings in the Kabuga case
in late September, which may be the last trial conducted
by the Mechanism. We hope that the Mechanism will
be able to conclude the appeal proceedings in the
Stanišić and Simatović case next year. We emphasize
that the main responsibility for holding perpetrators
of crimes accountable lies with States, while stressing
8/23

12/12/2022

the important role of international organs in achieving
international justice. We also appreciate the efforts
of the Mechanism, represented by its relevant judges
and the prosecution team, to find ways to simplify
and conclude its work, including by prosecuting all
the fugitives.
We stress the importance of the Mechanism
continuing its efforts to be more effective and efficient
and to reduce its workload, guided by the Security
Council’s vision that the Mechanism, as a structure,
must be temporary, effective and diminish over time.
In that regard, the United Arab Emirates welcomes
the President’s remarks that the coming years will
see the transition of the Mechanism from a legislative
body into a truly residual Mechanism. Regarding the
situation of the eight acquitted and released persons,
the United Arab Emirates regrets that their situation
remains unresolved. We stress the importance of the
Mechanism continuing its work with all the parties
concerned in order to reach an appropriate solution as
soon as possible in order to ensure the protection of
their rights and freedoms.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates urges
all States, especially those concerned, to fulfil their
obligations and cooperate with the Mechanism, as
well as to support it in completing the remaining
tasks needed to achieve international justice, because
relying on justice is the best way to honour the victims
of serious international crimes. In that connection, we
emphasize that strengthening international justice and
the rule of law on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations is essential for the international community to
effectively achieve sustainable development.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would
like to thank President Gatti Santana and Prosecutor
Brammertz very much for their briefings on the
ongoing work of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals to bring perpetrators to justice
for the atrocities committed in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia.
First, my delegation wants to thank President
Gatti Santana for her leadership in her first six months
as President of the Mechanism. We appreciate her
commitment to ensuring that the remaining trial and
appeal proceedings are concluded efficiently and fairly,
and that the Mechanism is able to transition into a fully
residual institution. We also acknowledge that even as
the work of the Mechanism comes to a close, President
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Gatti Santana has made it a priority to meet victims and
stakeholders where they live, travelling to Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the commemoration of the Srebrenica
genocide and to Rwanda for meetings and visits to
memorial sites. We must continue to place victims at the
centre of our efforts to promote justice for the crimes
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, even
as the Mechanism moves away from trials and appeals.
At the close of the year, we can reflect on the
remarkable successes of the Mechanism in moving
forward on active trials and appeals, closing the
book on outstanding fugitives and assisting national
jurisdictions in prosecuting international crimes.
Almost 30 years since the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia was established,
only the appeal in Stanišić and Simatović remains to
be decided. After years of proceedings, we hope that
a decision in that case will finally clarify the role of
those officials in Belgrade for the crimes committed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia.
The remaining proceedings with respect to the
Rwandan genocide are also drawing to a close. We
commend the Mechanism on the opening of the trial
of Félicien Kabuga, who is accused of acting as the
primary financier of the militia and political groups
that perpetrated the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.
We appreciate the efforts of the Mechanism to move
as expeditiously as possible — given Mr. Kabuga’s
age and health — as the victims have been waiting
decades for justice. The Mechanism has also moved
swiftly to address the last remaining fugitives from the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. With the
termination of the proceedings against Protais Mpiranya
and Phénéas Munyarugarama, only four fugitives
remain. We are pleased by South Africa’s increased
cooperation with the Mechanism and call on Member
States that may be harbouring any of those remaining
fugitives to cooperate with the investigation. We also
commend the Mechanism for finalizing the contempt
verdict in the Fatuma et al. case. We do, however, note
the outstanding contempt case and the lack of action
with respect to defendants Jojić and Radeta, and we urge
Serbia to respond to the outstanding arrest warrants.
Ensuring the integrity of court proceedings is essential
to the administration of justice.
Finally, we are grateful to the 13 countries serving
as enforcement States. Holding persons who have been
convicted and ensuring that their sentences are carried
out is indispensable to the operation of an international

S/PV.9217

tribunal. While the Mechanism and its predecessors
have done much to lay the groundwork for a new era
of accountability, national authorities must now carry
on with the important work of ensuring domestic
prosecutions and promoting truth-telling, reconciliation
and healing. We strongly urge States to promptly and
fully respond to all requests for cooperation.
Regrettably, as we have just heard from the Chief
Prosecutor, we continue to confront the dangerous
example of non-acceptance of historical facts. It is
striking that the Prosecutor stated in his briefing
that in the western Balkans, the denial of crimes, the
non-acceptance of judicial facts and the glorification
of war criminals are “not the words and acts of
people on the margins, but of those at the political
and cultural centres of the region’s societies”. Some
people also continue to deny the genocide crimes
perpetrated against Tutsis in Rwanda. We know what
the consequences of the normalization of hatred are and
what the persecution of certain groups can lead to. We
must unequivocally denounce those who seek to deny
the clear historical record and nurture old grievances
rather than move towards a future in which the rule of
law will govern.
In conclusion, we welcome the Mechanism’s
ongoing engagement with the affected countries to
strengthen national judicial systems, as well as its
efforts to promote public awareness and engagement
in ongoing court proceedings, preserving and sharing
court records and other initiatives designed to inform
and educate the public. That work is vital for ensuring
that the Mechanism’s work will continue to have an
impact long after the work in the courtroom is complete.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Since this is the first
briefing to the Security Council by Judge Graciela
Gatti Santana, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, I wish
to congratulate her on her appointment and thank
her for her forward-looking briefing, which also
provides an overview of the progress of work and
the challenges facing the Mechanism. I would like to
take this opportunity to assure her of Ghana’s support
and cooperation during her tenure. I would like to
congratulate Mr. Serge Brammertz, Chief Prosecutor
of the Mechanism, on his reappointment and thank him
for his briefing. I also welcome the participation in
this meeting of the representatives of Serbia, Rwanda,
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

22-742299/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

We acknowledge the important role of the
Mechanism in ending impunity and bringing the
perpetrators of atrocity crimes to justice and will
support every effort and work constructively with other
members of the Council in that regard. With regard to
the contents of the report, Ghana would make like to
make the following four points.
First, with regard to cooperation, Ghana continues
to call on all States to cooperate with the Mechanism
in accordance with applicable laws by handing over
fugitives to enable the judicial process to continue and
be completed. It may be noted that 152 States have
said “no” to atrocity crimes through the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. We urge those States that are still harbouring
identified fugitives to hand them over in fulfilment
of their international obligations. We also call for the
cooperation of States and the enforcement of sentences
and take this opportunity to thank Austria, Belgium,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Norway,
Poland, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland for assuming additional
responsibilities by agreeing to enforce the sentences of
one or more convicted persons and to encourage those
considering enforcing sentences in the future to do so.
Secondly, Ghana has always maintained that, as a
comity of nations, we have a collective responsibility
to remember the survivors and families of the victims
of the atrocity crimes that have been committed and
to sustain the demands of justice and accountability
without limitation over time. We underscore the fact
that the wheels of justice may sometimes grind slowly.
However, it is also our collective responsibility to seek
justice for them by holding the perpetrators of heinous
atrocity crimes accountable. The only way those
survivors and the victims’ families can find closure
is for the perpetrators of such heinous crimes to be
brought to justice.
Thirdly, Ghana takes notes with appreciation of the
forward-looking plans, as well as the road map that gives
the Security Council some clarity on the Mechanism’s
residual functions; future workload, as outlined in the
first to third phases; and possible options for future
institutional change. That is a positive development for
Ghana. And we look forward to further engagement
with the Mechanism through the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals in respect of possible
changes to the mandate with a view to assisting with
the implementation of the road map.
10/23

12/12/2022

Fourthly, Ghana recalls resolution 2529 (2020),
which emphasizes the importance of expeditiously and
durably relocating persons who have been acquitted or
have completed their sentences and calls on States to
cooperate and assist the Mechanism in doing so. Ghana
wishes to draw attention to the challenges facing the
Mechanism in the implementation of the resolution.
It is pertinent to state that the international justice
community has to pay attention to and resolve the
situation of the acquitted and released persons who
have completed their sentences. The continued lack of
liberty of those persons remains a stain on international
justice and perpetuates a well-founded criticism that
international justice has failed to ensure and implement
fundamental human rights. As we commend the efforts
of the Registrar for using diplomatic, political and
judicial avenues to resolve some of the challenges, we
call on the Council to also critically discuss the matter
with an outcome that will assist the Mechanism in
line with resolution 2637 (2022). Paragraph 5 of the
resolution states,
“Notes that decisions on the relocation of
persons who have been acquitted or completed
their sentences should take into account inter alia
the readiness of the state of origin to accept its
nationals, the consent or any objections raised by
the individuals to be relocated and the availability
of other relocation states”.
Ghana is convinced that paragraph 5 sets the tone
for an in-depth discussion by the Security Council. The
proposal is being made against the backdrop of the fact
that more of such persons will be released in the near
future and that, of late, not many States have expressed
interest in taking those persons. How long will the
Mechanism continue to take on such responsibilities,
which also have budgetary implications?
Ghana notes with appreciation the collaboration
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the national
prosecutions by providing them with access to evidence
and information in response to a high volume of requests
for those crimes. That is a positive development as it
helps in building the capacities of the offices in the
national prosecutions of affected countries.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the President and the Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The Residual Mechanism was established by the
Security Council 12 years ago. Finally, a miracle has
happened: the President announced her intention to
transform the Mechanism from a judicial body into
a genuine residual structure. By the way, I thank
Ms. Gatti Santana. She has once again proven us right.
For all these years, we keep saying that a de facto
judicial body has continued to exist under the label
of “Residual Mechanism”. The Security Council’s
decisions pertaining to a drawdown of the Tribunals,
have not been implemented. The Residual Mechanism
was deliberately dragging out cases and assuming
functions not within its mandate in an attempt to
artificially prolong its existence. I hope that, under the
new leadership, the situation will change significantly.
In that context, we took note of the plans to close the
pretrial detention facility in Arusha and the Sarajevo
office as of 1 April 2023. We consider that decision a
step in the right direction, and we urge not stopping
there. In general, given the residual nature of the
Mechanism, we are convinced that its leadership should
regularly review its functions, departments and offices
to check for redundancies and diminishing relevance.
The relevant practical recommendations of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services are much needed.
At the next briefing, it would be useful to hear
considerations of options for transferring the residual
functions of the Mechanism following its closure — for
example, their transfer to competent national bodies,
the United Nations Secretariat and so forth. In that
regard, the Mechanism should follow the best practices
of other similar structures, in particular the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon.
Indeed, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon is
responsible, inter alia, for managing archives,
including physical evidence, assisting national bodies
and protecting victims and witnesses. At the same time,
unlike the Mechanism, it has been able to set a precise
date for the conclusion of its work, 31 December
2023, and make a clear plan for the completion of
its final responsibilities before that deadline. That
example clearly shows that sound management and
planning make the conclusion of residual functions a
manageble task.
We once again have to express our extreme concern
with regard to the poor health of Ratko Mladić. He
is in the custody of, and therefore under the direct
responsibility of, the Mechanism. We recall that the

S/PV.9217

evaluation of, the care for and the improvement of the
physical and mental health of convicted persons falls
within the remit of the relevant penitentiary institution
and is one of the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. In addition,
access to timely and qualified health care for persons
under the authority of the Mechanism is established in
basic international legal documents, as well as in the
relevant resolution 2529 (2020).
We also noted that the instrument for early release
is used only when the Mechanism needs to absolve itself
of its responsibility for another seriously ill prisoner.
That is indicated by the fact mentioned in the report that
Radoslav Brđanin was released literally days before his
death. We consider that practice outrageous, inhumane
and in need of review.
The Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić case is a good
opportunity for the Mechanism to demonstrate a
humane approach. It is no secret that the fundamental
human rights of the Serbian Colonel General were
violated in the sentencing process. The disqualification
of three of the Mechanism’s judges because of bias
speaks volumes about the lack of objectivity in this
case. In that regard, bearing in mind Ratko Mladić’s
health and advanced age, we believe it would be fair for
the Mechanism to consider his release on humanitarian
grounds. That step would also help heal the wounds
inflicted by the civil war in the Balkans and NATO’s
indiscriminate bombing of the former Yugoslavia in
the 1990s.
We would like to make a separate point about the
Mechanism’s oversight functions with regard to the
sentence of Radovan Karadžić. Representatives of
Serbian civil society sent an open letter in defence of
his rights. The letter gives a detailed account of the
flagrant neglect of his legitimate rights by the United
Kingdom, where Mr. Karadžić is serving his life
sentence. In particular, the document shows that his
rights to a safe environment and access to information
are being ignored. He is unable to communicate with
his family and has no access to the materials in his
own case. That is a blatant violation of fundamental
international human rights legal instruments, including
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, also known as the
Mandela Rules. We call on the Mechanism to assume
responsibility for, rather than simply pay lip service to,
its oversight functions for the serving of sentences.

22-7422911/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Ms. Miley (Ireland): At the outset, I would like to
extend Ireland’s congratulations to Judge Gatti Santana
on her appointment as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I also want
to thank both the President and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their comprehensive briefings today.
We commend the Mechanism for the progress
achieved across its judicial functions, as well as
other key areas of its mandate, during the reporting
period. That output is all the more impressive given
that downsizing and budgetary constraints form an
ever-present backdrop to the Mechanism’s operations.
We also thank the President for elaborating the three
core priorities of her presidency. Ireland very much
welcomes the focus on steering the Mechanism through
the next phase of its lifespan, one focused on its longterm residual activities.
Cooperation is essential in ensuring that the
Mechanism can fulfil many of its mandated functions.
We recall that States have an obligation to cooperate
with the Mechanism in its investigations and
prosecutions. While we welcome the progress detailed
by the Prosecutor, I want to reiterate today our deep
concern about Serbia’s persistent failure to arrest and
surrender Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta — despite
the fact that Serbia has been referred to the Security
Council for non-cooperation on three occasions. We
urge all States to comply with their obligations under
international law, as well as to cooperate fully with
and assist the Mechanism in its efforts to arrest and
surrender the remaining fugitives.
Separately, Ireland welcomes the tireless efforts of
the Mechanism, as well as the assistance afforded by
Member States, to track the four remaining fugitives.
Ireland regrets that the situation of the eight
acquitted or released individuals relocated from
Arusha to Niamey in December last year has yet to be
resolved. We share the Mechanism’s concern that the
situation continues to have a serious detrimental impact
on the rights of the relocated persons who are living
under de facto house arrest. We also note the impact
of those developments on the Mechanism’s workload.
We call on the Niger and the States concerned to
respect the decisions of the Tribunal and to abide by the
terms of the relocation agreement. We also commend
the Registrar for his continued efforts to find a viable
solution to the problem.
12/23

12/12/2022

Last Friday marked the International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the
Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of this Crime.
By remembering the events of the past and honouring
the victims and survivors of genocide, the international
community signifies its commitment to “never again”.
It is therefore deeply worrisome that genocide denial,
historical revisionism and the glorification of convicted
war criminals continue to gain momentum, as reported
by the President and the Prosecutor. Ireland again
condemns genocidal ideology, the denial of crimes
and the glorification of war criminals, including by
high-level officials. Ireland also strongly supports the
Mechanism’s role as a preventive tool against future
acts of violence. That includes educational initiatives
funded by the European Union.
In conclusion, Ireland reaffirms its steadfast
commitment to achieving justice for all victims and
survivors of atrocity crimes in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. As we leave the Council, we will continue
to support the work of the Mechanism and its vital role
in ensuring that perpetrators of international crimes are
held to account.
Ms. Syed (Norway): I would like to thank Judge
Gatti Santana and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
thorough report to the Security Council and for today’s
briefings. I also congratulate Judge Gatti Santana on her
appointment as President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
At the outset, let me reaffirm Norway’s strong
support for the Mechanism, which diligently implements
the important mandate given to it by the Council.
Norway commends the Mechanism’s activities in the
reporting period.
In June we concluded the fourth review of the work
of the Mechanism and adopted resolution 2637 (2022).
We support the priorities outlined by the President and
the Prosecutor to implement the resolution, as follows.
First, they must ensure an efficient, effective and
fair conclusion of the two remaining main cases. We
note that the trial proceedings started this fall in the
Kabuga case and that the proceedings in the Stanišić
and Simatović appeal case continue as scheduled.
Secondly, they must lead the continuing transition
from an operational court to a truly residual institution.
We note in that regard that the planned downsizing of
staff continues.
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Let me recall the obligation of all States to fully
adhere to the Security Council’s decisions. We therefore
regret the lack of progress in the Jojić and Radeta case
and once again strongly urge Serbia to cooperate fully
with the Mechanism. The Mechanism is dependent on
the cooperation of Member States in order to fulfil
the mandate that the Council has provided: to ensure
accountability and justice for the victims.
We regret that, despite an earlier agreement, the
Mechanism continues to face problems in the relocation
of the eight persons who have been acquitted or released.
We urge the Niger to fully adhere to its agreement with
the United Nations.
Norway appreciates the Office of the Prosecutor’s
work, including the assistance rendered to national
jurisdictions prosecuting international crimes. We
thank the States that assist the Mechanism in tracking
fugitives. And we urge all States to fully cooperate
in order to ensure the arrest and surrender of all
remaining fugitives.
The Council, too, should assume its responsibilities
by examining every possible measure to conclude the
important work by the Mechanism.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to commend
Judge Gatti Santana for the productive beginning of her
tenure as the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and thank her and
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their 16 November
report on its activities.
Last June, the Security Council adopted resolution 2637 (2022), which allowed the IRMCT to continue its work for the next two years. This decision was
taken on the grounds of its continuing importance to
international justice. The IRMCT still needs time to
complete the important tasks for which it is responsible
in its mandate to fulfil the residual functions of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
These former Tribunals feature prominently in the
history of international criminal justice. They paved
the way for the Rome Statute and the creation of the
International Criminal Court. They provided important
benchmarks for the prosecution of the most serious
crimes in international law. Their legacy must not be
imperilled. This is why it is essential not to thwart the
IRMCT in its mission to bring justice to all the cases
it has the competence to adjudicate and inherited

S/PV.9217

from the former Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. Moreover, we must not forget that the
IRMCT also plays a crucial role in assisting national
jurisdictions, protecting victims and witnesses,
tracking fugitives and managing archives.
Despite its importance, the IRMCT must envisage
a path towards the conclusion of all its activities. The
Security Council conceived it to be temporary and for
its functions to diminish over time. For this reason, we
commend the principals of the IRMCT for bearing in
mind the need for clear timelines for the completion
of the Mechanism’s judicial activities. We note with
appreciation that the Office of Internal Oversight
Services found that its recommendations in this respect
were implemented. We also welcome Judge Gatti
Santana’s efforts to devise a comprehensive strategy
to guide the Mechanism’s ongoing transition from an
operational court to a truly residual institution.
At the same time, we acknowledge that the
Mechanism should be given enough time to transfer all
its functions in the light of the continuous nature of
some of them. In this context, we were satisfied to learn
about the progress achieved by the Mechanism in its
remaining core judicial cases. This was illustrated by
the conclusion of the appeal proceedings in the Fatuma
et al. case on 29 June, the prospect for the conclusion of
appeal proceedings in the Stanišić and Simatović case
by mid-2023 and the start of the trial in the Kabuga
case in late September.
To discharge its assignments, the IRMCT also
needs support from the international community. We
therefore call for full cooperation with the Mechanism
in the tracking of fugitives, the execution of outstanding
arrest warrants and orders of surrender, and the
relocation of acquitted or released persons.
Brazil reiterates its belief that national States bear
the primary responsibility for holding accountable those
who perpetrate crimes in their territories. International
tribunals are supplementary to national judiciaries.
They must act when national institutions are unable or
unwilling to adjudicate those crimes themselves.
The principle of complementarity ensures that
national States retain ownership in their right and,
above all, duty to provide justice to their citizens.
Strong national institutions that enforce accountability
for serious crimes make their societies more resilient in
the face of criminality. They also reduce the likelihood
of relapse into conflict.

22-7422913/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Still, the international community should not
evade its responsibility for ensuring that perpetrators
of gross atrocities will never go unpunished. Impunity
undermines the rule of law and trust in national and
international institutions. International tribunals are a
guarantee that justice will prevail in the end.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
President Gatti Santana and Prosecutor Brammertz for
their detailed report and their briefings.
We join other members in reaffirming our strong
support for the work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals — and of
President Gatti Santana — as the Mechanism continues
to make its own contribution to international criminal
justice, building on the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. We are
particularly pleased with the progress achieved in
terms of the Mechanism’s judicial role, including the
ongoing trial in the Kabuga case and the progress on the
appeal proceedings in the Stanišić and Simatović case.
Effective cooperation with States is critical to locating
and arresting the four remaining fugitives. We appeal
to all States to facilitate the completion of this task.
We applaud the ongoing work of the Mechanism
in completing trials and appeals, protecting victims
and witnesses, and ensuring that the proceedings
remain trustworthy, accessible and useful for future
contributions to international criminal justice. We are
particularly appreciative of the work of the Mechanism
in assisting national war crime prosecutions in the
Balkans and Rwanda, and we agree with Prosecutor
Brammertz that regional cooperation is important in
making progress in the work. Albania strongly supports
the efforts in ending impunity for the crimes committed
in the Balkans and anywhere else.
States have an obligation to cooperate with the
Mechanism and execute the arrest warrants without
delay. No one can afford to stand in the way of delivering
justice to victims. In particular, Serbia must promptly
execute the arrest warrants for Jojić and Radeta to make
sure these individuals face justice.
As President Gatti Santana said, justice does not
finish with the final judgment, and we agree that
information centres remain vital, considering the
cases involving the glorification of war criminals,
genocide deniers and historical revisionism of basic
facts. We deplore and condemn in the strongest terms
14/23

12/12/2022

these views, which are openly expressed in the public
square, on the streets, in stadiums and the Internet,
including by public figures and officials. All that not
only runs against rulings of the ICTY, but it offends
and dishonours the memory of thousands of victims,
in Srebrenica, Vukovar and Račak. They encourage the
commission of these crimes in future. The international
community must never normalize such views and act
against those who enable them.
In closing, we will continue to support the
Mechanism, and we must ensure that the Mechanism
maintains the capabilities necessary to implement its
mandate in full and deliver justice for the families of
the victims, their communities and their countries.
Ms. Nyakoe (Kenya): I thank Judge Graciela
Gatti Santana, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz for their briefings and in-depth
assessments of the progress of work of the Mechanism.
This being the first time that Judge Gatti Santana briefs
the Security Council in her capacity as President of the
Mechanism, my delegation would like to congratulate
her on her appointment and wishes her a successful
tenure of service. I welcome the participation of the
representatives of Serbia, Rwanda, Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina in this meeting.
Kenya supports the work of the Mechanism
established under resolution 1966 (2010) and renewed
under resolution 2637 (2022). The vision of the
Security Council was for the Mechanism to be a small,
temporary and efficient structure, whose functions and
size will diminish over time. This remains inseparable
from the aims of justice and accountability and was
re-emphasised by the Security Council through
resolution 2637 (2022). We therefore acknowledge
the progress that the Mechanism has made towards
the completion of that work and continue to urge it to
move quickly to complete the remaining cases. With
the commencement of the trial in the Félicien Kabuga
case, it is the expectation of the survivors and families
of victims in particular that the completion of the case
will provide a considerable degree of closure. It should
also help to bring them the healing they desire and to
solidify the gains made in reconciliation processes.
Given the responsibility we all collectively have to
ensure accountability for war crimes and genocide, we
urge all States to cooperate with the Mechanism in its
efforts to apprehend the remaining fugitives.
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

As we stated at the Security Council meeting on
14 June (see S/PV.9062), we reiterate our belief that
more effort should be put into preventive processes
and mechanisms. One of the greatest fears of people
who have suffered atrocities such as those covered
under the Mechanism is the possibility that they may
recur. One of the best ways of offering assurance that
this will not happen and actually preventing it from
happening is by investing in national reconciliation
and early-warning and preventive mechanisms. We
encourage international support in that regard, running
in parallel with the judicial processes but structured
to outlive them. Inclusive national dialogues should
therefore be woven into national processes. Similarly,
we call on the United Nations and other international
partners to provide support to the States affected in
strengthening their national investigative, prosecutorial
and judicial capacities, which is in line with the
primary responsibility of States to ensure justice and
accountability for their peoples.
Kenya thanks the delegation of Gabon, under
the leadership of Ambassador Biang, for ably and
successfully steering the work of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.
In conclusion, we reaffirm Kenya’s support for
the work of the Mechanism, while encouraging the
speedy conclusion of its work. We also want to assure
the Mechanism that as we leave the Security Council at
the end of this year, our support will continue within a
clear plan for the Mechanism’s work that corresponds
to the Council’s vision.
Mrs. Dime Labille (French) (spoke in French):
I thank President Gatti Santana and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings and their report. I
would like to congratulate Judge Gatti Santana on her
appointment as President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We also welcome
the presence of the representatives of Serbia, Rwanda,
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
France reiterates its full support to the Mechanism
and its work in the fight against impunity and the
preservation of the legacy of the International Tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. The year 2022
has been a decisive one for the Mechanism, which has
been able to continue its activities in a more favourable
health environment and to make concrete progress that
testifies to its relevance and effectiveness. The Security
Council should support it in its work. We take this

S/PV.9217

opportunity to thank Gabon and congratulate it on its
excellent coordination work at the helm of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
We commend the important judicial work of
the Mechanism, including the commencement of
the trial in the Kabuga case, which constitutes an
important development for the victims and for national
reconciliation in Rwanda. We also welcome the delivery
of the judgment in the Fatuma et al. contempt case,
as well as the continuation of the proceedings in the
Stanišić and Simatović case. In order to complete those
and other pending proceedings in a timely manner, the
Mechanism must have adequate financial resources and
qualified staff. France once again urges all States to
cooperate fully with the Mechanism in accordance with
their international obligations, and to support it in its
activities. We deplore the fact that some partners still
refuse to do so, despite the numerous calls from the
authorities of the Mechanism relayed in the Council. It
is essential that the last of the fugitives indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda be brought
to justice. The death of alleged perpetrators of the most
serious crimes cannot be considered justice for the
victims. Since the creation of the Mechanism, France
has provided significant support in several areas.
First, it has supported judicial cooperation, notably
with the arrest in May 2020 of Félicien Kabuga, one
of the final fugitives from the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, and his transfer to the Mechanism.
Secondly, we have provided support through the
French courts, particularly in the case of Laurent
Bucyibaruta, who was sentenced by the Paris Assize
Court on 12 July 2022 to 20 years’ imprisonment for
complicity in genocide and crimes against humanity.
Lastly, France’s active and permanent support for
the two ad hoc criminal tribunals has also taken the
form of agreements on the enforcement of sentences.
In 2000, France and the United Nations concluded an
agreement on the enforcement of sentences handed
down by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. In that regard, three persons served
their sentences in France between 2004 and 2013 and
one other is currently serving a sentence in France.
That ongoing support, which is part of France’s broader
commitment against impunity, will continue to ensure
that justice is served for the victims.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that the work
of the Mechanism is not limited to its judicial activities.
We welcome the President’s announcement about the

22-7422915/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

plan to develop a drawdown strategy for the Mechanism.
We encourage her to continue her efforts and to work
on options for the future of this jurisdiction. The fact is,
however, that after the conclusion of its core criminal
cases, the Mechanism will have to continue to carry
out onerous tasks, including addressing other judicial
issues as they arise, assisting national jurisdictions,
protecting victims and witnesses, managing archives
and monitoring the enforcement of sentences.
Remembrance work is also essential for reconciliation.
Finally, we remain deeply concerned about the
resurgence and proliferation of political statements
and acts of denial with regard to war crimes, as well
as the glorification of perpetrators of genocide and war
criminals convicted by international criminal tribunals
following impartial and independent proceedings.
Mrs. Jiménez Alegría (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank President Gatti Santana and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their report, and we welcome
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals to the Security Council for the
first time. We are confident that under her leadership
the Mechanism will continue to work effectively to
fight impunity. We also welcome the delegations of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia and Rwanda
to this meeting.
We take note of the priorities identified by the
President, particularly the actions she has launched since
taking office to develop a comprehensive strategy for
guiding the Residual Mechanism towards an effective
and efficient conclusion. Regarding the Mechanism’s
judicial functions, we welcome the conclusion of the
Fatuma et al. case and acknowledge the efforts of all
actors involved in the issuance of the appeal judgment.
We take note of the commencement of the trial in the
Kabuga case and the appeal proceedings in the Stanišić
and Simatović case. We are sure that they will be
conducted efficiently and expeditiously.
Regarding the situation of the four fugitives,
we highlight the work of the Prosecutor’s Office in
following up on those cases and acknowledge the
progress made in locating one of the fugitives. Mexico
considers their arrest and prosecution under Rwandan
jurisdiction to be a priority. We would like to remind
everyone that cooperation in locating fugitives is
not optional, but an obligation in accordance with
Council resolutions. We also underscore the value of
cooperation between the Office of the Prosecutor and
16/23

12/12/2022

the national authorities responsible for the procurement
and dispensation of justice, as it is those authorities
that must continue to work to combat impunity for
crimes committed both in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. Regarding the contempt cases, we want
to once again express our concern about the failure to
comply with arrest warrants, and we reiterate our call
for their enforcement.
Last week, we commemorated the seventy-fourth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and the
International Day of Commemoration and Dignity
of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the
Prevention of This Crime. In that regard, we condemn
the propagation of narratives that deny the commission
of atrocities punishable under international law and
that glorify war criminals. In 2022, there is no place for
divisive narratives that incite hatred. We urge the States
concerned to actively promote actions to counter such
messages, in particular to strengthen the promotion of
education to combat racism and discrimination.
Almost three decades after the establishment of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
Mexico acknowledges the contribution of both
Tribunals, as well as the Residual Mechanism, to
international justice. In the context of commenting on
the latest update on the work of the Residual Mechanism,
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
Mexico reaffirms its support for and commitment to
accountability, truth and justice.
Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): Let
me start by welcoming President Gatti Santana to the
Security Council for the first time. We are confident
that she will be an excellent leader of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We also
would like to thank her and Chief Prosecutor Brammertz
for presenting the report of the Mechanism and their
informative briefings today. It is clear that under their
stewardship the Mechanism will continue to play an
essential role in ending impunity and implementing
international justice. Their briefings demonstrate
that this is a good opportunity to look forward to the
Mechanism’s future.
First, this summer we will see the conclusion of
the final appeal relating to the crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia. The final decision in the Stanišić
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

and Simatović case is a defining moment, of which the
Court should be proud.
Secondly, we note that Félicien Kabuga’s trial
is progressing on schedule and is due to conclude
with judgment in 2024. His trial is a testament to the
international community’s continuing dedication to
accountability for the genocide against the Tutsi.
Thirdly, we are pleased to see the efforts that the
Mechanism is making to be agile and to downsize in
line with the tasks that it now has, including by looking
for new headquarters in The Hague and reducing its
presence in the Western Balkans. We look forward
to collaborating closely with the Mechanism and all
colleagues on the Security Council to ensure that
the Mechanism remains efficient, while securing its
critical legacy.
While there are positives for the future, we have
continuing concerns. It is high time that Serbia arrested
and transferred Petar Jojić and Vjerica Radeta to the
Mechanism following years of requests, considerations
and discussion. Separately, while the Mechanism
continues to engage in important work to assist with
justice at the national level in the Western Balkans,
the blocking of cooperation by some in the region
represents a critical and growing risk to meaningful
reconciliation and long-term stability. That has direct
implications for achieving justice for victims, and we
call on all States to meet their obligations and increase
their efforts to provide justice for those heinous crimes.
Finally, we are saddened to see that the glorification
of war criminals and the denial of genocide continue.
That is unacceptable and increases the suffering of the
victims. The United Kingdom condemns such denial
and glorification in all their forms and calls on all
Member States to do so as well. While we regret those
continuing issues, they serve as an important reminder
that the work and legacy of the Mechanism remain as
important as ever.
Before concluding, I would like to say a word in
answer to the concerns raised by our colleague from
Russia. Let me assure colleagues on the Council that
Mr. Karadžić is treated exactly the same as other
convicted prisoners, with the same rights, privileges
and restrictions. He has not been mistreated in any way.
While his access by telephone to certain members of his
family and a wider circle of contacts was temporarily
suspended, those controls were legal and in line with
prison service policy and were intended to prevent

S/PV.9217

his continued abuse of such access and to protect the
victims of his crimes. We also understand that, despite
Russia’s concerns, Mr. Karadžić himself has raised no
complaint. We consider that those types of spurious
complaints are a deliberate attempt by Mr. Karadžić’s
supporters to undermine the Mechanism and the United
Kingdom, as the enforcing State, as well as the victims
and survivors of his terrible crimes.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I join others in thanking the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Graciela Gatti Santana, and Chief
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for presenting the latest
report of the Mechanism. We are particularly delighted
to see a female Judge heading the Mechanism. India
firmly believes in gender equality, with the full
expression and participation of women in public life
and our socioeconomic and political discourse. I also
take this opportunity to commend outgoing President,
Judge Carmel Agius, for his able stewardship, despite
enormous challenges, including during the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
India supports the work of the Mechanism and
appreciates its contribution to the fight against impunity.
We reiterate the importance of the implementation of
the Mechanism’s mandate in strict accordance with the
principles of justice, impartiality and fairness. It is our
collective responsibility to seek justice for victims. My
delegation appreciates Judge Gatti Santana’s outlined
core priorities for her presidency, with a focus on an
efficient, effective and fair conclusion of the remaining
trial and appeal proceedings. We hope that the
Mechanism will very soon complete the transition from
an operational court to a truly residual institution.
We have taken note of the progress made by the
Mechanism in the trial proceedings in the Kabuga case,
as well as in the appeal proceedings in the Stanišić
and Simatović case. The judgment in the Fatuma et
al. case and the termination of proceedings against
Mr. Protais Mpiranya following his death has reduced
the judicial workload of the institution. The Mechanism
is now left with only two main cases relating to its core
mandate. We also acknowledge the progress made in
other judicial matters. The Mechanism should continue
to make headway in its remaining residual functions,
including protecting victims and witnesses, tracking
the remaining fugitives of the International Criminal

22-7422917/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Tribunal for Rwanda, extending assistance to national
jurisdictions and managing the archives of the ad hoc
Tribunals and the Mechanism.
We also emphasize the importance of cooperation
between the Mechanism and the Member States
concerned to address legal and logistical challenges.
We look forward to an early resolution of the impasse
posed in the context of the acquitted and released
persons relocated to the Republic of the Niger. That is
a humanitarian issue that needs to be addressed with
urgency and sensitivity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Holovka (Serbia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for the presentation of their comprehensive
periodic report and for their briefings today. I also
take this opportunity to congratulate Judge Graciela
Gatti Santana on her appointment as President of
the Mechanism.
We are pleased that the Mechanism is aware of the
major issues of concern, as set out in resolution 2637
(2022), and that it is investing efforts to implement the
recommendations of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, as well as those of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services. We are particularly
encouraged that, as reflected in the report and the
briefings, the Mechanism’s leadership has paid very
close attention to the resolution’s particular focus on
the future of the Mechanism, including with respect to
providing clear and focused projections of completion
timelines for all of the Mechanism’s activities, as
well as options regarding the transfer of its remaining
activities in due course, and the fact that the new
President has made it one of her core priorities to guide
the Mechanism’s transition from an operational court
to a residual institution. When those efforts come to
fruition, the aims of resolution 1966 (2010) will have
been achieved.
In that vein, I would like to point out several issues
stemming from the very nature of the Mechanism and
its residual functions, which warrant our attention.
From the standpoint of Serbia, they are: the initiation
of new cases before the Mechanism; supervision of
18/23

12/12/2022

the execution of sentences; provision of assistance to
national jurisdictions; and management of the archives.
In relation to the first issue, I wish to point to the
repeated assertions of alleged non-cooperation of the
Republic of Serbia with the Mechanism regarding
the case of Prosecutor v. Petar Jojić and Vjerica
Radeta. Serbia’s position in connection with that
case remains consistent that its conduct does not
represent a violation of its international obligations,
but an effort to act in accordance with resolution
1966 (2010). We are convinced that, under the current
circumstances, conducting proceedings before national
judicial authorities can promote justice and strengthen
confidence in national judicial systems. We reiterate
our readiness for the Jojić and Radeta case to be taken
over by the judiciary of Serbia, and we are ready to
provide assurances that the proceedings will be
conducted in accordance with the requirements of the
proper administration of justice, with full respect for
both the Mechanism and the rights of witnesses and
the accused.
Similarly, with regard to ongoing investigations
in another case of contempt of court, the case of
Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj, should the Prosecutor
decide to bring charges against certain individuals for
contempt of court, we express our readiness for the trial
to be conducted in the Republic of Serbia.
With regard to the supervision over the execution
of sentences, we would like to recall our readiness and
repeat the request that the prison sentences handed down
by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the Mechanism be served in the Republic
of Serbia, under the full authority and supervision
of the Mechanism. We are firmly convinced that
circumstances in the region have changed significantly
since the opinion given by the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 808 (1993), back in 1993.
As the prosecution of war crimes today is exclusively
within the competence of national judiciaries, we do not
see any justification for maintaining the current policy.
Furthermore, we believe that, in that way, not only
would costs be reduced and the position of the families
of convicted persons be eased, but the conditions would
be created for proper rehabilitation, and the authority of
the Mechanism would be strengthened.
At this point, we are compelled to again appeal
to the Security Council and the Mechanism to
prevent all attempts to harass convicted citizens of
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Serbia and request the President of the Mechanism
to immediately notify the Republic of Serbia of all
requests for extradition or the provision of other kinds
of legal assistance in criminal matters that concern its
citizens who are serving sentences, and to enable it to
participate in eventual proceedings. We firmly stand
by the position that the country in which the convicted
person is serving a prison sentence and the Mechanism
do not have jurisdiction to decide on the extradition of
our citizens to a third country. Furthermore, it is the
responsibility of the Mechanism to ensure that prison
sentences are served in a country in which conditions
provide for the adequate treatment of convicted persons.
Another issue that is pending is the return of the
extensive archives provided by Serbia to the ICTY or the
Mechanism. We do not see any reason for the massive
volumes of documentation that are no longer needed or
that were never used to remain with the Mechanism and
remain hopeful that the matter of the return of original
documents will be dealt with, without further delay.
Regarding the claims related to the denial of crimes
and glorification of war criminals, we must clearly
state the position of the Republic of Serbia. With the
many proceedings that it has concluded and harsh
sentences that it has handed down, primarily to its
citizens, for crimes committed on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia, Serbia has proven its commitment
to justice and accountability. On the other hand, several
acquittals by the ICTY, a lack of cooperation by certain
elements in the region and an evident lack of readiness
to investigate horrendous crimes perpetrated against the
Serbs or to try perpetrators, particularly members of the
so-called Kosovo Liberation Army in Serbia’s province
of Kosovo and Metohija, have cast a serious shadow on
the legacy of the Tribunal and the Mechanism.

S/PV.9217

without which there is no future, stability, economic
development or normalization of relations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow me to join
previous speakers in thanking both principals of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Santana and Prosecutor Brammertz,
for their usual useful briefings.
Rwanda welcomes the work done by the court
and the Office of the Prosecutor in executing their
mandate. Rwanda also values the good cooperation that
exists between the Mechanism and the Government
of Rwanda. We commend the relentless efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor in locating and arresting the
remaining fugitives. Rwanda believes that the expertise
and knowledge of the court should not end with the
court, but rather should assist member States like my
own with capacity-building and knowledge transfer,
to assist our countries in hunting down the remaining
fugitives. We believe that it is the responsibility of the
international community to assist Rwanda in bringing
to justice the remaining known fugitives and those yet
to be known.
Despite having set up the international criminal
tribunals, the international community was indeed
reluctant — for a long time — to put pressure on
countries to bring genocide perpetrators to justice.
It took years before those indicted were transferred
for trial and many perpetrators are yet to be brought
to justice.

We rightly expect that the Mechanism will act
in accordance with its mandate in fostering regional
cooperation and the provision of assistance to national
jurisdictions. In that sense, we see merit in the
Prosecutor’s assessments, particularly with regard to
the conduct of one particular neighbouring country,
the Republic of Croatia, and call upon its judicial
authorities to cooperate.

Given the significance of the work undertaken by
the Mechanism and the Office of the Prosecutor, we
highly recommend that the Security Council provide
them with all the necessary support, including the
financial resources needed, to fulfil their mandate.
The push for a drawdown of the court should consider
the gravity of the crimes handled by the court, not
only the financial resources. The survivors, too, have
been patiently waiting for too long for justice. Rising
genocide denial and glorification of criminals are
eroding the steps taken by the court, and the established
jurisprudence of the court is under attack.

For its part, Serbia strongly believes that all crimes
must be tried and adequately punished, regardless
of the nationality of the perpetrator. It remains fully
committed to a policy of reconciliation in the region,

While the Office of the Prosecutor has viable leads
on the whereabouts of some of the remaining fugitives, a
major challenge remains the lack of timely and effective
cooperation by Member States. Similarly, as mentioned,

22-7422919/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Rwanda has sent out more than 1,000 indictments
to 34 countries around the world, requesting their
cooperation in arresting, prosecuting or transferring
fugitives to face justice in Rwanda. Regrettably, only a
few countries have complied.
The failure by some Member States to cooperate
with the court, pursuant to Security Council resolutions,
General Assembly resolutions and African Union
decisions, amounts to active support for genocide
fugitives in escaping justice and is, therefore, a failure
of their international legal obligations.
The survivors and victims hope to see action
and hear concrete proposals by the Council on how
to deal with the continued problem of the failure of
Member States to cooperate. The implementation of the
Mechanism’s mandate requires the full cooperation of
Member States.
Today’s briefing, like previous ones, is a reminder
to the Council that the victims are still waiting for
justice. They had expected to see a greater degree
of justice done through cooperation among Member
States. Worse, they are still tormented by genocide
deniers and the glorification of war criminals. Denial is
damaging to the survivors and to reconciliation. At the
moment, the international community remains silent on
the need to stop and punish genocide deniers. Genocide
denial concerns us all because it undermines the justice
that the courts have so painstakingly achieved. The
first step to taking genocide denial seriously is to pass
laws at national levels that criminalize genocide denial.
Laws prohibiting the denial of genocide would greatly
contribute to setting the record straight and reducing
the chances of political leaders and opinion-makers
conducting shameful discourse on genocide denial.
Protecting the truth from deniers and bringing justice
to the victims of the genocide is the best action the
Security Council can take to prevent genocide from
recurring in the future.
In conclusion, pronouncements of commitments to
international law and justice are not credible unless they
are matched by actions. Rwanda will continue to seek
justice for the more than 1 million lives exterminated
during the genocide against the Tutsis. That genocide
was perpetrated by an extremist Government with
the complicity of a passive international community.
Instead of the genocides of the twentieth century
serving as a stunning lesson to the world as one of the
vilest chapters of contemporary history and helping to
20/23

12/12/2022

prevent their recurrence, we are hearing silence. As we
heard today, that is a dangerous situation for the entire
world. The proliferation of hate speech, as reported by
both the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Office on Genocide
Prevention, should be a wake-up call to the Council to
take action to prevent and stop future genocides.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I would like to thank Judge
Gatti Santana, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and congratulate
her on her appointment. I thank her and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings today. Croatia is fully
committed to complying with its obligations under
resolution 1966 (2010) and will continue to support the
Mechanism for the remainder of its mandate.
Let me first address the cases that are still pending
before the Mechanism. In the Stanišić and Simatović
case, we hope that the Appeals Chamber will convict
Stanišić and Simatović for their participation in a
joint criminal enterprise and for crimes committed in
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as requested by
the Prosecutor. Considering the fact that circumstances
unfortunately did not allow the world to see the end
of the Milošević case with a final verdict against him
for the brutal crimes he committed and orchestrated,
it is very important for the Stanišić and Simatović case
to end with a judgment that clearly demonstrates the
involvement of Serbia’s top authorities in atrocity crimes
committed in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With regard to the importance of cooperation
between Member States and the Mechanism, which
is a prerogative under resolution 1966 (2010), we
are compelled to once again raise the issue of the
Mechanism’s referral of Serbia to the Security Council
for its continued failure to respect its international
obligations by refusing to arrest the accused, Petar Jojić
and Vjerica Radeta, for contempt of court, and by not
transferring them to the Mechanism.
Croatia is committed to constructive, transparent,
non-politicized and evidence-based judicial cooperation
with other neighbouring States in matters related to
war crimes. In that regard, we were disappointed by
the factual inaccuracies and contradictions in the
Mechanism’s progress report, as well as the biased
qualification regarding Croatia’s bilateral cooperation
with other mandated States. We therefore want to
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

stress again that meaningful cooperation is not a
one-way process, and that alongside transparency and
openness, standards of good practice must be upheld
if States are to engage constructively when ensuring
meaningful progress in cooperation. To that end, as
we have already indicated during previous briefings
on the Mechanism, Croatia is still waiting for Serbia’s
response to our invitation to a fourth and final round of
negotiations on a bilateral agreement on processing war
crimes. The provisions of that agreement would prevent
further misuse of the instrument of legal assistance.
Unfortunately, instead of concluding a bilateral
agreement, Serbia started a politically motivated trial
against Croatian citizens that does not comply with
international legal standards.
The non-acceptance of the facts established by
the Tribunals, as well as the denials of the work of the
Mechanism and attempts to rewrite history, require our
attention. The Government of Croatia has consistently
condemned and will continue to condemn the genocide
in Srebrenica and its perpetrators and enablers, in full
accordance with the verdict of the International Court
of Justice.
The glorification of war criminals and the denial
of the crimes committed, as well as non-cooperation
regarding missing persons, are unacceptable. Resolving
the fate and whereabouts of the remaining 1,821 missing
persons is something that Croatia will continue to
pursue with the full determination it deserves. It is the
lack of political will in Serbia to forward information
and enable access to archives that remains the greatest
obstacle to achieving that end. Finding the remains of
the missing persons and determining the circumstances
that led to their disappearance is a matter of both human
dignity and long-overdue comfort for the victim’s
families, and an essential element in contributing to
reconciliation. It is therefore very important, as the
Mechanism transitions from an operational court to
a truly residual institution, to increase awareness
about the legacy of the former Tribunals. In that
regard, we recognize the need to establish information
and documentation centres with the support of the
Mechanism.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm our strong support
for the important work of the Mechanism and its
successful completion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

S/PV.9217

Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I want to wish you every success in performing
your duties and assure you of my delegation’s
full support.
I would also like to congratulate Ms. Graciela
Gatti Santana on her appointment as President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (IRMCT). I wish her every success in her
work, whose main goal is to achieve justice for all in
the international community, especially victims of war
crimes. And I thank her and Mr. Serge Brammertz,
the Chief Prosecutor of the Mechanism, for their
comprehensive briefings today. Let me also commend
Mr. Carmel Agius, the former President of the
Mechanism, for his tireless work and success in leading
the Mechanism for the past three and a half years.
We commend the Mechanism for having continued
to make progress in its work during the reporting
period. I would like to emphasize that the work of the
Mechanism can be concluded only when all unfinished
cases in The Hague and the region receive a rightful
outcome. Therefore, the continuation of its work until
such closure is achieved is of paramount importance.
I would like to inform you, Madam President, that
the judicial authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are working tirelessly on the implementation of the
revised strategy for processing war crime cases. One
of the required steps in implementing that strategy
and strengthening the rule of law is the formation of a
supervisory body for the strategy. In that vein, I would
like to confirm that the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is working on the formation of that
important body. The implementation of the strategy will
send a strong message that impunity will not and must
not be allowed, regardless of the nationality and ethnic
identity of either the victims or the perpetrators. That
is important for reconciliation and progress in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and throughout the Western Balkans.
I would also like to inform you, Madam President,
that the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the prosecutors’ offices at the other, lower
levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina, are taking all the
necessary measures to investigate all war crimes that are
still unresolved and prosecute all potential perpetrators
for their personal or command responsibility. According
to the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Prosecutor’s offices at all

22-7422921/23

S/PV.9217

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina are working on 465
war crimes cases, involving more than 4,000 suspected
persons. Also, courts at the different levels in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are working on 220 unresolved
war crime cases. During the reporting period, the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina filed
three indictments against seven persons, while 75 cases
were delegated to the other, lower levels for prosecution.
The Prosecutor’s Office in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
still working on a total of 334 war crime investigation
cases against 3,572 suspected persons. Assistance from
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism remains
essential for completing that work.
Let me inform Council members that the Prosecutor’s
Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has registered 362
suspected or accused persons who are inaccessible to
the judicial authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
According to the available information, 63.3 per cent
of those persons are located in the Republic of Croatia,
Montenegro and the Republic of Serbia, while the other
persons are located in Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Saudi
Arabia, Türkiye and the United States of America. The
Prosecutor’s Office has already issued 50 warrants, and
62 additional warrants have been issued by different
courts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The judicial
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina will work closely
with Prosecutor Brammertz and those countries I just
mentioned to make all suspected persons available to
our judicial authorities.
Allow me to emphasize once again that, as
evidenced in their reports during the period under
review, the cooperation of Bosnia and Herzegovina with
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals has been stable and complete. In that vein,
we commend the regional meeting held on 10 and
11 October in Belgrade between Prosecutors from
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia with a
delegation from the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, led by Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Chief Prosecutor of the Mechanism. Good cooperation
among those Prosecutors Offices was recognized
in the compliments bestowed by Mr. Brammertz at
the meeting; however, participants also recognized a
lack of good cooperation with the judicial authorities
of the Republic of Croatia. I would like to recall that
the judicial authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have been awaiting a significant number of responses
from the authorities of the Republic of Croatia for
22/23

12/12/2022

mutual legal assistance but have not received them.
In that regard, we appeal to the judicial authorities of
the Republic of Croatia to take action and positively
respond to the requests of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
mutual legal assistance.
I would like to inform Security Council members
that representatives of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals visited Sarajevo
and had a meeting with the Chief Prosecutor of the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
1 November, at which regional cooperation and the
transfer of a number cases to and from other countries
in the Western Balkans region were discussed. I would
like to highlight the good and improved cooperation
between the Prosecutors in the region. A memorandum
of understanding on support for witnesses and victims
for their participation in criminal proceedings was
signed by the chief Prosecutors of the relevant countries.
I would like to emphasize the importance of
education and the dissemination of judicial practice
among the younger generations. In that vein, let me
congratulate the Mechanism and its cooperation with the
European Union and Switzerland on the implementation
of the Mechanism Information Programme for Affected
Communities. It is significant that more than 100 highschool history teachers participated in five workshops
organized by the Mechanism on using the archives of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the Mechanism. Also, we would like to congratulate
the President of IRMCT, Judge Gatti Santana, on her
launch of the fourth cycle of the Programme’s video
lecture series, entitled “International Law and Facts
Established before the ICTY”, with the participation of
postgraduate law students from 14 universities across
the former Yugoslavia.
I would like to extend our gratitude to the European
Union for the fourth phase of the implementation of
the project of improving work on war crime cases,
which started in 2021. The European Union, in that
phase, invested about €4 million, improving our human
resources and other capacities needed for more efficient
and timelier implementation of the revised strategy for
processing of war crime cases.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains committed to
investigating, prosecuting and punishing all persons
responsible for war crimes, regardless of the offender’s
nationality, ethnicity, religion or political or other
affiliation. We would also like to emphasize that
22-74229

12/12/2022

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

witness protection is of the utmost importance in the
conduct and operations of all judicial institutions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Cooperation between the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina and those of
neighbouring countries in the exchange of information
is also critical, and we continue to search for, with a
view to identifying, about 7,000 persons who still
remain missing in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
regard, I would like to inform Council members that
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina exhumed the
human remains of 93 persons in 2022.

S/PV.9217

We remain committed to contributing actively to
the Mechanism’s efforts to accomplish its mission. We
would also like to reiterate our commitment to its work
and call on all Member States to fulfil all obligations
and make their financial contributions to provide for
the uninterrupted work of the Mechanism. We are fully
committed to continuing to strengthen the rule of law,
human rights and economic development.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

22-7422923/23
