General Assembly-Twenty-fifth Se.1ion

126

4. Expresses the hope that, in accordance with the
desire set forth in the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law, it will prove
possible to staff the Commission's secretariat appropriately so as to cope with any increases in the
work-load involved in servicing the Commission, provided that this does not entail supplemental appropriation;
S. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue its work on the topics to which it has
decided to give priority, that is, the intern~ional sale
of goods, international payments, international commercial arbitration and international legislation on
shipping;
( b) Continue to give attention to ways and means of
promoting training and assistance in the field of international trade law;
(c) Continue to collaborate fully with international
organizations active in the field of international trade
law;
(d) Continue to develop working methods which
will enhance the efficiency of working groups and ensure full consideration of the commercial practices and
needs of all regions;
( e) Continue to give special consideration, in promoting the harmonization and unification of international trade law, to the interests of developing and landlocked countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions on the Commission's
third report at the twenty-fifth session of the General

Assembly.

1903rd plenary meeting,
12 November 1970.
2644 (XXV). Report of the S~ial Committee on
the Question of Defining Aggression

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its session held at Geneva from 13 July to
14 August 1970,10
Taking note of the progress made by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of
defining aggression and on the draft definition, as reftected in the report of the Special Committee,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its task, in particular its consideration of the proposals concerning a d.raft definition of aggression submitted to the Special Committee
during its sessions held in 1969 and 1970,
Considering that in its resolutions 2330 (XXII) of
18 December 1967, 2420 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968 and 2549 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969 the
General Assembly recognized the widespread conviction of the need to expedite the definition of aggression,
Considering the urgency of bringing the work of the
Special Committee to a successful conclusion and the
desirability of achieving the definition of aggression as
soon as possible,
Noting also the common desire of the members of
the Special Committee to continue their work on the
10 Ibid., Supplement No.

19 (A/8019).

basis of the results achieved and to arrive at a draft
definition,
1. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330
(XXII), as early as possible in 1971;
2. Reque~ts the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-sixth session an item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression".
1914th plenary meeting,
25 November 1970.
2645 (XXV).

Aerial hijacking or interference
with civil air travel

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that international civil aviation is a vital
link in the promotion and preservation of friendly relations among States and that its safe and orderly
functioning is in the interest of all peoples,
Gravely concerned over acts of aerial hijacking or
other wrongful interference with civil air travel,
Recognizing that such acts jeopardize the lives and
safety of the passengers and crew and constitute a
violation of their human rights,
Aware that international civil aviation can only
function properly in conditions guaranteeing the safety
of its operations and the due exercise of the freedom
of air travel,
Endorsing the solemn declaration11 of the extraordinary session of the Assembly of the International
Civil Aviation Organization held at Montreal from 16
to 30 June 1970,
Bearing in mind General Assembly resolution 2551
(XXIV) of 12 December 1969 and Security Council
resolution 286 (1970) of 9 September 1970 adoeted
by consensus at the 1552nd meeting of the Council,
1. Condemns, without exception whatsoever, all
acts of aerial bijackinJ or other interference with civil
air travel, whether onginally national or international,
through the threat or use of force, and all acts of
violence which may be directed against passengers,
crew and aircraft en,aged in, and air navigation
facilities and aeronautical communications used by,
civil air transport;
2. Calls upon States to take all appropriate measures
to deter, prevent or suppress such acts within their
jurisdiction, at every stage of the execution of those
acts, and to provide for the prosecution and punishment of persons who perpetrate such acts, in a manner
commensurate with the gravity of those crimes, or,
without prejudice to the rights and obligations of States
under existing international instruments relating to the
matter, for the extradition of such persons for the purpose of their prosecution and punishment;
3. Declares that the exploitation of unlawful seizure
of aircraft for the purpose of taking hostages is to be
condemned;
11 International Civil Aviation Organization, Re,olutlona
adopted by the Assembly, Seventeenth Session (Extraordinary) (Montreal, 1970), resolution A17-1.

Reeolutlom adopted on the report, of the Sixth Committee

4. Declares further that the unlawful detention of
,passengers and crew in transit or otherwise engaged in

civil air travel is to be condemned as another form of
wrongful interference with free and uninterrupted air
travel;
S. Urges States to the territory of which a hijacked
aircraft is diverted to provide for the care iuid. safety
of its passengers and crew and to enable them to continue their journey as soon as practicable, and to return the aircraft and its cargo to the persons lawfully
entitled to possession;
6. Invites States to ratify or accede to the Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed
on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 14 September
1963,12 in confornuty with the Convention;
7. Requests concerted action on the part of States,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
towards suppressing all acts which jeopardize the safe
and orderly development of international civil air
transport;
8. Calls upon States to take joint and separate
action, in accordance with the Charter, in co-operation
with the United Nations and the International Civil
Aviation Organization to ensure that passengers, crew
and aircraft engaged in civil aviation are not used as a
means of extorting advantage of any kind; 1
9. Urges full support for the current efforts of the
International Civil Aviation Organization towards the
development and co-ordination, in accordance with its
competence, of effective measures in respect of interference with civil air travel;
10. Calls upon States to make every possible effort
to achieve a successful result at the diplomatic conference to convene at The Hague in December 1970
for the purpose of the adoption of a convention on the
unlawful seizure of aircraft, so that an effective convention may be brought into force at an early date.

1914th plenary meeting,
25 November 1970.
2669 (XXV). ProgreHive development and codlficadon of the rules of internadonal law
relating to international watercourses

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1401 (XIV) of 21 November 19S9, by which it considered that it was

11'7

RecalUng that despite the great number of bilateral
treaties and other regional regulations, as well as the
Convention on the Regime of Navigable Waterways
of International Concern, signed at Barcelona on 20
April 1921,14 and the Convention relating to the Development of Hydraulic Power affecting more than
one State, signed at Geneva on 9 December 1923,111
the use of international rivers and lakes is still based
in part on general principles and rules of customary
law,
Noting that measures have been taken and valuable
work carried out by several international organs, both
governmental and non-governmental, in order to
further the development and codification of the law of
international watercourses,
Convinced of the necessity to promote, in accordance with Article 13 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the work on the progressive development and
codification of the law of international watercourses
and to concentrate this work within the framework
of the United Nations,
1. Recommends that the International Law Commission should, as a first step, take up the study of
the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses with a view to its progressive development and codification and, in the light of its scheduled
programme of work, should consider the practicability
of taking the necessary action as soon as the Commission deems it appropriate;
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue the study initiated by the General
Assembly in resolution 1401 (XIV) in order to prepare a supplementary report on the legal problems
relating to the utilization and use of international
watercourses, taking into account the recent application in State practice and international adjudication
of the law of international watercourses and also intergovernmental and non-governmental studies of this
matter;
( b) To forward to the International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the item at
the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly, the
report prepared by the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 1401 (XIV), as well as the text of the
present resolution and all other documentation necessary for the Commission's work.
1920th plenary meeting,
8 December 1970.

desirable to initiate preliminary studies on the legal
problems relating to the utilization and use of international rivers, and as a result of which useful legal
material was collected in the report submitted by the
Secretary-General on 15 April 1963,18
Considering that water, owing to the growth of
population and the increasing and multiplying needs
and demands of mankind, is of growing concern to
humanity, that the available fresh water resources
of the world are limited and that the preservation
and protection of those resources are of great importance to all nations,
Conscious of the importance of legal problems
relatinf to the use of international watercourses, inter
alia With regard to international water resources de-

velopment,

12 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 704 ( 1969), No. 10106.

llA/5409.

2697 (XXV). Need to consider au11estion• regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
RecalUng its resolutions 992 (X) of 21 November
1955 and 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 on the
procedure of reviewing the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling further its resolution 2S52 (XXIV) of
12 December 1969 entitled "Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations",
H League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. VII (1921-1922),
No. 172.
111 League of Nations, Treaty Serles, vol. XXXVI (1925),
No. 90.5.
