and 33 shall extend to adopted children or step- f cles 30 et 33 s'appliquent auss1 a des enfants
children.
adoptifs ou aux enfants du conjoint.
Annex B

Annexe B

STAFF REGULATIONS

STATUT DU PERSONNEL

II. APPOINTMENT, PROBATION AND PROMOTION

II. NOMINATIONS, STAGES ET PROMOTIONS

Regulation 12A
The appointment of any member of the staff for
a probationary period or on a short-term contract,
which shall include any temporary contract, may
be subject to such conditions as the SecretaryGeneral may deem desirable.

Article 12A
L'engagement de tout membre du personnel
pour une periode de stage ou sur la base d'un
contrat a court terme, ee qui s'applique a tous Jes
contrats temporaires, peut etre soumis awe conditions que le Secretaire general estime opportunes.

Regulation 21
The Secretary-General may terminate the appointment of a member of the staff in accordance
with the terms of his appointment if made under
the provisions of regulation 12A, or if the necessities of the service require the abolition of the
post or a reduction of the staff, or if the services
of the individual concerned prove unsatisfactory.

Article 21
Le Secretaire general peut resilier !'engagement
d'un membre du personnel awe termes de son engagement si celui-ci a ete etabli conformement awe
dispositions de !'article 12A, ou si les necessites du
service exigent la suppression de son poste ou une
reduction de personnel, ou si Jes services de l'interesse ne donnent pas satisfaction.

162 (II). United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Scheme

162 (II). Caisse commune des pensions du
personnel de l'Organisatio_n des Nations Unies
L'Assemblee generate
Prend acte des dispositions administrativcs
reglementant la Caisse commune des pensions du
personnel ( document A/397) ;
Decide de maintenir sans changement, pendant
une periode d'un an, et sur une base provisoire, le
regime provisoire de la Caisse commune des pensions;

The General Assembly
Takes note of the administrative rules relating
to the Provisional Joint Staff Pension Scheme
(document A/397);
Decides that the Provisional Joint Staff Pension Scheme now in effect shall continue unchanged, and on a provisional basis, for a further
period of one year;
Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to study the report of the Secretary-General, the implications of
the proposals of the United Nations Staff Benefit
Committee and any new proposals made by the
Joint St:1ff Benefit Committee, the communication from !\fr. A. J. Altrneyer of the United Nations St:-.ff Bendit Committee, and communications from delegations rcl.iting to the Pension
Scheme, as well as tbe record of discussions in the
Fifth Committee during the second part of the
first session and the se(·<m<l session of the: General
Assembly, and to circulate a report to the l\fembers of the United Nations before the next regular session of the General Assembly;

Declares that a permanent pension scheme
should be promulgated, if possible in 1948.
Hundred and twenty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

Invite le Comitc consultatif pour lcs questions
administratives et bu<lgctaircs a etudier le rapport
du Secretaire general, lcs incidences des propositions du Comite des pen~!ons du personnel des
l',ati01is Unics et de toutc proposition nouvelle
:ormu!Ce par le C,,m:tc mixte des retraitcs du perrn:rnd, la ,:omr:nmication emanant de 1\1. A. J.
Altmcyer du Comitc de, pensions du personnel
ck-; Nati,m< Unies, et Jes communications cma11ant des delegations. relatives au projet de pensions, ainsi q ue lcs co:11ptcs rend us des discussions
qni ont eu li::u dcvant la Cinquicme Commission
pendant la scconde partie de la premicre session
et pendant la deuxicmc i-ession de l'Assemhlee
gcnfrale; et de distribuer aux Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unirs un rapport avant la
prochaine S('.,<ion ordi:i;iirc de I' A<semblee generale;
Declare qu'il v a lien de mettre en vigueur un
regime permanent de pensions, si possible en 1948.
C·n t-vingt et uni,lrne seance pl!:niere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

cm.

163 CII). Provisional Financial Regulations
of the United Nations
The General Assembly resolves

163

1. That the following Provisional Financial
Regulations be adopted in place of those adopted
by the General Assembly at the second part of its
first session under resolution HO ( T; ; 1

1. D'adopter le reglement financier provisoire
ci-aprcs en remplacement du reglement financier
que l'A,,semblcc gcncrale a adoptc pendant la
scronde partie de sa premierc session, aux termcs
de la resolution 80 (I) ;

'See Resolutions adopted by the General Asjembly during the second part of its first session, page 144.

1
Voir Jes Resolutions adoptees par l' Assemblee ginerale
pendant la scconde partie de sa premiere session, page 144.

Reglement financier provisoire de
l'Orgcmisation des Nations Unies
L'Assembl!:e generate decide

68
