III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

5. Nuclear energy should be used exclusively for
peaceful purposes and only for the benefit of mankind.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/101.

Development and strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations as expressed in the Charter to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours,
Recalling its resolutions 1236 (XII) of 14 December 1957.
1301 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, 2129 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and, in particular, 34/99 of 14 December 1979,
Bearing in. mind that, owing to geographic proximity,
th~re are particularly favourable opportunities for co-oper~tion and mutual advantage between neighbouring countries
m many fields and that the development of such co-operation
may have a positive influence on international relations as
a whole,
C'!nsidering_ that the great changes of a political, economic and social nature as well as the scientific and technological progress which have taken place in the world and
led to ~npre~edented interdependence of nations have given
new d1mens1ons to good-netghbourliness in the conduct of
States and increased the need to develop and strengthen it,
1. Reaffirms that good-neighbourliness conforms with
th~ purposes of the United ~ati?ns and is founded upon the
strict observance of the pnnctples of the Charter of the
United _Nations and of th~ Dec!aration on Principles of
International Law concernmg Fnendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the Unite_d Nations, 86_ as well as upon the rejection of any
acts seekmg to establish zones of influence or domination;
2. Calls upon all States, in the interest of the mainten~ce of internat~onal pe~ce and security, to develop goodneighbourly relations, actmg on the basis of these principles;
3. Co~si~ers that the generalization of the long practice
~d of pnn~tples and rules pertaining to good-neighbourlmess 1s hkely to strengthen friendly relations and
co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter;
4. Reaffirms the need to examine the question of good~eighbourliness in order to strengthen and further develop
tts content, as well as ways and modalities to enhance its
effectiveness;
?· Beli:eves that the results of the examination of goodne1ghbourhness and of the clarification of its elements could
be included, at an appropriate time, in a suitable international document;
6. Requests the Governments that have not communicated their views and suggestions on good-neighbourliness,
as well as on ways and modalities to enhance it, with a view
to preventing conflicts and to increasing confidence among
States, to do so as soon as possible, and invites the Governments that have already communicated such views and
suggestions to supplement them if they deem it necessary;
7. Invites the United Nations organs, bodies and programmes, as well as the specialized agencies, within their
fields of competence, to continue to inform the SecretaryGeneral of the aspects of their activities relevant to the
development of relations of good-neighbourliness between
States;
86

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

77

8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, on the basis of
the replies of States and of the views expressed during the
thirty-sixth session, as well as of the comments of specialized agencies, a report containing an orderly presentation
of the views and suggestions received concerning the content
of good-neighbourliness. as well as ways and modalities to
enhance its effectiveness;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Development and
strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States".
91st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/102.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security

The General Assembly.
Having considered the item entitled · 'Review of the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security",
Noting with concern that the provisions of the Declaration
on the Strengthening of International Security 87 have not
yet been fully implemented,
Profoundly disturbed by the escalation of tension in the
world, the ever more frequent recourse to the threat or use
of force_, interventio~, interference, aggression and foreign
occupation, the contmued stalemate in the solution of crises
in different regions, the continuous escalation of the arms
r~ce and military buil~-up, the pursuance of the policy of
nvalry. the confrontat10n and struggle for the division of
the ~orld into spheres of influence and domination, the
persistence of colonialism, racism and apartheid, and the
lack o! solution of t~e economic problems of developing
countnes. all of which endanger international peace and
secunty.
Deeply concerned that the process of relaxation of international tension has reached a point of deep crisis owing
to the lack of progress in the settlement of international
problems and conflicts and to the stalemate in the process
of disarmament,
S!ressing the. need for the main organs of the United
Na~10ns re~ponsible for the maintenance of peace and secunty, particularly the Security Council. to contribute more
effectively to the promotion of international peace and security by seeking solutions to the unresolved problems and
crises in the world.
Emphasizing that, in its twenty years of existence, the
~ovement of Non-Aligned Countries has significantly contnbuted to the efforts of the United Nations towards the
promo_tion ~f. international peace and security, the democrat1za~10n of mternati_onal relations, the development of inte~atlona\ co-opera_110n and the establishment of a system
of mternat10nal ~elat10ns based on justice, sovereign equality
a~d equal secunty of all States and peoples, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles and policy of non-alignment.
I. Expresses its deep concern over the aggravation of
focal points of international tension and crisis in the world,
more frequent recourse to force and increasing violations
of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms once more the universal and unconditional
validity of the purposes and principles of the Charter as the
firm basis of relations among all States, irrespective of size,
"Resolution 2734 (XXV)
