UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/2000/54
26 January 2000
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In accordance with the understanding reached at the (resumed)
4092nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 January 2000 on the item
entitled "The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo", the
statements of the representatives of Brazil, Cape Verde, Colombia, Egypt,
Israel, Japan, Lesotho, Norway, the United Republic of Tanzania and the United
States of America and the Permanent Observer for the International Organization
of la Francophonie to the United Nations are reproduced in the annexes to the
present note.
The President of the Security Council wishes to express his gratitude to
the above-mentioned delegations for their understanding and cooperation.

00-26175 (E)

270100

270100

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 2

Annex I
[Original:
Brazil:

English]

statement by Gelson Fonseca, Jr.,
Permanent Representative

Let me first commend you, Mr. President, on dedicating this entire week of
activities of the Security Council to the situation on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This is a timely initiative and yet another clear sign of the
resolve and determination of the United States Presidency in the Security
Council to come to grips with the critical situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, one which has been described as Africa’s First World War and
represents today the most difficult challenge to the Security Council in facing
up to its Charter responsibilities.
We welcome the presence here today of the African leaders of the region.
This meeting is an example of the Security Council at its best. It is a
remarkable effort to put the Lusaka peace process back on track.
Brazil has always called for an active and direct involvement of the
Security Council in peacemaking efforts. As Secretary-General Kofi Annan has
reminded us time and again peace cannot be imposed on parties that do not want
it. But it is no less true that where a peace process is needed it is the role
of the United Nations to help create one; and where obstacles obstruct further
progress it is our role to help remove them.
It is our genuine hope that this week’s discussions will make strides in
removing the main obstacles still facing the peace process.
Brazil favours a robust presence of the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in support of the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement
and we support the three-phase approach outlined by the Secretary-General.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an important test
for the Organization. If the Security Council fails in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, its authority and credibility will be seriously damaged.
We understand nevertheless the dilemma faced by the Council.
We must deal with the problem in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with
a sharp sense of realism. And it is true that, despite the efforts made by the
leaders in the region, there are repeated violations of the Ceasefire Agreement,
most of its provisions are not fully respected and ideal conditions are not yet
in place for the safe deployment of an enlarged United Nations operation.
But this is no reason for the Council to rest immobilized. And we are
reassured that this meeting is proof enough that the Council is not.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 3

But as I had the opportunity to point out last December in our debate in
the Council, in certain political situations, when two sides are presenting
contradictory arguments, both can be right.
The urgent matter for the Council is to show concrete evidence of its
commitment not to let the Lusaka Agreement derail for lack of earnestly needed
international support.
In this respect there is an urgent need of adequate financial resources to
support the internal mechanisms established by the Lusaka Agreement, namely the
Political Committee and the Joint Military Commission.
But beyond that, we must recognize that the call so eloquently presented
for an enlarged presence of the United Nations is not an artificial one. It can
serve as a firm deterrent to further violations of the ceasefire and it can
provide a solid foundation for the peace process to bear fruits.
We therefore support the call made in the last report by the SecretaryGeneral that the Security Council proceed with the authorization of an enlarged
presence of the United Nations in the region.
Not only the concept of operations and military tasks outlined in the
report seem appropriate to the circumstances and the magnitude of the
challenges, but also the preconditions set out in paragraph 60 of the report are
clear enough and must be respected by all parties concerned. The signatories of
the Lusaka Agreement bear a crucial responsibility in ensuring its
implementation.
This enlarged presence should be followed in due course by a United Nations
peacekeeping operation under Chapter VII.
Like the Secretary-General we view this meeting as a unique opportunity for
the leaders of the countries concerned to demonstrate their commitment to the
Agreement and ultimately to peace and stability in the entire Central African
region.
The supportive steps taken by the international community need to be
matched by a responsive attitude on the part of the warring factions.
It is indeed vital to create the political conditions for a lasting peace
in the region.
Brazil firmly believes that this should be based on the principles of
territorial integrity, non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
security of national borders, and genuine international cooperation for the
promotion of social and economic development and for the removal of the root
causes of conflict.
International support will also have to be matched by internal peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We were encouraged by the designation of
Sir Ketumile Masire, former President of Botswana, as the neutral facilitator to
conduct the inter-Congolese national dialogue. The establishment and
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 4

consolidation of a truly representative democracy in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is a precondition for lasting peace in the country.
Let me also reiterate our firm support to the continuous efforts deployed
by the Secretary-General and our deep appreciation for the work of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the
leadership of the Special Representative Kamel Morjane.
Brazil’s solidarity with Africa takes root on multiple linkages forged
through centuries of a common history. The Brazilian people are genuinely
concerned with the plight of the continent and are always willing to contribute
their share of cooperation to help Africa overcome its compelling problems.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 5

Annex II
[Original:

French]

Cape Verde: statement by José Luis Monteiro,
Permanent Representative

The work segment the Security Council has started on today is not simply
just another one. It is devoted to an issue of extraordinary importance and
gravity for African, and hence international, peace and security.
The conflict taking place in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
revealed regional roots and developed regional ramifications which confer on it
a complexity and an impact on the African continent that are unparalleled in the
recent history of Africa.
We thank you and congratulate once again, Mr. President, on the initiative
you have taken of promoting this burst of momentum that the present segment of
meetings and consultations represents.
The fact that this initiative has won the support, and enjoys the presence
at the highest level, of the parties involved and concerned confirms to us that
it is both vital and timely.
The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement meant that the parties opted for seeking a
solution to their dispute other than through hostilities. The Agreement remains
a fundamental instrument, and our job is now to give effect to its substance by
implementing the plan of action it contains.
The institutions provided for in the Agreement, among them the Joint
Military Commission and the Political Committee, are in place and functioning.
More recently, in the person of former President Sir Ketumile Masire, the
Facilitator of the National Political Dialogue has also assumed his duties.
Valuable time has nevertheless been lost, and meanwhile, the ceasefire has
not always been fully respected on the ground. There is thus an urgent need for
vigorous reactivation of the process in order to complete and consolidate it.
It is the expectation of the African Group that the United Nations, through
the Security Council, will finally be able to decide on and authorize the
deployment of the military observers and peacekeeping force whose absence has so
far prevented it from providing the envisaged and necessary support for the
consolidation of the ceasefire and the transition to more advanced phases of
settlement of the conflict.
In this context, the Security Council wanted to hear, from the top African
leaders participating in this meeting, a reaffirmation of their firm commitment
to the Lusaka Agreement and of their readiness to do everything to ensure that
it is more fully respected.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 6

Yesterday, we heard that reaffirmation stated unanimously and forcefully.
It is in our view clearly apparent that there is no doubt in the minds of the
senior officials concerned of the need to implement the Agreement in full, and
more immediately of the need for an effective ceasefire.
This moment, which some have described as a quasi-renaissance of the Lusaka
Agreement, is moreover a sequel to meetings held in the past few days by the
Joint Military Commission, the important Southern African Development Community
(SADC) Summit and the Political Commission. Taken together, these exercises
lend all the credibility that is currently possible, and respond to the
Council’s requirements for so facilitating its decision to deploy the military
observers and the peace force without further delay.
Africa is unanimously convinced that this deployment constitutes a vital
element in making the ceasefire permanent, and that it should not be regarded
rather as a cement applied a posteriori. Moreover, recent experience in
relation to other conflicts does indeed seem to confirm this perception.
But we remain concerned about this issue. The risks and operational
requirements associated with the deployment must not go beyond what is
reasonable, but seeking to eliminate these risks as a condition for the
deployment might prove unrealistic, prolong the slowness of the action and keep
the way open for losses of direction which would again compromise the success of
the peace process. It is to be hoped that the resolution the Council is
preparing for adoption reflects the appropriate determination in this regard.
Meanwhile, the important presidential statement just adopted provides a
useful updating of the requirements for better implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement, and is thus capable of strengthening the existing framework for
cooperation among the parties, the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity with a view to the success of the peace process.
We also commend the statements that have been made of tangible support for
the needs of the Joint Military Commission and the important activity of the
Facilitator of the National Dialogue. It is to be hoped that these decisions by
some members of the international community will encourage and stimulate others
in the same direction.
Restoring peace, finding just and credible solutions to the problems in the
region and re-establishing trust and cooperation there, these are the objectives
which will follow the more immediate consolidation of the ceasefire. The Lusaka
Agreement, moreover, already indicates this inevitable direction. For the
conflict in the region is yet another, and a major, stumbling block on the road
to the progress and development of Africa, one which its leaders have a duty to
remove in the interests of the well-being of their peoples.
May your deliberations be crowned with success.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 7

Annex III
[Original:
Colombia:

Spanish]

statement by Alfonso Valdivieso,
Permanent Representative

Colombia is a country that is a friend of Africa. Furthermore, it is a
member of the international community which longs to see peace prevail on that
continent. These are our main reasons for participating in this debate and
contributing our brief and constructive point of view to efforts to settle the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
To put it briefly, we should like to see the unconditional implementation
of the following general principles, which we wish to underscore:
1.
The responsibility for achieving peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo falls essentially upon the parties to the conflict. The work of the
Security Council must be to support, not replace, the regional solution set
forth in the Lusaka Agreement. The responsibility for administering the peace
must also be essentially that of the parties, with the resolute support of the
international community. Accordingly, it is important that the national
dialogue among the Congolese people should begin immediately.
2.
Expectations with regard to the role that can be played by the United
Nations must be realistic. Previous peacekeeping situations have provided us
with some lessons. Let us not make this another learning experience. Peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a task for the entire international
community. Failure also has an impact on everyone, to a greater or lesser
degree. We support the deployment of the 500 military observers, as the
Secretary-General has recommended.
3.
The territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must be
preserved and respected. Any solution that does not respect this principle will
create future instability in the region. The statements on the territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo made this week by the
distinguished heads of State of the African countries most involved in the
conflict and by other delegations participating in the debate are, in our view,
encouraging.
4.
A large number of persons affected by the conflict require urgent
humanitarian attention. Accordingly, it is necessary to ensure that
humanitarian personnel are able to move freely and have access to the population
groups in need. Children should not be recruited in order to serve in the war.
The norms of international humanitarian law must be respected.
5.
It is more difficult to administer peace than to achieve it. A political
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will probably
be achieved. But this is only the beginning of what is usually more difficult
and complicated: administering the peace. We sincerely hope that the Security
Council will maintain this longer-term perspective.
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 8

My delegation, Mr. President, wishes to congratulate you for the initiative
that you have taken in organizing this open debate in the Council during the
presidency of the United States of America. At the same time, we wish to
reiterate our commitment of solidarity with Africa and with its leaders, who, at
this time, are facing the challenge of resolving the greatest regional conflict
of the post-colonial period.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 9

Annex IV
[Original:
Egypt:

Arabic]

statement by Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
Permanent Representative

My country’s delegation listened with great interest and attention to the
statements made yesterday by the leaders of the States parties to the Lusaka
Agreement, just as we did to the statements of President Chiluba, former
President Masire, Mr. Salim Ahmad Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity, and the envoy of President Bouteflika. Since time is so
short, allow me to touch briefly on a number of the points to which my
delegation attaches particular importance, although I would hope that the full
statement of Egypt’s delegation will be incorporated in the official records of
the Security Council.
1.
The Lusaka Agreement represents by all accounts a major accomplishment
whose importance can be belittled by none. Indeed, the Agreement continues at
the present time to provide the comprehensive and unique political and military
framework in which a peaceful and agreed settlement to the ongoing conflict in
the Congo can be reached. While we acknowledge that the Agreement, signed as it
was more than six months ago, has been violated on some occasions and that there
have been delays with respect to compliance with the calendar annexed thereto,
we nevertheless maintain our position that it is essential to enhance the role
that must be assumed by the United Nations in order to promote its
implementation before it is too late and before a historic opportunity to
establish peace and stability in this region of the African continent is lost.
2.
Egypt believes that the time has come to deploy the second stage of the
United Nations military presence in the Congo by expanding the United Nations
Observer Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) established by
Security Council resolution 1279 (1999). I should like in this connection to
stress that to wait until there are optimum security conditions before taking
this step will serve no purpose because, like all other peacekeeping missions,
the Congo operation will by its very nature and given the character of its
location be fraught with dangers that cannot be avoided. That should not,
however, be used to justify or excuse any failure to establish and dispatch the
operation now, and I repeat the word "now". For its part, Egypt is fully
prepared to participate in the peacekeeping operation immediately it is
expanded, and we have already informed the Secretariat of the military observers
Egypt can make available to the operation and are currently engaged in exploring
the possibility of providing it with additional individuals and units.
3.
The international community cannot contribute to promoting the
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement without seeking a lasting solution to
the problem of the armed groups present in the eastern part of the country, and
the United Nations cannot establish and dispatch a peacekeeping operation
without preparing and implementing an extensive and comprehensive programme to
disarm and demobilize the members of these groups and reintegrate them into
civilian life. We hope that the Joint Military Commission, in cooperation and
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 10

coordination with the United Nations, will be able to complete the elaboration
of a clear and detailed scenario for proceeding with the implementation of this
part of the Ceasefire Agreement in the near future.
4.
The efforts of the international community to achieve lasting peace in the
region cannot achieve success without addressing and remedying the intricate
root causes of the problems that beset the Congo and its neighbours in all their
ethnic, social, economic and humanitarian dimensions. We therefore support the
initiative of the Government of France for the convening of an international
conference on peace, security and development in the Great Lakes region under
the joint auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
as soon as political and security conditions permit.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 11

Annex V
[Original:

French]

Israel: statement by Yehuda Lancry,
Permanent Representative

First of all, and like the many speakers who have followed one another
during this major discussion, I should like to express to you my full respect
for your exceptional initiative.
Under your presidency of the Security Council, the African continent finds
itself at the heart of the international debate, the subject of an intensive and
wide-ranging dialogue taking place on a brightly lit stage with a level of
speakers, partners and actors, in this particular case, that has rarely been
equalled.
In so doing, Mr. President, you are responding not only to a priority
urgent need of the United Nations agenda, but also to an undisputable imperative
of justice that underlies your personal contribution, as remarkable as it is
inspired, as well as that of your country, the United States of America, to
peace and stability in a number of regions of the world.
There is undoubtedly in this wide-ranging consultation of the Security
Council on Africa a widespread awareness of the acuteness and seriousness of the
problems facing that continent. While the consultation cannot of itself alone
replace the direct partners in peace and the actors on whom the future of Africa
rest, it can nevertheless serve as an amplifier of Africa’s creative energies
directed towards peaceful coexistence and economic and social development.
For, it must be emphasized, these creative energies are indeed to be found
on African soil. They are embodied, inter alia, in African organizations such
as the Organization of African Unity, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Southern African Development Community, all of them structures
whose commitment to the maintenance of peace, conflict resolution and collective
development remains extremely valuable.
Conclusive proof of this is to be found in the efforts of OAU to calm one
of the African hotbeds of tension with multiple repercussions that is afflicting
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and some of its immediate neighbours. The
decision of OAU to appoint the former President of Botswana, Ketumile Masire, as
Facilitator in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the successive
summits of the heads of State concerned, are important contributions to a
negotiated settlement. The conclusions of the summits related to the progress
in the implementation of the ceasefire, as well as the establishment of the
Joint Military Commission that emerged from the Lusaka Agreement, or again the
deployment of the OAU Military Observers for the maintenance of the ceasefire,
are significant stages in the assembling of regional resources in pursuit of
security and as a guarantee of future peace. From this noble standpoint,
lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region, the
contribution of the international community, and in particular that of the
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 12

United Nations and its agencies, represents a considerable, indeed essential,
factor in the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. Thus, over and above the
activities of the United Nations Mission - MONUC - Security Council
resolution 1279 (1999) gives the Democratic Republic of the Congo an important
security mechanism for the maintenance of peace.
These precious assets, both regional and international, are a measure of
the hard-won progress made thus far but they can and must be built on until the
parties themselves find the political will to put an end to the conflict.
International humanitarian and security assistance is a necessary part of this
difficult process but it is not enough. The partners in dialogue and
peacemaking will have to make a major political effort as well. It is they who
will have to draw up the terms of a lasting settlement that can tap the region’s
potential and they who will have to support it by providing significant
international economic and technical assistance.
Moreover, today’s impressive consultation among seven heads of State linked
to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will have traced the
broad outlines of a possible solution. All the heads of State gathered here
today view the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
standpoints in which many areas of convergence are discernible. The main points
on which there is agreement are:
1.

The Lusaka Agreement must be the basis for any peace agreement;

2.

The territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
recognized by all the parties;

3.

Support for the mediation missions of the Facilitator, President
Masire, and the Special Representative of the United Nations
Secretary-General, Ambassador Morjane, is unanimous;

4.

All the parties accept the need for reconciliation among the Congolese
people.

With regard to international assistance, from the earliest days of African
independence Israel supported the young African States as they attained freedom
and sovereignty. Israel, itself restored to statehood after two thousand years,
felt an automatic affinity with a number of African peoples as they gained their
independence. It is this profound affinity that explains the scope of IsraeliAfrican cooperation in various areas, such as agriculture, industry,
infrastructure, medicine and community development.
It is also these assets and this affinity between Israel and Africa that
prompt, indeed compel, Israel, itself engaged in a peace process in its own
region, to take part in this debate on peace in Africa.
Mr. President,
As a highly skilled peacemaker, you are fulfilling here today, with your
customary talent, conviction and determination, a strong African vocation. By
showing such responsiveness and sensitivity to Africa, you have taken a decisive
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 13

step in the right direction. As Nietszche once said, health is best gauged by
ascertaining what ails a person.
To look at what ails Africa is to make a serious attempt to think and act
in ways that will improve Africa’s health. It is the international community’s
responsibility to build the many bridges that will bring Africa out of its
isolation. The etymology of the word "Africa" is "Africus", one of the 12 winds
of Greek mythology, that wind from the south which gave the continent its name.
So we must make some good winds, some good spirits blow over Africa, which has
been assailed by evil spirits for far too long.
Another possible meaning of the word "Africa", which derives from a
personal etymology acquired in the land of my birth, Morocco, and hence in
Africa, might give it, by virtue of a semantic and phonetic proximity which owes
nothing to the rigour of etymological theory, an additional resonance. Without
hazarding a linguistic blunder or twisting semantics, the Arabic language could
detect in "Ifriquia" the root farq, referring to the notion of separation. This
seems to point clearly to Africa’s inherent withdrawal into itself. In this era
of triumphant globalization, it is high time that universality, justice,
equality and solidarity were extended to Africa, that illustrious but separate
continent.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 14

Annex VI
[Original:

English]

Japan: statement by Yukio Satoh,
Permanent Representative

I would like to commend you, first of all, on your strong leadership in
focusing the Council’s attention on Africa this month. The meetings to date
have already raised the level of international awareness of the plight of
African peoples and their communities, particularly, AIDS and the displacement
of people, which are seriously threatening human security, that is to say, the
life, freedom and dignity of many communities and their members in Africa.
I would also like to express my appreciation to you for convening this open
meeting of the Security Council to consider ways and means of advancing the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is among the gravest
ever witnessed in Africa, involving almost half the countries on the continent
in one way or another. And it is no exaggeration to say that the Security
Council’s commitment to peace is now being tested on this issue.
It is all too clear that the Lusaka Peace Agreement must be implemented
quickly in order to solidify the prospects for peace, not only in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but throughout the entire Great Lakes region. I have to
stress that, by playing for time, the parties concerned are compounding the
suffering of the civilian population of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
depriving many countries involved of precious opportunities and prospects for
development.
Japan therefore strongly demands that all parties concerned faithfully
abide by all the elements of the Lusaka Peace Agreement. Most importantly, all
the parties concerned must observe the ceasefire, foreign troops must be
withdrawn from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and a
national dialogue for reconciliation must be commenced.
For our part, Japan is prepared to make an additional financial
contribution of $300,000 in order to promote a national dialogue to be
facilitated by Sir Ketumile Masire. With the contribution of $200,000 already
made last November to the Joint Military Commission, Japan’s financial
contribution in support of the Lusaka peace process will amount to half a
million dollars.
We are extremely encouraged by the efforts which the United States has made
in order to have the leaders of all the parties to the Lusaka Agreement present
in New York and to provide them with an opportunity to reconfirm their
commitment to the Agreement.
Japan welcomes the presidential statement just adopted in front of all the
Heads of State who signed the Lusaka Peace Agreement. This demonstrates a clear
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 15

commitment of the Security Council to move forward the peace process on the
basis of the reaffirmation of the Peace Agreement, made by all the parties
concerned here in New York.
Now that the commitment to the Lusaka Peace Agreement is reaffirmed, it is
our strong hope that the Security Council will quickly decide to dispatch the
500 military observers to the Democratic Republic of the Congo together with
their protection forces as recommended by the Secretary-General in his report.
It is also important for the Council to decide to deploy a full-fledged
peacekeeping force as soon as possible. I assure you, Mr. President, that
Japan, which bears 20 per cent of the cost of any peacekeeping operation, will
support such a decision by the Council.
Since 1994 Japan has been providing humanitarian assistance to the
countries in the Great Lakes region, which amounts in total to $270 million. It
is Japan’s intention to continue to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in the hope that it will help
stabilize the situation and reinforce the peace process.
As many delegations have pointed out, once the peace process is back on
track, it will be important to address the issues of post-conflict development
as well as the prevention of the recurrence of conflicts. With a view to
enhancing human security, Japan is determined to support efforts by the
international community in such fields as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration - especially of child combatants - removal of anti-personnel land
mines and the control of illicit trade of small and other arms.
In concluding, I would like once again to urge all the parties to the
Lusaka Peace Agreement to implement faithfully and quickly this important
agreement and move forward in cooperation with one another to ensure a better
prospect for peace and development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the neighbouring countries.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 16

Annex VII
[Original:
Lesotho:

English]

statement by Phakiso Mochochoko,
Chargé d’affaires a.i.

Let me begin by commending you for the exemplary businesslike manner in
which you have been conducting the work of this Council since the beginning of
the month. This we believe has set the right tone for the conduct of the United
Nations meetings as we enter the new century and should thus be emulated. We
commend you in particular for devoting this first month of the new year to
African issues, a clear testimony not only of your personal commitment, but that
of your Government, to peace and stability in Africa. It would indeed be a
fitting crown for you and your country if the Council were to adopt a resolution
on the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo during this month of your Presidency.
Our gratitude also goes to the Secretary-General for his report on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which once again reveals the complexity of the
conflict that continues to ravage this country. It is clear from the report
that the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot end unless the
parties fully commit themselves to cooperate to end it. In this regard, and for
a long time, the absence of a neutral facilitator for the inter-Congolese
dialogue has been seen as a missing link for the effective implementation of the
Agreement. The appointment of former President Masire of Botswana as the
facilitator of the national dialogue between the political forces, which we
wholeheartedly welcome, is not only timely but should give renewed impetus to
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement. We congratulate President Masire
for his appointment and wish him all the best in his endeavours to find lasting
peace for the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The signing of the Lusaka Agreement is not only a step in the right
direction but a brave and giant leap for all of us. It has offered renewed
hopes for the return of peace to the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in particular, the Great Lakes region, southern Africa and the African
continent in general.
Since its signing, however, we have been faced with a paradox: the
incidences of the Agreement’s flagrant violations have been as pervasive as the
universal yearning for its full implementation. It is indeed regrettable that,
even as we gather here today, concerns about the implementation of the Agreement
continue to mount.
Of particular concern is the deterioration in the military and security
situation, resulting in increased flow of internally displaced persons and
refugees; exacerbation of food shortages and flagrant breaches of peoples’ human
rights and international humanitarian law principles. No doubt, the unregulated
transfer of weapons and ammunition has greatly contributed to prolong this
conflict, to increase tensions and heighten civilian casualties.
A lot has been said about the need for a political will to find a
democratic, long-lasting, non-military resolution to the conflict in the
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 17

Democratic Republic of the Congo. In reiterating the call for the parties to
show even greater political will and commitment to the Lusaka process, we urge
them to remember their obligation to the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo: the selfless pursuit of the full implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement. This occasion of the open Security Council debate in the presence of
the leaders should not only be a time for reflection but is a unique opportunity
for the parties to renew their commitment to the Lusaka Agreement by pledging to
cooperate in a more active manner towards its full and successful
implementation. Agreeing on a date for the convening of a regional conference
on security and stability would certainly augur well for the process.
On the other hand, this Council must also reciprocate, not only by its
political messages but by concrete actions underlining its commitment to assist
the implementation of the Agreement. In the past and today as well, calls have
been made for a more significant United Nations presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for this Council to take decisive steps to resolve the
conflict in that country. In particular, appeals have been made for the urgent
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force. We subscribe to this
laudable idea fully aware that all members of the international community need
to make a strenuous effort to assure its success.
With memories of Srebrenica and Rwanda, in particular, as well as other
unsuccessful United Nations stories still fresh in our minds, and given the
complexity of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
appreciate warnings not to throw caution to the wind and that delay may be
preferable to error. At the same time, we cannot wait for perfect peace in the
face of continued suffering and killing of Congolese people who want peace now.
Let us be reminded of the adage, "Peacekeeping is no job for soldiers, but
soldiers are the only ones who can do it". We therefore urge this Council to
give them the job.
Until such time as peacekeepers can be deployed, the Joint Military
Commission’s role for executing peacekeeping functions will remain
indispensable. We are encouraged by progress made by the Commission in a short
space of time since its establishment. The situation at Ikela and the
Commission’s efforts for a peaceful resolution underscore the urgent need for a
peacekeeping force. This issue also highlights the need for closer cooperation
between the Commission and the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) on the one hand as well as enhanced
coordination and cooperation amongst all the players, including the United
Nations, OAU and SADC. To this end, the appointment of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative is a welcome move for the implementation of the Agreement
and we wish him every success as well.
Lastly, the Lusaka process has to be matched by the commitment of resources
for its successful implementation. We note that funds for the maintenance of
the United Nations Mission will only last up to March, and that additional funds
will be required for the implementation of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for the deployment and equipping of additional military
observers and civilian support personnel. We support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation and appeal for the necessary financial and logistical support
from the international community for the implementation of those
recommendations.
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 18

Annex VIII
[Original:
Norway:

English]

statement by Hans Brattskar,
Chargé d’affaires a.i.

Norway highly appreciates the initiative of the United States and
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke to convene this meeting on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Norway is also grateful to President Chiluba, President
Bouteflika and OAU, President Mbeki, President Chissano and others for their
efforts to work for peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Norway
commends the humanitarian gesture of the United Republic of Tanzania of
receiving, in the spirit of solidarity and as an international obligation, more
than 100,000 refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and neighbouring
Burundi. Norway moreover welcomes the designation of Sir Ketumile Masire,
former president of Botswana, as Facilitator in the inter-Congolese
negotiations.
This meeting of the Security Council will hopefully contribute to restoring
and maintaining momentum for the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. However, the main responsibility lies with the signatories. It is
on the basis of their commitment to the Agreement that the international
community will consider lending its support.
Norway is already a considerable donor in the Great Lakes region and has
followed the situation closely and with concern. An annual sum of approximately
200 million Norwegian kroner has been channelled to the region, including the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, over the past years. These contributions have
been channelled both through the United Nations and various non-governmental
organizations. The main focus of this assistance has been peace,
reconciliation, human rights and humanitarian projects. In the same spirit
Norway is prepared to channel assistance to former President Masire’s efforts to
facilitate the process of an internal national dialogue and reconciliation.
Moreover, Norway will support activities such as demobilization, social
reintegration of ex-combatants and rehabilitation of child soldiers through the
United Nations trust fund.
Noting the Secretary-General’s recommendation for the deployment of an
expanded United Nations mission, Norway is willing to consider contributing
military observers to such a force provided that the security situation is
satisfactory.
Finally, Norway supports the idea launched by France and supported by
others to arrange a Great Lakes conference, taking into account all the problems
that are dividing the region concerning security, refugees, disarmament,
development and democratization.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 19

Annex IX
[Original:

English]

United Republic of Tanzania: statement by Daudi N. Mwakawago,
Permanent Representative

Mr. President, the United Republic of Tanzania joins others in commending
your Presidency, as well as the Council, for the continued interest in the
difficulties facing Africa. It was with a sense of renewed hope that we
welcomed the dedication of this month to Africa. The presence of some of our
Heads of State here is a clear demonstration of our confidence in the ability of
the Security Council to act as an instrument of peace in our strife-torn
continent. It is in this regard that for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
the call for concerted action in its pursuit for peace and stability has never
been more urgent.
The position of the United Republic of Tanzania on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was succinctly stated by my President,
His Excellency Benjamin William Mkapa, on 1 September 1999 in an address to the
University of Uppsala in Sweden when he said:
"... the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement signed on 10 July 1999 provides an
adequate framework and mechanism for durable peace, security and stability,
not only in the Democratic Republic of the Congo itself, but also in the
entire Great Lakes region. The Agreement, which was negotiated by all the
concerned parties, takes care of the security concerns of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and her neighbours. It provides a unique opportunity
for the Congolese people to put in place a new political dispensation in
their most troubled country through an all-inclusive national dialogue.
Thus the Agreement, whose ownership is not contested by any concerned
party, including the rebel movements, should be given a chance, politically
and materially, to be implemented urgently."
Later during the month, in his address to the General Assembly on
20 September, President Mkapa further noted that it was very encouraging that
all the parties involved in the conflict had finally signed the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and cautioned that:
"the challenge ahead is not to let the momentum ebb, but to move
expeditiously to implement the truce, including sending and empowering the
OAU observer and United Nations peacekeeping force as envisaged."
When President Mkapa spoke last year he was not being prophetic, only
realistic. For indeed, without exception, his persistent pleas constitute the
thrust of the message we have heard in the Council yesterday and today. There
is no denying that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is facing a moment of
great challenge for its future. There is also no doubt about the direction it
has chosen to walk. But whether it is able to walk down that path will largely
depend on the degree this Council and the international community can stand up

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 20

and support the process the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region has
committed itself to.
The Heads of State and the Ministers of the States of the region that spoke
yesterday were very clear about their presence here: they had come to seek the
help of the Council in the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement - an
agreement which was also characterized as a vindication of the courage of the
parties to choose dialogue over armed conflict. Tanzania continues to stress
the urgency of supporting the Lusaka peace process. The leaders of the region
have cautioned that any further delay can only be detrimental to the Ceasefire
Agreement. Furthermore, there are sufficient indications that the cost of
inaction or procrastination could be tragic, not only for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but the entire Great Lakes region. These warnings should
urgently be heeded if another catastrophe is to be averted in the region.
It is in this context that our regional leaders have called for the
following urgent measures to support and sustain the Ceasefire Agreement.
Urgent deployment of the necessary United Nations military observers;
Urgent deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping force;
Provision of humanitarian assistance;
Resources and material support to the Facilitator;
Material, logistical and financial support to the Joint Military
Commission;
Assistance to the refugees and displaced population in the region.
The positive manner in which the Council responds to the pleas for help and
assistance will not only signal a renewed sense of partnership but would trigger
a fresh momentum so urgently required in order to move the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region towards peace and stability.
In addition, the United Republic of Tanzania is also concerned that the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has had the effect of
generating refugees who, in fear for their lives, have fled into our country.
Already we are host to over 100,000 refugees from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Refugees have a particularly ominous aspect. The Security Council has
been informed that one of the reasons some foreign troops are in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is to neutralize the security they face, some of which
emanates from genocidal refugees in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
noteworthy that Tanzania has repeatedly been falsely accused of being a hotbed
for elements within refugee camps bent on overthrowing the government they were
running from. From our point of view, therefore, refugees are not only a
product of conflict but are also often the cause of a vicious cycle of conflict.
It is our belief that the international community and the Security Council in
particular have not paid sufficient attention to the problem of refugees in
Africa as a destabilizing force internally and in the region, and as a
contributory factor to conflict in Africa.
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 21

It is thus our strong view that the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement will create a conducive atmosphere, not only for the critical role to
be played by Sir Ketumile Masire, but also for peace and the national dialogue.
We see the significance of this process in the creation of permanent structures
for democracy and governance and therefore legitimacy in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This will, in turn, stem the tide of refugees into our country
which, in spite of the security risks it potentially creates, has also caused
considerable human suffering to an innocent civilian population, the most
vulnerable of whom are women and children. It is in this context that we urge
firm support for Sir Ketumile Masire’s efforts.
The President of Zambia, His Excellency Frederick Chiluba, pointed out that
one of the major reasons for the delay in the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement has been the lack of funds. The President expressed his
disappointment that not all pledged commitments have been realized. It is
indeed unfortunate that the initial enthusiasm and goodwill which greeted the
signing of the Agreement appear to have waned away. The delay in the
implementation of the accord and the weak financial support made available have
only succeeded in introducing an element of uncertainty on the ground. It is
important that this regrettable state be reversed. This is our collective
responsibility. It is our responsibility to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.
Our leaders travelled a long distance to come to New York. It is our hope
that the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will not have to endure
a long wait before they reap the dividends of their leaders’ sojourn. The
Council’s meeting has also created anticipation and renewed hope. It is our
great expectation therefore that the significance of this meeting in the
fulfilment of the aspirations of the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will be rewarded with a firm commitment for a stronger partnership with
the United Nations in seeking a lasting solution to the difficulties they and
the region face.
Once again we commend the United States Presidency of the Security Council
for declaring January the Africa month. It is our hope the groundwork that has
been laid will be sustained in the months to come.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 22

Annex X
[Original:

English]

United States of America: statement by Richard C. Holbrooke,
Permanent Representative
This morning, as I was listening to the excellent and encouraging
statements being made, I could not help but think back two years to when I
visited many of the leaders who have come here today in their home capitals.
was a time rich in promise.

It

In President Kabila, the Congolese people had a new leader pledged to
national unity, and to carrying out economic and political reforms. Governments
throughout the region seemed to be working together well, dedicated to finding
solutions even to hard problems. There was broad agreement on the need for
cooperation in securing borders, building democracy, respecting human rights,
and preventing a recurrence of genocide.
In the months since, the United States has remained actively engaged.
President Clinton made an historic visit to the continent. I have talked with
officials from the region regularly. Special Representative Wolpe and other
Administration representatives have worked hard on a daily basis to support the
cause of stability and peace.
Unfortunately, during this period, there has occurred a catastrophic
breakdown in regional cooperation and trust. The consequences have been
disastrous, especially for the people of the Congo. I think we are off to a
very good start today in bridging differences and focusing clearly not on blame
for the past, but on concrete steps to build the right kind of future.
It is my fervent hope that this week will one day be viewed as the time
that the promise of the Lusaka Agreement was finally fulfilled; as a decisive
turning point, not only through this session, but also through the various
bilateral and group meetings that will be held.
This has been called the month of Africa in the Security Council. But I
know from my own years here that African issues are a regular topic of Council
concern. My hope is that through diligent and persistent effort we can
eliminate the need for that concern.
For we know that every dollar spent on war is a dollar that could have been
spent to feed the hungry, educate the young or care for the ill. Every moment
spent on war is a moment lost to democracy, human rights and the rule of law.
Today, the opportunity beckons for restoring international cooperation in
Central Africa, fostering reconciliation in the Congo, and starting a new era of
peace and growth throughout the region.
Given the past, I am neither optimistic nor pessimistic about whether that
opportunity will be seized. I only know that, realistically, it can and must be
seized by you and by us, now. With that goal in mind, we look to Africa for
leadership, and offer our sincere and lasting support.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 23

Annex XI
[Original:

French]

International Organization of la Francophonie: statement by
Ridha Bouabid, Permanent Observer

I should like to express to you the appreciation of the International
Organization of la Francophonie for the efforts that you are making, as
President of the Security Council for this month of January, to focus the
attention of this organ, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, on Africa and, today, on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
More than half the member countries of that organization are in the African
continent. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a founding member of that
intergovernmental organization, which was established at Niamey in 1970. It is
the second largest French-speaking country after Canada, in terms of area, and
the second largest French-speaking country after France, in terms of population.
Because of its geographical location it is a central element for peace and
security, not only in the subregion but in the continent as a whole.
We are therefore very interested in the Council’s discussions on Africa and
we pay close attention to your debates - and to your decisions - concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that this new mobilization of the international community, through
the Council and under your presidency, around the Congolese conflict will lead,
this time, to concrete results. The Council has sometimes seemed like a
hesitant actor or even a silent witness to that tragedy, although in other
situations it has demonstrated greater swiftness and a stronger commitment,
notwithstanding the uncertainties that may have hovered over the implementation
of some of its decisions.
Since the start of the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my
organization, both at the level of its forums and at the level of its general
secretariat, has sought to make its contribution to a negotiated settlement of
the conflict.
As early as December 1998, the ministerial conference of la Francophonie,
meeting in Bucharest, took note with interest of the beginnings of a dialogue
between all the parties which occurred on the occasion of the Africa-France
Summit and the promise of a ceasefire which was given to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and to the then Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity. It supported the idea of an international conference on peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region, under the auspices of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity and invited the Secretary-General
of la Francophonie to make himself available to the parties concerned, with a
view to contributing to the multilateral action in the service of peace in that
region.

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 24

The heads of State and Government of la Francophonie, at their eighth
summit, in Moncton, Canada, last September, gave their full support to the
efforts made to settle the conflicts in the Great Lakes region; they welcomed
the signing by all parties of the Lusaka agreements - an essential step towards
a just and comprehensive peace in that region; they called on all the parties
and all the signatories to those agreements to apply all the provisions of those
agreements and declared that they were prepared to lend their support to the
implementation of those provisions.
The Secretary-General of the International Organization of la Francophonie,
for his part, spared no effort to help the belligerents cease hostilities and
start a true dialogue, which is the only way which can lead to peace and create
the conditions necessary for national reconciliation and a resumption of the
democratic process.
Just a few weeks following the outbreak of the crisis he sent a first
mission of good offices to Kinshasa, from 2 to 5 October 1998, which he
entrusted to Dr. Emile Derlin Zinsou, former President of Benin.
President Zinsou, special envoy of the Secretary-General of la Francophonie
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, was to go another three times to that
country, and also to Uganda and Rwanda, twice on a joint mission with the
Community of St. Egidio. (You will undoubtedly remember the role that that
religious community played in the settlement of the conflict in Mozambique.)
All these missions and the numerous contacts initiated by la Francophonie
and by the Community of St. Egidio, in Paris, and also in Brussels and Rome,
made it possible to establish contacts and in-depth consultations, not only with
the Kinshasa authorities but also with all three elements of the armed
opposition, with the unarmed internal opposition, the unarmed external
opposition, civil society and the churches.
At each of these stages, the International Organization of la Francophonie
recalled its commitment to the unity and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, emphasized its complete neutrality vis-à-vis all the
parties and worked to establish a national debate which could be a first step
towards re-establishing trust between the parties and clearing the way to a
negotiated solution of the conflict.
Aside from the question of facilitation, we were negotiating with all
Congolese political and military forces regarding the nature, goals and even the
agenda of the national debate that was to be instituted; the list of who should
participate; the place, date and duration of the meetings; the guarantees
concerning the liberty and security of participants and the status of any
decisions which might result therefrom.
At each of those stages, our partners in the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity were kept informed, so convinced are we that the
settlement of conflicts, as well as the prevention of conflicts, is a delicate
and complex task requiring the assistance of everyone, the assistance of all
who, to a greater or lesser degree, are in a position to make their contribution
to peace-building.
/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 25

We therefore welcomed the signing of the Lusaka agreements. We saw them as
yet further proof that Africans - who have long been urged to do this by the
international community - are in a position to settle their differences
themselves, through negotiation and dialogue.
These agreements - you, Mr. President, have said it yourself, you who have
the experience of so many other peace negotiations throughout the world - are a
remarkable basis for bringing the country out of its crisis and putting it back
on the road to sustainable peace and development.
We therefore also welcomed the appointment of Sir Ketumile Masire, former
President of Botswana, as facilitator of the national dialogue among the
Congolese.
I should like, on behalf of the Secretary-General, to assure him of our
wholehearted support for his mission and to assure him that the International
Organization of la Francophonie stands ready to make available to him, and to
the Organization of African Unity, the experience which it has acquired through
its involvement, from the start of the crisis, in the search for a negotiated
solution to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that this appointment will enable the parties to embark truly and
with all necessary good faith, on serious negotiations. But we remain greatly
concerned at the deterioration of the situation in the field.
For there are a number of reports, all of which are in agreement, which
would lead one to believe that the parties continue to prefer the military way.
The recent events in Mbandaka, the upsurge in military activity by certain armed
groups in the eastern part of the country and reports from south Kivu do not
attest to the commitment of the parties to the path outlined and agreed on at
Lusaka.
We support your efforts and we joint you and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations in calling on all the protagonists to embark resolutely on
implementing the Lusaka agreements.
We call on them to end the suffering of the Congolese people and of the
hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced persons, and to cooperate with
their governmental and non-governmental partners so that they can help them to
help the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The International Organization of la Francophonie stands ready to cooperate
with the other international partners, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in strengthening the international
community’s efforts to protect and promote human rights in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I also take this opportunity to remind all parties that we stand ready to
help them to restore and strengthen democratic practice and democratic
institutions in the country, and we urge them to participate in the discussions
being held in our organization in accordance with the plan of action adopted at

/...

S/2000/54
English
Page 26

the Moncton Summit in preparation for the international symposium on democratic
practice in the francophone world, to be held in Bamako at the end of this year.
No one can restore peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo unless the
Congolese people themselves want peace. But although there are disturbing
trends that cast doubt on their will to reach a peaceful solution, there are
other trends that raise high hopes for the peace initiatives of the
international community.
Mr. President, there are few who do not agree with your statement that the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is probably far more complex
than that of East Timor and as least as complex as that of Kosovo.
But at the same time, let us not forget other cases where, despite the
extremely difficult situations which have prevailed in some countries and which
have threatened to destabilize their subregions, the Council has succeeded in
taking the necessary decisions and in helping them to recover from their crises;
I allude, inter alia, to Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic.
As President Chiluba maintained a few months ago, and again yesterday,
before this Council, Africa has played an important role in the process of
resolving the Congolese crisis. With patience and determination, it has
achieved the negotiation, conclusion and signature by all parties of the Lusaka
Agreement.
It is now time for the international community to play its role by
supporting those endeavours.
Thanks to the edifying report which the Secretary-General has submitted to
you and for which I wish to express my appreciation, the Council now has a body
of new information that should give it an even clearer idea of the situation
than it had during the previous deliberations and should allow it to act
promptly and effectively to promote the full implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and the restoration of peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The proposed concept of operations is, in our opinion, both realistic and
appropriate pending the full deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force.
If agreed and implemented promptly, it will make it possible to maintain the
enthusiasm inspired by the signature of the Lusaka Agreement and to show the
Congolese people that if they want peace, the international community is on
their side.
We are confident that the Council will take the necessary steps to ensure
that the recommendations contained in this report are acted upon. We hope that
this will be done and assure you once again, Mr. President, of our full support.

-----
