UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2245) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 1 August 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative
of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14084) . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.........................

1

SIPV.2245

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records qf the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

2245th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 20 August 1980, at 4 p.m.
Presidenf:

Mr. Vasco FUTSCHER PEREIRA
(Portugal).

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2245)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
.
Letter dated 1 August 1980from the Acting Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/14084)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.10 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: It is my privilege and very
pleasant duty to pay a tribute, on behalf of all the
members of the Council, to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Philippines, General Carlos Romulo, for
his services as President of the Council for the month
of July. Ever since he led his country’s delegation
to the United Nations Conference on International
Organization in San Francisco in 1945,General Romulo
has been a dedicated advocate of the Organization
and has placed his enthusiasm and diplomatic skill
at its disposal over the years, as President of the
General Assembly at its fourth session, in 1949, and
as President of the Security Council in January and
December 1957. It was indeed gratifying for all of us
to have this esteemed and distinguished world statesman bring his wisdom and long experience once again
to the service of the Council. We enjoyed our informal
contacts with him, appreciated his willingness to share
his recollections of earlier years in the Organization,
and were gratified that under his distinguished leadership the Council was able to recommend to the
General Assembly the admission of Zimbabwe to
membership of the United Nations, thus bringing to
a close one of the long-standing and intractable issues
that had preoccupied this and other organs for many
years.
2. I am sure that our good friend Ambassador Yango
will convey to General Romulo our feelings of deep

appreciation and our very best’ wishes for his continued good health and fruitful work.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 1August 1980from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14084)
3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the members of the Council that I have received letters from .
the representatiires of Algeria, Bahrain, Chad, Democratic Yemen, Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia; Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates, the Upper Volta and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
conformity tiith the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Nuik
(Pakistan) and Mr. Blum (lsruel) took places at the
Council table and Mr. Ourabah (Algeria), Mr. AlSafiar (Bahrain), Mr. Kessely (Chad), Mr. Ashtal
(Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Furah Dirir (Djibouti),
Mr. Abdei Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Blain (Gambiu).
Mr. Fofana (Guinea), Mr. Cubral (Guinea-Bissau),
Mr. Suryokusumo (Indonesiu),
Mr. Motahari (Iran),
Mr. Al-Ali (fray), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. Bishara
(Kuwait), Mr. TuPni (Lebanon), Mr. Burwin (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Halim (Malaysia),
Mr. Zaki
(Mald/ves), Mr. Samass4kou (Mali), Mr. Taya (Mauritania), Mr. Lahluu (Morocco), Mr. Al-Said (Oman),
Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Zuwawi (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Kane (Senegal), Mr. Adan (Somalia),
Mr. Abdalla (Sudan), Mr. Mansouri (Syrian Arab Republic),Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Al-Tajir
(United
Arab
Emirates),
Mr. OuPdraugo
(Upper
Volta) and
Mr. Alaini (Yemen) took the places reserved fur them
at the side of the Council chamber.
”

4. The PRESIDENT: I should also like to inform the
members of the Council that 1 have received a letter
dated I5 August from the Charge d’affaires al interim
of the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United
Nations ]S//I/UY], which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the Council’s consideration of the item entitled
‘The situation in the Middle East’, in accordance
with the Council’s usual practice.**
5. The proposal by the representative of Tunisia is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but, if approved by the
‘Council, the invitation to participate in the debate
would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) the same rights of participation as those conferred on a Member State when it was invited to
participate under rule 37.
6. Does any member of the Council wish to speak
on the proposal by the representative of Tunisia?
7. Mr. vanden HEUVEL (United States of America):
The United States delegation has repeatedly made
clear its view that it is inappropriate for the Security
Council to invite the Palestine Liberation Organization
to participate in the debate in terms that some seek
to interpret as conferring the same tights of participation as if it were a Member State. For that reason,
we shall vote against the proposal.
8. The PRESIDENT: If no other member of the
Council wishes to speak at this stage I shall take it that
the Council is ready to vote on the proposal by Tunisia.
A vote wws tukn by shos of hum/s.
In fuvour: Bangladesh, China, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Philippines, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Aguinst: United States of America
Abstuininng: France, Norway, Portugal. United
-Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

At the invitution qf the President, Mr. Tcrzi (Pulcwinc Libcruticm Orgunizution) took u pluw ut the
Council table.
‘9. The PRESIDENT: The Council is meeting today
in response to the letter dated I August from the
representative of Pakistan to the President of the
Security Council (S/14084).
10. 1should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council, to the following documents: S/14090,

containing the text of a letter dated 4 August from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to the
Secretary-General; S/14098, containing the text of a
letter dated 1I August from the Charge d’affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of Romania to the Secretary-General; S/14103, containing the text of a letter
dated 12 August from the representative of Viet
Nam to the Secretary-General; S/14106, containing
the text of a draft resolution sponsored by Algeria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Chad, Democratic Yemen,
Djibouti, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan
Arab Jamahirlya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, the Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates, the Upper Volta and Yemen; S/14! 13, containing the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s consultations; S/l41 15, containing the text of a letter dated I4 August from the
Chat@ d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Afghanistan to the Secretary-General; S/l4097, containing the text of a note verbale dated 8 August from
the representative of Jordan to the Secretary-General.
Il. The first speaker is the representative of Pakistan,
the current Chairman of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. I call upon him.
12. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): Mr. President, on behalf
of the members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, I wish to extend our warm felicitations
to you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of August. It is a special pleasure
for me personally to address the Council under your
presidency because of your long association with my
own country. We deeply admire your outstanding
qualities as a diplomat and the dedication with which
you have sewed the cause of promoting relations
between our two countries. We have full trust in your
wisdom and skill, which will surely guide the important
work of the Council during this month.
13. I also avail myself of this opportunity to pay our
tribute to your predecessor, a founding father of the
United Nations, General Romulo, the Foreign Minister
of the Philippin.es, whose presence in person at the head
of the Council last month reminded us of the solemn
commitment of all nations, embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations, to uphold the cause of peace
and justice in the world.
14. This is the ninth time since last March that the
Council has met to consider the grave situation
resulting from the Israeli policy of creeping annexation
of occupied Palestine and systematic repression
against its Palestinian inhabitants. As international
pressure has increased on Israel to terminate its
aggression and occupation of the Paiestinian and other
Arab- territories, Israel has intensified its efforts to

create new settlements in the occupied territories and
to expropriate Arab and Palestinian lands and natural
resources. Palestinian leaders have been forced into
exile and even made targets of assassinations. The
Israeli authorities have also revived with increased
vigour the obsessive Zionist scheme to Judaize the
Holy City of Jerusalem by destroying its historical
personality and turning it into “the eternal capital of
Israel”.

compliance by Israel with that resolution, to examine
practical ways and means, in accordance with relevant
provisions of the Charter, to secure the full implementation of the resolution.
19. Resolution 476 (1980) had clearly warned Israel
that its actions were illegal and that it must desist
forthwith from carrying out its policy of the annexation of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the mutilation of the
unique, historical and spiritual personality of the Holy .’
City. That resolution was, however, instantly
denounced by the Israeli authorities, who once again
demonstrated their characteristic intransigence
and utter disregard for the sentiments and the will of
the international community and the voices of peace
and justice. Indeed, in a calculated act of defiance
of the call of the Council, Israel went ahead and, wittlin
one month of the adoption of the resolution, enacted
as a so-called basic law the bill proclaiming the Holy
City of Jerusalem the “capital of Israel*‘.

15. Responding to the explosive situation created by
these fanatical actions of Israel, the Council has
adopted several resolutions condemning Israeli policies
in the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories. Those
resolutions have declared that all measures taken by
Israel to change the physical character, demographic
composition, institutional structure or status of the
Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since
1967, including the Holy City of Jerusalem, have no
legal validity. They constitute a flagrant violation of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949’
as well as a serious obstruction to the achievement of
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. So far, Israel has contemptuously rejected the
decisions of the Council and is ruthlessly pursuing its
policies of aggression and expansionism.

20. The adoption of that so-called basic law by the
Israeli Parliament is a grave affront to international
morality and the universally recognized norms of international behaviour. It is a flagrant violation of the
fourth Geneva Convention’ and several resolutions
of the United Nations which call for the preservation
of the specific status of the Holy City of Jerusalem,
the latest being resolution 476 (1980), of last June, to
which I have already referred.

16. The introduction of a bill in the Knesset last
May declaring the Holy City of Jerusalem Israel’s
“permanent capital” stirred the deepest emotions and
indignation throughout the Islamic world. Accordingly,
the Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers,
held last May at Islamabad, called for the convening
of an urgent meeting of the Council to consider the
dangerous situation arising from this Israeli move to
consolidate its illegal annexation of the Holy City of
Jerusalem.

21. This outrageous and provocative Israeli action’
has evoked world-wide reaction and strong condemnation by the international community. Even the United
States, which abstained in the voting on resolution 476
(1980), has recognized the inadmissibility of the Israeli
law and described it as unilateral action aimed at
changing the status of Jerusalem. The Israeli proclamation also flies in the face of the clear position
of the Western countries on the status of the Holy
City, only recently enunciated in the Venice declaration, to the effect that they would not “accept any
unilateral initiative designed to change the status of
Jerusalem” [S/14009 of 20 June 1980, para. 81.

17. At the request of Pakistan, made on behalf of the
members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Council met from 24 to 30 June and, at
its concluding session of 30 June, adopted resolution 476 (1980) by 14 votes to none, with the United
States abstaining.

22. The objective of the present meeting is not to
convey expressions of concern and indignation over
Israel’s illegal action; nor are we here to debate the
specific character and status of ‘the Holy City of
Jerusalem. The irrefutable historical facts regarding the
character and status of the Holy City are evident.
They have been recapitulated in the Council on several
occasions. The deep concern of the international
community, particularly that of the Islamic world,
over the Israeli moves to annex and Judaize the Holy
City, and the implications of such moves for intemational peace and security, have also been fully highlighted in the past-particularly at the June meetings
of the Council and during the seventh special emergency session of the General Assembly convened last
month. The specific purpose of today’s meeting is to
remind the Council of its obligation in terms of its

18. In that resolution, the Council once again
strongly deplored the continued refusal of Israel to
comply with the relevant resolutions of the Council
and of the General Assembly. It reconfirmed that all
legislative and administrative measures and actions
taken by the occupying Power which purport to alter
the geographic, demographic and historical character
and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem are null and
void and must be rescinded. The Council further
urgently called upon Israel “to desist forthwith from
persisting. in the policy and measures affecting the
character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem”.
It also reaffirmed the overriding necessity of ending
the prolonged occupation of Arab territories occupied
by Israel since 1967, including the Holy City of
Jerusalem, its determination, in the event of non3

own resolution 476 (1980), adopted last June. This
obligation was spelled out in paragraph 6 of that
resolution, which stated that in the event of noncompliance by Israel with that resolution, the Council
was determined to examine practical ways and means,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter, to secure its full implementation.

of the Security Council are clearly laid down in
Chapter VII. At the Eleventh Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers held at Islamabad, and subsequently
at the second extraordinary session of the Islamic
Conference of Foreign Ministers held at Amman last
month, the member States of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference demanded the imposition of sanctions against Israel under Chapter VII of the Charter
in order to force Israel to terminate its policy of
annexation and occupation of the Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including the
Holy City of Jerusalem. This demand has been reiterated in the final declaration of the extraordinary
sessionof the Jerusalem Committee of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, which was concluded only
two days ago at Casablanca.

23. The Council is, therefore, solemnly bound to
act-and act firmly-in order to secure the full implementation of its resolution 476 (1980). Enactment of
the basic law by Israel which declared the Holy City
its capital made it imperative for the Council to meet
urgently in order to respond to the challenge posed by
this latest Israeli act of aggression in total defiance of
the Council’s verdict. In requesting this meeting, the
member States of the Organization of the Islamic Conference have only reminded the Council of this paramount responsibility.

28. The Islamic nations cannot ask for less. The
cynicism with which Israel has carried out its expansionist policy in Palestine and strengthened its stranglehold over Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in contemptuous defiance
of the Security Council, compels us to demand that the
firmest measures be taken under the Charter. We make
this call because of our respect for the rule of law in
international relations, our commitment to the Charter,
our concern for a just and lasting peace and our deep
reverence for Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

24. The Council must fully address itself to Israeli
defiance and intransigence and carry out its obligation
to protect the unique religious significance, the
historical character and the specific status of the Holy
City of Jerusalem. The Holy City cannot be allowed
to become the spoils of war or a victim of Zionist
aggression. On behalf of the members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, let me reaffirm in
clear terms that the status of the Holy City is not
negotiable. We categorically reject any assertion that
the status of the Holy City is yet to be settled. The
Holy City is under occupation, which is inadmissible
under international law and that occupation must be
terminated. Al-Quds Al-Sharif must be returned to
Arab sovereignty.

29. The time has come when condemnation and
censure alone will not induce Israel to desist from its
present aggression and expansionism. Strict imposition
of the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the
Charter., including interruption of economic and
military relations with Israel, is imperative to impress
upon Israel the overriding necessity of bringing to an
end its prolonged occupation of the Palestinian and
Arab territories, including the Holy City of Jerusalem.

25. The Council must take effective measures, in
terms of its own decision and the Charter, in order to
secure full implementation of its resolution 476 (1980).
It must exercise its authority and power to demonstrate that it cannot tolerate violation of its verdict.
Complacency in this regard will amount to a betrayal
of the purposes and principles of the Charter.

30. The Council’s failure to act firmly has encouraged
Israel to persist in its illegal actions with impunity.
It is now contemplating definitive annexation of other
parts of the occupied Arab territories as it did with the
Holy City ofJerusalem. According to the latest reports,
fanatics in the Israeli Parliament have started
clamouring for the annexation of the Golan Heights,

26. The Council must strongly condemn Israel for its
refusal to comply with the Council’s resolutions,
especially with its resolution 476 (1980). The Council should reconfirm that all legislative and administrative measures and actions taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, which have altered or purport to
alter the character of the Holy City of Jerusalem
-in particular the recent “basic law” declaring the
Holy City Israel’s capital-are null and void and must
be rescinded forthwith. The Council must call upon
all States to refuse to accord any recognition to the
“basic law” and not to deal with any Israeli institutions or authorities established in the Holy City. It
should also call upon those States which have established diplomatic representation in Jerusalem to withdraw such representations from the Holy City.

31. Emboldened in its expansionist designs, Israel
has been carrying out relentless aggression against
Palestinians in southern Lebanon, violating the territorial integrity of Lebanon at will and in blatant
defiance of all considerations of international law and
morality. The brutal Israeli assaults against Palestinians in southern Lebanon, the latest of which came
only yesterday, are being carried out as a deliberate and
systematic policy of the Israeli Government. These
criminal acts of aggression deserve the strongest condemnation by the international community.
32. It is time clearly to foresee the dangers inherent ,
in Israel’s persistent aggression and its defiance of ;
international law and covenants. Israeli actions are ’
destroying the last hope for a just and peaceful settle-

27. The practical ways and means prescribed by the
Charter to deal with non-compliance with the decisions
4

37. The Council has already affirmed and reaffirmed,
in particular on 30 June in its resolution 476 (1980), that

ment in the Middle East. Those who support Israel
must realize that the protection that their veto provides
to Israel has only served to encourage it in its aggression. Their veto is not aiding peace in the Middle
East; it cannot arrest the deteriorating situation in
that region. Indeed, it is pushing the situation close to
the brink of a major conflict. It has, therefore, become
imperative that the Security Council be allowed to act
firmly and freely, in conformity with the will and
determination of the international community, so that
Israel will be compelled to respect the Council’s decisions, which alone can pave the way for a just and
peaceful solution of the Middle East conflict.
33. Firm and decisive action by the Council would
bring home to Israel the fact that it can no longer
flout the verdict of the international community or
present the world with another&it accompli, and that
it must respect the decisions of the United Nations,
to which it owes its very existence. The imposition of
sanctions would serve as a timely warning to Israel
against its policies of aggression and occupation.
Finally, such an action by the Council would also
reinforce the faith of the international community in
the effectiveness and ability of the United Nations
with regard to the maintenance and strengthening of
international peace and security.

“all such measures which have altered the geographic, demographic and historical character and
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem are null and
void and must be rescinded in compliance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council’*.
The General Assembly, meeting in emergency special
session one month later, adopted resolution ES-7/2,
in which it demanded
“that Israel should fully comply with all United
Nations resolutions relevant to the historic character of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in particular
Security Council resolution 476 (1980) of 30 June
1980”.
38. The decision of the Israeli authorities to sanction
by a basic law the annexation, pure and simple, of
Jerusalem confronts the Council with a situation which
it had duly foreseen and with regard to which it had
clearly asserted its determination to ensure full implementation of its previous decisions, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter.
39. The member States of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference had also foreseen this situation.
They have therefore stood firm, since the Council had
in its turn echoed their legitimate concern, in their
joint decision to invite the Council to take note of
the refusal of Israel to abide by international legality,
to condemn it and to invite the Member States of the
United Nations to apply against it the measures stip
ulated in the Charter.

34. Mr. OUNAIES (Tunisia) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, I should first of all like to
welcome your assumption of the presidency of the
Council, to convey to you our congratulations, and to
reiterate how much we admire the courage and impartiality demonstrated by your delegation in the
implementation of the Council resolutions concerning
the Middle East. You have consistently been Portugal’s
spokesman in the important and frequent debates on
matters of concern to us as an African, Arab and
Islamic country, and you have demonstrated on every
occasion your devotion to the progress of our
deliberations and to the successof our debates. I must
also pay a tribute to your dedication and to your ability
to impart to the office of the presidency a sense of
lofty responsibility and a desire for effectiveness.

40. Indeed, we consider that no one can with impunity
shirk his essential obligations regarding international
peace and security. The deliberate and overt violation of international law and of the fourth Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949 by Israel cannot be
cloaked with the slightest appearance of legality, and
we have not heard anywhere, not in the camp of its
very few allies and certainly not in the camp of its
victims, the slightest justification for this uncommonly
clear-cut act of violation. We similarly consider that
the Council cannot shrink before this fundamental act
of responsibility with regard to a matter which falls
fully within its competence and which, except in the
case of the Israeli authorities, elicits only the general
repudiation of offtcials throughout the world.

35. Similarly, I should like to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, General Carlos Romulo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Philippines, for the ease and
the great experience with which he guided the proceedings of the Council last month.
36. Through its Chairman, Mr. Agha Shahi, the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, the Organization of the Islamic Conference had placed the
question of Jerusalem before the Council as early as
last May. From 24 to 30 June, the Council devoted to
that question a wide-ranging and responsible debate.
It sealed its deliberations with the adoption of a resolution which binds the Council and which binds all
Member States. We therefore consider that there is no
need to renew the debate: we must merely draw the
proper lesson from it and live up to our obligation to
fulfil our own commitments.

41. We are well aware of the extreme seriousness of
the situation in Jerusalem. As a result, our debate is
characterized by the far-reaching nature of the decisions that we are called upon to adopt, by its audience,
and by the great hope that the Islamic community
throughout the world-if indeed not all believersplaces in it. We are particularly alive to the collective
determination of the Council firmly to rebuff any
hegemony designed to change, either today or tomor5

row, the integrity of the Holy City of Jerusalem or its
historical character and status. In so doing, the Council will have served the law and safeguarded conditions of peace.

secondary aspect of the Arab-Israel conflict, invariably
abstracted from its true and proper context. One would
have thought that the grave threats to international
peace and security in Afghanistan, South-East Asia
and other parts of the world were worthy of more
than the cursory attention and treatment that the Council has accorded them. But it is now clear that Arab
obsessionswith Israel take precedence over everything
else, to the point of eclipsing or even excluding other
matters, however grave a threat they pose to intemational peace.

42. Forty years ago, when Europe, brutally buffeted
by an act of unjustified annexation, finally yielded to
intimidation, candidly believing that it was safeguarding peace, it was doing nothing other than paving
the way to its own misfortune and to what soon would
be the collapse of world order.
43. In these extreme situations, a clear and firm
response is the only healthy attitude; and so, our
perspicacity, as well as our understanding of order
and law, are being put to the test.

50. Just three weeks ago, a bogus “emergency”
special session of the General Assembly was concluded. And today this debate has been initiated by
countries which, for the most part, have long associated
themselves with the Arab war effort against Israel and
which do not hesitate to fan the flames of political
incitement and religious prejudice as part of their
bellicose design. We have no illusions as to what
their true objectives are in initiating the present debate,
which fits into that broader design.

44. That is why we considered ourselves in duty
bound to put before the Council the draft resolution
contained in document S/14106, in the hope of making
known our profound concern, our determination and
our desire to reach firm and meaningful decisions.
However, in order to ensure the widest possible
support for that text, the sponsors will not press for
an immediate vote on it.

51. Israel’s position on Jerusalem was set out in great
detail in my statement to the Council on 30 June
[224isr meeting]. Nothing has happened since that
date which has changed the status of Jerusalem, or
Israel’s position thereon. Jerusalem has always been,
as it is today, the capital of the Jewish people. And
it has been the capital of the State of Israel since the
restoration of our national independence more than
three decades ago. Over that period it has been, as it is
today, the seat of the President of Israel, the Knesset,
the Government and the Supreme Court.

45. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel. on whom I now call.
46. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset,
let me present my compliments to you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of
August. We well recall the exemplary skill, wisdom
and propriety with which you conducted the business
of the Council in May of last year. It gives us special
pleasure to see you, the representative of a country
with which mine has the most cordial of relations, in
the presidency for a second time in the course of
Portugal’s membership in the Council, and we know
that you will exihibit once again the outstanding
qualities which have gained you the esteem of us all.

52. The law adopted by the Knesset on 30 July.
merely reaffirms that position. Beyond that, it also
underlines once again Israel’s awareness of the signiticance of Jerusalem to Christians and Moslems, as well
as to Jews. As early as 27 June 1967, immediately
after the reunification of Jerusalem, the Knesset
adopted the Law on the Protection of the Holy Places
safeguarding those places and guaranteeing unrestricted access to them to members of all faiths. The
law adopted last month assures yet again due consideration to the concerns of all religions in Jerusalem
and to the sentiments of their adherents. I must reiterate “due consideration to the concerns of all”
-1 repeat, “all”--“ religions in Jerusalem”.

47. I should also like to take this opportunity of
paying my respects to last month’s President of the
Council, General Romulo, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Philippines, one of the founding fathers of the
Organization, who has contributed so much over the
years to the work of the United Nations.
48. All of us know that the whole United Nations
system has been mobilized in an unremitting war
against my country, particularly since the signing of
a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt. Since the
beginning of this year, the time and attention of the
Council have been virtually monopolized by the Arab
enemies of peace in the Middle East and their supporters beyond the region.

53. This open and universalistic approach stands in
stark contrast to the attempts by Arab and other States
to blur not only the Jewish bond with the City but
also the Christian connections with it. It. also.stands in
stark contrast to the situation which prevailed under
the Jordanian occupation of a part of the City, between
1948 and 1967. Thus, complete freedom of access to
and worship at the shrines sacred to the adherents
of all faiths has been guaranteed and maintained by
Israel in a manner unprecedented in the history of the
City. Regardless of the false and empty allegations
made in the Council, the millions of Moslem. and

49. The fixation of Israel’s enemies about my
country is clearly evidenced also in the fact that of the
60 meetings held by the Council since the beginning
of this year, 34 have been devoted to one or another
6

Christian tourists and pilgrims who have visited
Jerusalem since 1967 can attest to this fact. The
free and unfettered administration of the Holy Places
by each religion and its chosen institutions is and will
be guaranteed, and this in co-operation and conjunction
with the religious authorities concerned.

dignity. As I said at the outset of my remarks, the
initiators of this debate seek to exploit it for incitement,
both religious and political. In fact, these shrill voices
of religious fanaticism have been heard sabre-rattling
in recent days and weeks, in this chamber and beyond.
Israel would hope that all the members of the Council
would agree that the injection of fanaticism, bigotry
and hatred into these proceedings is highly undesirable and in no way conducive to advancing the cause
of peace, which is epitomized in Jerusalem, a city
whose very name in Hebrew-Yerushalayim-means
“the City of Peace”.

54. Much has been said in recent weeks about the
Knesset law which merely reaffirms the situation that
has prevailed in Jerusalem for a long time and which
now serves as the ostensible pretext for this debate
today and for the resolution which will be ritualistically
adopted in its wake. At the same time, nothing has
been said-or is likely to be said here-about the
concerted attempts that have been made in recent years
by our Arab enemies and by their supporters to abuse
Jerusalem-and its sanctity-with a view to escalating
tension in our region. These attempts, which have
included undisguised threats against and coercion of
a number of countries, have intensified since the
signing of the Camp David accords, and in particular
since the conclusion of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty.
Even the Security Council has been repeatedly seized
upon and manipulated to this end. One of the blatant
instances of this manipulation is the reprehensible
resolution 465 (1980), which contributed significantly
towards escalating tension in this matter-as was
indeed its sponsors’ intention from the outset.

60. Experience has shown that no balanced and fair
approach can be expected in the contentious, acrimonious atmosphere characterizing all United Nations
deliberations on any aspect of the Arab-Israel conflict.
Today’s proceedings again bear out that regrettable
fact.
61. For its part, Israel will not allow Jerusalem to
become another Berlin, with all that implies not only
for the welfare of its citizens but also for intemational peace and security. Israel will continue to work
for the peace and well-being of its capital, Jerusalem,
and of all its residents, as well as for the preservation of the special place which Jerusalem holds in the
hearts of people of diverse faiths around the globe.

55. In this connection, one cannot lose sight of the
declaration and decision by the Egyptian People’s
Assembly of 1 April and of 1 July, respectively, which
regrettably followed the pattern of Security Council
resolutions aimed by their sponsors at undermining
the peace process in the Middle East.

62. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
63. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): It is a source of
great pleasure for me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. You represent a country with
which Egypt has friendly and close relations. We
are confident that under your wise and able leadership, the deliberations of the Council will reach a fmitful conclusion.

56. Anyone who disregards these grave developments does a great disservice both to the cause of
truth and to the cause of peace in the Middle East.
57. Israel has repeatedly given expression to its
awareness of the significance of Jerusalem to other
religions and their sentiments. By the same token,
equal awareness should be displayed by all of the
incontrovertible and indisputable fact that, although
throughout the centuries Jerusalem has known many
rulers, it has been the capital city for only one people
-that is, the Jewish people. No amount of gainsaying,
distortion and biased and one-sided resolutions can
alter that undeniable historical fact; nor can they alter
another basic fact, namely, that ever since modem
statistics became available some 150 years ago they
have consistently shown the existence of an uninterrupted Jewish majority among the residents of
Jerusalem.
58. Some clearly have a vested interest in ignoring
these facts, because their ignoble and nefarious purpose has been and remains to whip up a religious
frenzy in everything that surrounds Jerusalem.

64. The Council is meeting for the second time in
just a few weeks to consider the serious situation
arising from the Israeli moves to alter the status of
the Holy City of Jerusalem by consolidating its
annexation. Only last June the Council considered the
legislative steps initiated in the Knesset with the aim of
changing the status of Jerusalem. The Council, in its
resolution 476 (1980), strongly deplored such Israeli
policies. Furthermore, it reconfirmed that all legislative
and administrative measures and actions taken by
Israel which purport to alter the character and status
of the Holy City of Jerusalem have no legal validity.
Yet Israel continued its provocative policies and its
violation of the rules of international law and United
Nations resolutions by passing a so-called law proclaiming the annexation of Arab Jerusalem and
declaring Jerusalem the permanent capital of Israel.

59. Jerusalem should be approached, in every sense,
with veneration and respect, with reverence and

65. That Israeli attitude constitutes complete disregard for the sentiments of 800 million Moslems and

.

7

,

the will of the international community and a flagrant
violation of Security Council resolutions regarding the
special status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, including
its most recent one, resolution 476 (1980).

comply with ail United Nations resolutions relevant
to the historical character of the Holy City of Jerusalem, in particular Security Council resolution 476
(1980).

66. Egypt strongly condemns such a move and considers it null and void. It is yet another serious obstacle
to peace, deliberately created by Israel at this crucial
juncture in the history of the Middle East. The latest
measures taken by Israel have stirred the deepest
emotions and indignation throughout the Moslem
world. The so-called law declaring Jerusalem to be
Israel’s capital has added a new dimension to Israel’s
expansionist policies and its continued illegal occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territory, including
Jerusalem.

70. Israel’s response to that injunction was to
persist in its refusal to recognize the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, to continue to disregard the
sanctity of the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, and thus withdraw
to the preJune 1967 border, and to ignore the United
Nations resolutions co:ceming Jerusalem. The
response of Israel was, once again, another irresponsible act in complete defiance of the international
community, in utter disregard of the United Nations
resolutions and in flagrant violation of the rules of
international law.

67. For days speaker after speaker addressed the
General Assembly at its seventh emergency special
session, on the question of Palestine. We listened to
one delegation after the other declaring its universal
support for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. It was a clear demonstration of the intemational consensus that a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East cannot be established unless
Israel withdraws from all the Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and unless the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are attained.

71. In this connection, it is pertinent to recall that
resolutions 22S3 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V), adopted by
the General Assembly in July 1967, declared ail measures taken by Israel to change the status of Jerusalem
to be invalid and called upon Israel to rescind those
measures and to desist forthwith from taking any action
which would alter the status of the Holy City. Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (1968), 267 (1969),
298 (1971) and 446 (1979) have unequivocally affirmed the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by military conquest and declared
totally invalid all legislative and administrative actions
taken by Israel to change the status of the City of
Jerusalem, including the expropriation of land and
properties, the transfer of population and any legislation aimed at the incorporation of its Arab section.
In almost all of those resolutions the Council has
condemned or censured Israel for its refusal to comply
with the Council’s decisions. In its resolution 465
(1980), adopted unanimously, the Council determined
that

68. I should like to bring to the attention of the members of the Council what the Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt said on 25 July, during the
seventh emergency special session. He stated, inter
alia, that
“If the recent news reports concerning the motion
in the Knesset to enact legislation that would make
Jerusalem the capital of Israel have any credibility,
I declare in solemn and clear terms that the Egyptian
Government will consider any such action as an
infringement of the rights of the Palestinian people
and a flagrant violation of international law and
international legitimacy. Such Israeli action should
therefore warrant a firm stand on the part of the
international community.“*

“all measures taken by Israel to change the . . .
composition, institutional structure or status of the
Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem, or any part thereof, have
no legal validity. and that Israel’s policy and practices
of settling parts of its population and new immigrants in those territories constitute a flagrar.t violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and also
constitute a serious obstruction’ to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East”.

The Minister continued:
‘1. . . on behalf of the Government of Egypt, from
this rostrum I call upon the Government of Israel
to desist from all actions aimed at altering the status
of Jerusalem. That policy cannot but undermine
and damage the opportunities for attaining peace.
If further pursued, it will have a negative effect on
the present endeavours for peace.“*

Those resolutions have decisively and repeatedly
affirmed in clear and categorical terms the illegality
of all Israeli attempts-past, present and even futureto annex Arab Jerusalem.

69. In its resolution ES-7/2, the General Assembly
called upon Israel to withdraw completely and unconditionally from all the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since June 1967, including Jerusalem. It further demanded that Israel should fully

72. The position of Egypt in this regard is a matter of
record; It was amply defined at the last emergency
special sessionof the General Assembly in the aforementioned statement of Egypt’s Minister of State for
8

Foreign Affairs. He reaffhmed the following principles
pertaining to the solution of the Jerusalem question
in conformity with resolution 242(1967): first, the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war;
secondly, the necessity of Israel’s withdrawal from
East. Jerusalem, which is an integral part of. the
occupied West Bank, thus restoring it to Arab sovereignty; thirdly, the right of the people of East Jerusalem, as part of the population of the West Bank, and
therefore the Palestinian people, to exercise their
national and legitimate rights, including the right to
self-determination; fourthly, guaranteed access by all
adherents of the three monotheistic faiths to their
respective places of worship; Iifthly, the possibility
of-integrating the main services in the Holy City as
a step towards a special regime for the entire City of
Jerusalem that would take into account all the rights of
all its residents and the position of the international
community.

elected Palestinian officials; it has confiscated Arab
lands; it has demolished houses; it pursues a policy of
cruel and indiscriminate repression against the
residents of the occupied territories; it has declared
the annexation of Jerusalem. And now comes the last
link in this chain of obstructionist policy-namely,
the so-called basic law on Jerusalem. This all leads us
to question the sincerity of Israel’s interest in peace.
Is Israel now trying to renege on its obligations?
78. Egypt considers that the adoption of t.he bill on
Jerusalem by the Knesset is contrary to the spirit of the
Camp David accords and the peace process, and it has
no alternative but to delay the autonomy talks until
this new obstacle has been removed. Israel stands
fully responsible for this delay in the peace process
and any other negative results of this new illegal
measure. We strongly appeal to the Israeli people
to stand firm for peace and against those fanatics who
want to plunge the whole region into another catastrophe. Those fanatics, in their myopic view, may think
that they have scored a point, but it is a very shortlived success.This action is inopportune, provocative
and self-defeating. The supporters of this action will
be held responsible for the serious consequences
resulting from it, and those who have been dragged
along behind, whether willingly or unwillingly, will
be equally responsible.

73. Egypt stresses the special importance it attaches
to the solution of the question of Jerusalem in such a
way as to preserve the legal, historical and spiritual
rights of all Arabs, all Moslems and all Christians
in the Holy City in order to create conditions for
coexistence among the adherents of the three
monotheistic faiths.
74. Israel’s attitude requires a firm stand on the part
of the international community. Israel’s fanatical
claims are a transparent disguise for a stand bred by
introversion and ethnocentrism and a denial of the
rights of man. The Islamic and Christian shrines in the
Holy City are eloquent testimony to centuries of
religious tolerance and of undeniable Islamic and
Christian rights. Arab sovereignty in East Jerusalem
should be restored.

79. The people of Israel will ultimately suffer from
any breakdown of the peace process, that process
which Egypt initiated and which it has followed
diligently, assuming tremendous risks and facing
hostile reactions of which we are all aware. Genuine
security for Israel, in my opinion, means living in
peace with its neighbours, first and foremost, the
Palestinian people. To bring about such a situation,
Israel must rid itself of its exclusivist attitude-an
attitude vividly manifested in Israel’s claim to Jerusalem. Israel cannot afford to ignore the legitimate rights ‘_
of Arabs in Jerusalem. On the contrary, it must respect
such rights and reconcile itself to the fact that Jerusalem is not, and will never be, Israel’s exclusive domain.

75. The stand of the international community in this
regard should be based on the following elements:
first, non-recognition of all unilateral Israeli
measures in Jerusalem-legitimacy can never be conferred on such illegal measures; secondly, reaffirmation
that those measures are null and void and violate the
principles of international law and the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter; thirdly., all
States should be urged not to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel.

80. So may I reiterate our appeal to the Palestinian
Arab people and the people of Israel to engage in an
intensive dialogue with a view to bringing about mutual
recognition and acceptance and the enjoyment of
peace, prosperity and security:

76. In this regard we wish to pay a tribute to the
wise decision of the Governments of Venezuela,
Ecuador and Uruguay to move their embassies from
Jerusalem to Tel-Aviv. We call upon all States that
maintain their embassies in Jerusalem to do likewise.

81. The representative of Israel referred today to
the resolutions adopted by the Egyptian People’s
Assembly in April and July concerning Jerusalem.
Those resolutions, which I happen to have with me,
declare, inter alia, that Jerusalem is an integral part of
the West Bank, which was militarily occupied by
Israel on 5 June 1967, and rea.fIirm the necessity of
respecting and restoring historical and legal rights in
the City. I should like to reiterate Egypt’s position in
this regard, since the Israeli representative has raised
the point.

77. Notwithstanding the overwhelming sentiment of
the world community in favour of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, Israel continues in its policy
of creating obstacles on the road to peace. It persists
in its armed attacks against Lebanon; it persists in its
provocative. policy of building illegal settlements in
the occupied Arab territories; it has illegally deported
9

82. First, the unanimous resolution of the Egyptian
People’s Assembly reflects the position of Egypt concerning Jerusalem, as reaffirmed by President Sadat
on numerous occasions-in particular, in his historic
statement in the Knesset itself, on 20 November 1977.

Israel’s policy of aggression and occupation and its
constant disregard for and violation of the Charter and
the decisions of the United Nations. The Organization
is permanently being challenged by the ruhng circles
in Israel; the Arab peoples are openly snubbed. My
delegation shares the view of the Islamic States, as
implied in document S/14084, that the Israeli action
seriously endangers world peace and international
security.

83. Secondly, the resolution of the People’s Assembly is based upon the universally accepted principle
of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory
by war, which constitutes one of the basic principles of
the contemporary international system, the Charter of
the United Nations and resolution 242 (1967).

91. Only a few weeks ago, the General Assembly
had to deal with this policy at its seventh emergency
special session. By its decisions, this session made an
important and constructive contribution to the implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and to bringing about a comprehensive and just
solution to the Middle East issue. In addition to this,
these decisions are the clear answer of the overwhelming majority of Member States to Camp David
and to the policy of separate deals.

84. Thirdly, the resolution of the People’s Assembly,
in its categorical rejection of all Israeli measures aimed
at altering the status of Jerusalem, stands in full conformity with international agreements-and, in particular, with the fourth Geneva Convention, which
is applicable to all occupied Arab territories of which
Jerusalem is part.
85. Fourthly, the resolution of the People’s Assembly echoes the universal consensus which rejects and
condemns the illegal Israeli measures in occupied
Arab territory and considers them null and void.

92. At the same time, while we were concentrating
our efforts on defusing the dangerous hotbed of tension
in the Middle East, the Israeli Parliament decided
upon the annexation of the eastern part of Jerusalem.
Another dangerous step in its policy of aggression:
such was Israel’s answer to the overwhelming vote of
the United Nations. With the recent barbarous raids
into Lebanon, this policy of aggression has reached
another culminating point.

86. The policy of imposing fairs accomplis against
the will of the whole world cannot lead to peace. Peace
can be achieved only on the basis of legality and
justice. Israel must try to rise to the level of the historic
peace initiative that was carried out by President
Sadat for the achievement of justice, prosperity and
stability in the Middle East.

93. The reasons for Israel’s constant disregard for the
decisions adopted by the Council are well known. In
this context, quite a number of speakers at the seventh
emergency special session referred.particularly to the
responsibility which rests upon those who, here in the
Council, have up to now prevented the adoption of
more stringent measures against Tel Aviv.

87. The PRESIDENT: It is my understanding that
the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution in document S/14113. I shall now call on
those members of the Council who wish to make
statements Gefore the voting.

94, Israel intends to establish furtherfairs accomplis
as regards. the city of Jerusalem and to perpetuate the
annexation of land which it began in 1967.

88. Mr. ZACHMANN (German Democratic Republic): Mr. President, my delegation wishes to extend
most cordial congratulations to you, the representative of a country with which the German Democratic
Republic maintains fruitful relations of peaceful
coexistence, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of August. We are convinced
that your diplomatic skill, the rich experience you have
gathered and your untiring endeavours in advocating
the solution of international conflicts by peaceful
means will ensure the successful discharge of the task
currently before the Council.

95. My delegation shares the serious concern
expressed by a number of delegations which describe
Israel’s negation of resolution 476 (1980) as another
action designed to torpedo the-efforts aimed at bringing
about a comprehensive, just and durable peace
solution.
96. Those who railroaded through the Israeli Parliament the law by which Jerusalem is declared the capital
of Israel obviously feel encouraged to take such
intensified -aggressive action because their imperialist
patrons and those who finance them in numerous parts
of the world have pursued a policv of confrontation.

89. The members of the Council. considered it an
honour to do their work in the month of July under
the proven presidency of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs

of the Republic

of the

Philirrninfta;

General

Carlos Romulo. We should like to ask Ambassador
Yango to transmit our thanks and our appreciation to
all members of the Philippine delegation.

97. It is high time to counter the peace-threatening
policy pursued by Israel’s ruling circles with effective
measures to be taken by the Council in order to force
the aggressor to-implement the decisions of the United
Nations. How.right, as it turns out, were those States

90. Today’s is the thirty-fourth meeting of the Council this year that has been convened in order to discuss
iG

which emphasized
during the seventh
emergency
special session that only coercive measures under the
Charter could stop the aggressor,
Israel!
98. For this reason. my delegation supported
the
draft resolution
submitted
by the group of Islamic
States and contained in document S114106. My delegation deems that this important point, namely coercive
measures,
should have been included in the draft
resolution now before us. Unfortunately
this is not the
case, Therefore we consider the draft resolution submitted in document S/ 14 I I3 to be merely the minimum
of what the Council should do in this situation and we
shall vote in favour of it because the Islamic States
regard this text as a further step towards urging Israel
to comply with United Nations decisions.

104. The succession
of draft resolutions
before the
Council and the emergency, special session of the
General Assembly
has neither aided the Camp David
process
nor offered a single alternative
with the
slightest chance of success.
105 Eight times in these five months, draft resolutions on the Middle East have come before us. For its
part, the United States has joined in the debate and the
voting. We have done that because we respect this
institution.
and we honour those who have laboured
hard for a positive approach.
But eight times those
draft resolutions
have failed the critical tests: those
of reason, of balance, of accounting for the concerns
of both sides, of genuinely serving the objective of
peace.

99. The United Nations, with all its authority.
has
made it eloquently clear that a just and durable peace
settlement in the Middle East cannot be achieved if
the- United Nations
decisions
urging Israel’s
withdrawal from the territories illegally taken and occupied
in 1967 are not respected and implemented and if it
is not possible to bring about a just solution of the
problem of Palestine on the basis of the implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to establish a State of its own.
The United Nations has to apply all its weight to force
Israel and its allies to give up their resistance to a just
and durable settlement in the Middle East. Only then
will all peoples and States of that region be able to
live together in peace and security.

106. The draft resolution
before us today is illustrative of a preoccupation
which has produced this
series of unbalanced and unrealistic
lexts on Middle
East issues. It fails to serve the goal of all faiths that
took upon Jerusalem as holy. We must share a common
vision of that ancient city’s
future-an
undivided
Jerusalem.
with free access to the Holy Places for
people of all faiths.

100. The PRESIDENT:
1 wish to acknowledge
with
great pleasure the presence among us of the Secretary
of State of the United States, Mr. Edmund Muskie,
to whom I extend a very warm welcome and on whom
I now call.

108. That is the position of my Government.
But it
is more. The status of Jerusalem cannot simply be
declared; it must be agreed to by the parties. That
is a pwctical reality. It will remain so. despite this draft
resolution or a hundred more like it.

101. Mr. MUSK-IE (United Slates of America): ‘First
of all, Mr. President, I should like to thank you for that
warm welcome;
1 had hoped that I might escape with
anonymity
this afternoon.
Secondly. I should. like to
offer my congratulations
to you upon your assumption
of the duties of President. Your reputation as a skilled
parliamentarian,
capable of carrying
these heavy
responsibilities,
was known to mc before I entered this
chamber. I am delighted to be here.
102. I come here today out of my deep respect for
the United Nations and all it has represented
for
35 years. It is a force for peace and reason in the world.
It is a. forum whe~re nations may air their differences
and seek out the common ground. We should all be
grateful that this, institution
has worked
so well. on
so many issues. in its relatively short span of time.
103. Therefore, I also come here today with a feeling
of sorrow, for I believe that in its work on the Middle
East over the past five months the United Nations
has been the focus of attempts not to advance the cause
of peace, but to restrain it, contrary
to the ideals
and purposes-of
this institution.

107. But how can that vision be realized? Certainly
it cannot be realized by unilateral actions, nor by
narrow resolutions
,in this forum. Rather the question
of Jerusalem must be addressed in the context of negotiations for a comprehensive,
just and lasting Middle
East peace.

109. We have encouraged all parties to refrain from
unilateral actions which seek to change the character
or status of Jerusalem.
in line with this position we
will not vote against the draft resolution as presently
written.
110. So that there can be no mistake, let me note that
we will continue firmly and forcefully
to resist any
attempt to impose sanctions against Israel under Chapter VII of the Charter. That step is contained in a draft
resolution presented
here but not to be voted upon
ISf14106). We are unalterably opposed to it. We will
vote against any such draft resolution.
1 I I. But if we do not vote against the draft resolu- ’
tion before us. neither can we find cause to support
it, for it is still fundamentally
flawed. It fails even to
reafftrm resolution 242 (1967) as the basis for a comprehensive
peace. Israel, for example, is to be censured, yet there is no censure, indeed no mention at
all,‘of violence against Israel or of efforts that undermine Israel’s legitimate security needs. Further,
the
Council calls upon those States that have established

diplomatic missions in Jerusalem to withdraw them
from the Holy City. In our judgement this provision
is not binding. It is without force. And we reject it as
a disruptive attempt to dictate to other nations. it does
nothing to promote a resolution of the difftcuh problems facing Israel and its neighbours. It does nothing
to advance the cause of peace.

been at the top of the agenda together. It is the first
time there has been real hope-not a mirage or a
wish-that a comprehensive settlement could be
attained.
120. My Government has stated many times in the
past, and I will restate it again today, that we are
absolutely and firmly committed to the successof the
process begun at Camp David and its ultimate goal of
a just and lasting peace throughout the region. There
is no issue on which President Carter has spent.m.ore
time and effort than this great cause. And that will
continue to be the case until the job is done.

112. On these specific grounds, we shall abstain in the
vote on the draft resolution.
113. And on broader grounds, we ask that the United
Nations return to first principles in addressing the
Middle East. Let us resist useless pronouncements
and resume the practical search for results-on Jerusalem, and on all other issues.

121. This is difftcult and painstaking work. But it is
precisely the kind of effoG that inspEed the creation
of the United Nations. It is precisely the work to
which the United Nations should now rededicate itself.
We desire to work closely with the Islamic States in
order that their legitimate goals set out in resolution 242
(1967) may be attained in peace and honour.

114. There are few problems in the world today as
much in need of resolution-and of patient, constructive effort to achieve it. Four cruel wars in 30 yearsand the peril and suffering that remain-underscore
the urgency of this task. And it is underscored again
by recent fighting in Lebanon, renewing the violent
cycle.

122. It is vital that a pohtical climate be preserved
within which the hard work of peace can succeed.
That is why we have urged all the parties not to
take unilateral steps that could prejudice the outcome
of the negotiations. That is why we have counsehed
patience, and sought wider support for our efforts.
And it is why events here in the last several months
have been so profoundly disturbing. We do not expect
everyone to support the Camp David process. We do,
however, seek an end to efforts that work in the
contrary direction-not just to undermine the Camp
David process, but to disrupt the search for peace
itself;

1IS. For all those 30 years there was no peace. Plans
were tried and abandoned. Partial solutions came
apart. Modest, stabilizing steps were the very most to
be achieved-and they were all too fragile.
116. Then in November 1977, President Sadat of
Egypt took the courageous step of going to Jetusalem-in an inspired act of statesmanship to break the
deadlock. With equal statesmanship the Israeli Govemment responded. At Camp David the next September,
for 13 days President Sadat, Prime Minister Begin
and President Carter joined to create a framework for
peace in the Middle East. Thus was born the first
real chance to bring the goals of resolution 242 (1967)
into being. Then, following President Carter’s trip to
the Middle East in February 1979, peace between
Israel and Egypt-the first real peace-was achieved.

123; Let me therefore repeat our belief that this
constant recourse to debates and resolutions that
are not germane to the peace process-and are even
harmful to it-should stop. Elsewhere, in South-West
Asia and in South-East Asia, warfare is a present
reality. The aggressor nations make no effort to find
peace. Yet the Council is continually drawn to the
Middle East, where authentic work forj peace is under
way.

117. Even .so, it was only a beginning. Camp
.David was designed not just for a limited settlement
between Israel and one of its neighbours, but as a
framework for a truly comprehensive and final peace
among all parties to the conflict.
118. A year ago last May, the second stage of the
Camp David process began-negotiations between
Egypt and Israel, with the United States as full partner,
to provide full autonomy for the inhabitants of the West
Bank and Gaza. This is to be a transitional arrangement of five years. Not later than the third year after
the start of that period, negotiations to settle the final
status of the territories would begin.

124. The United States will not be deterred from this
historic enterprise. Indeed, 1 should like to reiterate
our firm determination to finish what has been so well
begun. At Camp David, as a result of statesmanship
and courage, the two parties, with the help of the
United. States, designed a frame~work for a comprehensive peace. They agreed to start with a treaty of
peace between Egypt and Israel. This was a goal
which many thought to be utterly ‘unattainable but
which was achieved through negotiation and on the
basis of resolution 242 (1967).

119. This may be an imperfect process. But let me
remind members of this: it is also the first time the
twin issues of Palestinian rights and Israeli security
-issues at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict-have

125. As a further step towards a comprehensive
peace&e parties agreed to launch serious negotiations
aimed at providing autonomy for the Palestiman inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza.for a transitional
12

period. The final objective is clear: resolution of the
Palestinian problem in all its aspects and, ultimately,
peace treaties between Israel and all of its other
neighbours-Jordan, Syria and Lebanon.

132. The Soviet delegation was prepared to support
the adoption, as proposed by a number of representatives and as envisaged in the draft resolution of the
Islamic States [S/14106], of the most forthright possible
actions against Israel, including the application of
sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter. This would be the logical outcome of the
previous decisions taken by the Council on this question and would also be a fitting reply to the illegal
decision to proclaim Jerusalem the capital of Israel.

126. We intend to persevere in this effort regardless
of all distractions, diversions and difftculties.
127. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote
tne draft resolution contained in document S/l41 13.

133. Quite apart from anything else, Israel has grossly
violated the most recent resolution of the Council
on this issue, resolution 476 (1980), which clearly
warned Israel not to take any steps which would
affect the status of Jerusalem. At that time the
Security Council stated, in its resolution, that if Israel
undertook any such actions the Council would consider
practical ways and means of exerting pressure on
Israel in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Bangladesh, China, France, German
Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger,
Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union. of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia
Against:
Abstaining:

None
United States of America

The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none,
with I abstention (resolution 478 (I 980)).

128. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those
members of the Council who have asked to be allowed
to speak following the vote.
;29. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian):
First of all, I should like to welcome you, Sir, the
representative of Portugal, to the presidency of the
Council, which you will be occupying this month. It
is our hope, Mr. President, that your activities in this
important and responsible post during the month of
August will promote the effective work of the Council.

134. That was precisely the kind of decision that was
expected of the Council by the international community and, first and foremost, by the Palestinian
people, the Arab and many other Muslim countries.
And if such a decision has not in fact emerged today,
if the Council has proved unable to take decisive
steps, then we must state quite unambiguously who
bears the full weight of political responsibility for
that. Responsibility for the fact that the Council was
unable to take an effective decision aimed at curbing
the aggressor lies quite definitely and above all with
the United States of America.
135. For many years now, Washington has been
giving Israel various kinds of political, economic,
financial and military assistance, thus encouraging
it to continue its policy of expansion and aggression
against the Arab States. In the Security Council, the
United States by the use or threat of the veto has
constantly blocked the adoption of decisions confirming the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian
people, resolutions which might have influenced Israel
and forced it to heed the voice of reason. Actually,
that was a point made today by the representative of
Pakistan.

130. On behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union,
I should also like to express our sincere gratitude to
General Romulo, an eminent statesman and diplomat
of the Republic of the Philippines, for the successful
way in which he guided the activities of the Council
last month.
131. The delegation of the Soviet Union voted in
favour of the draft resolution contained in document
S/14113. We did so because of our solidarity with the
.Arab and other Islamic countries which felt it essential
that the Council should take at least minimal action
in connection with the new provocative action of the
Israeli occupiers, in this particular case with regard to
Jerusalem. Although the resolution that we have
adopted contains some positive features, we should
like to make it abundantly clear that it is, nevertheless, far from being adequate. Thus, the resolution
does not envisage the adoption of measures against
Israel commensurate, first, with the seriousness of the
question we have been discussing today, or, secondly,
with the consequences that stem from the provocative
actions of Israel and which are so dangerous for peace.

136. Washington worked hand in glove with Israel at
the recent emergency special session of the General
Assembly, when it voted against the Assembly’s
resolutions.
137. At the same time, the representatives of the
United States continue their rhetorical exercise of
claiming that they have an impartial attitude towards
a Middle East settlement, and they still try to don the
garb of peace-makers and friends of the Arab and
Islamic world. In fact, however, the essence of the
Middle East policy of the United States has been
revealed in its attempts to substitute for a genuine,
just and comprehensive solution of the Middle East
13

problem-and,
conseauentlv. the achievement of
lasting peace in that area-s&rate
deals designed to
perpetuate the results of Israeli aggression and to
deprive the Palestinians of their legitimate rights.

today. Our gratitude-is also due to your distinguished
predecessor, General Romulo of the Philippines, for his
wise conduct of Council affairs last month.
142. Successive British Governments have taken the
view since the 1967 conflict that Israeli rights in East
Jerusalem do not extend beyond those of an occupying
Power pending an agreed solution on the City’s future.
My Government shares the international concern at
Israel’s attempts to determine Jerusalem’s status
unilaterally rather than through a negotiated settlement. They are unacceptable.

138. Like many other States, the Soviet Union has
emphasized from the very outset that the separate deal
between Israel and Egypt, concluded under the
sponsorship of the United States, would not lead to a
strengthening of peace in the Middle East but, rather,
would lead to a further destabilization of the situation
in &hat part of the world, and thus it constitutes a
departure from the ways and means that, through
collective efforts by all the parties concerned, might
have led to genuine peace in the Middle East. At one
time there were some who attempted to question that
assertion, but now, after only a very short time has
elapsed, there is hardly anyone who would be bold
enough to deny the obvious truth that under cover of
the Camp David collusion-rejected outright by the
Palestinians and practically all the Arab and many
other non-aligned countries-Israel has proceeded to
consolidate its annexation and to carry out its plans
to create a so-called greater Israel. Indeed, it was
precisely because Israel was emboldened by that collusion that it proceeded to proclaim Jerusalem as its
capital.

143. When the Council met two months ago on the
subject of Jerusalem, my delegation voted in favour
of resolution 476 (1980), which among other things
calledupon Israel to “desist forthwith from persisting
in the policy and measures affecting the character
and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem*‘. In our
statement in that debate [224isr meering], we urged
Israel to eschew further actions which could only serve
to stoke the fires of resentment and make even more
difficult the search for a comprehensive settlement
of the conflict in the Middle East. It was therefore
with deep regret and concern that we learned on 31 July
of the enactment by the Knesset of the law which
among other things declares that a complete and united
Jerusalem is the capital of Israel. My delegation considers this to be a highly provocative act. We have
never accepted Israeli measures purporting to change
the status of East Jerusalem unilaterally and have
made it quite clear that we do not regard the recent
Knesset law as valid or as changing the situation in
law in any way whatsoever. Israel should be left
in no doubt of the international community’s condemnation of its action, or of the fact that in the eyes
of the world Jerusalem’s status remains unchanged.

139. The authors of the separate deals promised the
advent of a new era of peace and co-operation in the
Middle East. In fact, however, what we are witnessing
is an era of further expansion on the part of Israel.
In those circumstances, peace has not come to the
Middle East-nor, indeed, could it come, for the main
problems besetting that part of the world remain
unsolved: the withdrawal of Israel’s armed forces
from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967; the
guaranteeing of the legitimate national rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, including their right to selfdetermination and the creation of their own State; the
guaranteed exercise by all States in the area of their
right to a secure existence and development.

144. We remain convinced that the only road to
lasting peace is through a negotiated settlement. We,
with our-partners in the European Community, strongly
desire to see progress towards a comprehensive
settlement. The Venice declaration [S/14009] and
Mr. Gaston Thorn’s mission are clear demonstrations
of our concern and our commitment to progress. We
shall pursue these efforts with vigour.

140. The Soviet delegation would like to reaffirm
that support for the struggle of the Arab peoples for
the complete elimination of the consequences of
Israeli aggression is its unalterable policy. Thus,
we have consistently favoured and shall continue to
favour a comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East and the establishment in that area of a genuinely
just and lasting peace.

145. My delegation therefore voted in favour of the
draft resolution in document S/l41 13, and we are glad
it has been adopted. We consider it an appropriate
response by the Council to the Israeli legislation on
Jerusalem.

141. Mr. MANSFIELD (United Kingdom): May
I first congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of August.
The closeness of our relations with your Government
and your delegation, and with you personally,
strengthens our confidence that the business of the
Council will be dealt with efficiently and objectively
under your guidance. I therefore expected the skilful,
patient and good-humoured manner in which you have
conducted the negotiations on the item before us

146. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretarion
from French): Mr. President, I should like, first, to say
how happy we are to see that the President of the
Council during this busy month ofAugust is a diplomat
whose wide experience and judgement are so well
known-indeed, he has just given us another striking
example of those qualities-and who represents a
country, Portugal, with which France has long-standing
friendly. relations.
14

147. I should like to ask the representative of the
Philippines, Ambassador Yango, to be good enough to
convey to General Romulo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Philippines, on behalf of my delegation
our congratulations and our gratitude for his having
presided over our Council’s work during July; we
are all aware of his great prestige.

sultation can a solution be found that will restore
peace to the region and, in particular, make it possible
to preserve the unique and universal character of
Jerusalem.
153. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

148. Two months ago, the Council had already met
as a result of various statements by the highest authorities of Israel announcing the forthcoming vote on a law
designed to change the status of Jerusalem. On that
occasion 12241stmeeting], my delegation emphasized
that any unilateral measure concerning Jerusalem
-legislative
or otherwise-would
be illegal. We
warned against the taking of any “decision” by
Israel that would be unacceptable to the international
community. Like almost all the other members of the
Council, my delegation voted in favour of resolution 476 (1980), which called on Israel to respect international law and desist from taking any further
arbitrary measure concerning Jerusalem. We all know,
regrettably, what happened. Far from heeding this
appeal, the Israeli Parliament, on 30 July, adopted a
basic law which claims to make Jerusalem the reunified
capital of the State of Israel.

154. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): Mr. President, I wish
to take this opportunity of speaking before the Council this month to express my most sincere congratulations to you, Ambassador Futscher Pereira of friendly
Portugal, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council, to which you bring your wisdom, statesmanship and dedication. Your versatility, patience and
prudence have been severely tested over the past
three weeks and you have emerged with flying colours.
155. It is also my privilege most highly to pay a tribute
and to offer our warm congratulations to an elder
statesman--one of the founding fathers of the United
Nations-General Carios Romulo, of the friendly
Philippines, on his presidency of the Council during the
month of July. It was fitting that his presidency should
have coincided with the Council’s decision to admit
Zimbabwe to the family of nations. That certainly was
a fulfilment of one of his most cherished visions.

149. That is a unilateral measure that is clearly
contrary to international law. In this connection,
I should like to recall that France has always considered that all legislative or other measures adopted
by the Israeli authorities to absorb the part of Jerusalem that has been occupied since 1967 are contrary
to the rules of international law according to which
the occupying Power must preserve the demographic,
economic and cultural character-of occupied areas.

156. I wish to express my Government’s deep
appreciation to the friendly Governments of Venezuela, Ecuador and Uruguay for acting so promptly
in support of international law and United Nations
resolutions by withdrawing their embassies from
Jerusalem. That is a reaffirmation of their faith in the
Charter and in legality. It is our earnest hope that the
other countries will likewise withdraw their embassies
from Jerusalem, because we are confident that their
adherence to international law is equally staunch.

150. Therefore France believes that the law passed
by the Israeli Parliament can in no way modify the
status of Jerusalem, and we consider that law to be
null and void. It was along those lines that the heads
of State and Government of the nine countries of the
European Community expressed themselves on
13 June last in Venice.

157. The allegation of the representative of Israel
that resolution 465 (1980), condemning the relentless
devouring of the occupied territories, is reprehensible
and has triggered the debate in the Council is an
insult to the intelligence of the international community. Does the representative of Israel expect the
world community to watch, arms folded, the annihilation of our people in the occupied territories,
in that large prison-to the extent of 35 per cent?
What would remain of land and people to come to
peace with, if their very existence should cease over
the next few years?

151. Under the circumstances, it is understandable
that the Council should have denounced the policy
pursued by Israel in yet clearer terms than it did
in June last. That is also the reason why my deiegation voted in favour of the draft resolution submitted
to the Council, which essentially refuses to recognize
the law passed by the Israeli Parliament.
152. The decision adopted recently by the Israeli
Parliament can only contribute to increased tension
and to the creation of new difficulties at a time when,
more than ever before, the need is felt for negotiating
a global settlement of the Middle East conflict that is
just and lasting. Aware of the need for a global settiement, the Nine have asked Mr. Gaston Thorn to
conduct on their behalf an exploratory mission with all
the-parties concerned. Only through dialogue and con-

158. As for the name Yerushaiayim, I should like to
remind the representative of Israel that that name was
used by the Jebusites, the founders of Jerusalem, and
was “cloned” by the Israelite tribes.
159. I do not intend to engage in any substantive discussion of an issue of such universal and colossal
magnitude as the fate and status of Jerusalem and
its people. For the fate of Jerusalem and its status are
15

known to the Council in all their dimensions; they have
been debated, discussed and decided upon on
numerous occasions since. 1967-even earlier, since
1947. Nor do I find it seemly or appropriate to refute
the fraudulent, false and self-incriminating utterances
of an aggressor and an illegal entity that has audaciously
defied the same United Nations to which it owes its
very existence-though in a far smaller segment of
Palestine, which did not include Jerusalem.
160. The latest Israeli action, which has climaxed
its aggression, is far too serious to permit the luxury
of verbal exercises in futility. It is unmitigated aggression, and it can only be dealt with as such.

166. Jerusalem is not up for grabs, nor is the 6,000year legacy of Palestinian, universal and spiritual
existence erasable by a Knesset fiat. To us, reprehensible and insane Israeli behaviour is just the
beginning, and not the end, in eternal Jerusalem’s
dire sufferings over mihennia. For how can there be
an end to eternity?
167. Action by the Council is the only avenue left to
avert an otherwise inevitable catastrophe which none
of us, I am sure, would wish to happen to the City
of Peace, or to the region, as it would spill over
and pose a grave threat to international peace and
security.
168. I hope that today’s substantially watered-down
resolution will serve as yet another signal that aggression, injustice and defiance can never go unredeemed,
for they tear to shreds the very fabric on which the
United Nations was founded as the guardian of peace,
security, justice and legality in the world.

161. Suffice it here to recall what HerzI stated at the
first Zionist Congress, in Basle, Switzerland, in 1897:
“If we attained Jerusalem one day and I were still
alive and able, I should destroy everything not sacred
to the Jews, and demolish all the centuries-old sites.”
Those were his words. He did not have to remain alive,
for his dreams and his obsession with destruction have
been implemented, and they will continue to be implemented in full measure by his followers.
162. The King-Crane Commission, acting for United
States President Woodrow Wilson and the League
of Nations, expressed its judgement and affirmed its
considered conviction that the Jews were not only the
least qualified to be the guardians of the Holy Places
but that they regarded such a task as abhorrent. Those
are not my words, please understand that; they are
words excerpted from the Commission’s report3 After
all, are not we Christians and Muslims and other
creeds abhorrent gentiles?
163. Mr. President, with your permission I wish to
distribute to the members of the Council a small booklet that portrays in brief certain aspects of the Zionists’
fiendish misdeeds and designs against Holy Jerusalem,
which has literally been emasculated, transformed
and obliterated.

169. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list
is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now call.
170. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
At the outset, Sir, I wish to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency. We can be certain,
judging- by past experience, that the deliberations and
proceedings here will lead us to a fruitfu1 result. At
this moment I recall with great honour the moments
I spent in the company of Chairman Yasser Arafat in
his meeting withthe President of Portugal last November in Lisbon. I can never forget the warm welcome
shown- to the delegation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization by the Portuguese authorities and
people. Nor shah I forget, and I shall always consider
with great respect, Portugal’s role in the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979).
171. General Romulo’s presidency of the-Council was
of very deep and profound significance to us. It came
at a time when we thought the world needed to be
reminded of the fundamental principles that were laid
down by the founding fathers.

164. I feel in duty bound to reiterate that no one
should miscalculate our eternal determination to undo,
in God’s good time, what is a crime against civilization
and humanity. No cause in all the millennia of history
has summoned and galvanized the totality of our
resolve as has the fate of Jerusalem. It was always
the capital of Palestine, without being &led the capital
of Palestine. It was far more important than the capital
of a province or a greater conglomerate.

172. The Council has unanimously adopted a resohrtion now which, in our opinion, has some positive
aspects: it determines that the Israeli atrocities
--although they are called “iegislative and administrative measures and actions”-are null and void, and
demands that they be rescinded forthwith. The resoiution aIso affirms a positive aspect: that the actions by
Israel constitute a serious obstruction to.the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. Moreover; the resolution decided not
to recognize the “basic law” and called on all Member States to accept that decision. We would have
liked to have the words of the Charter used: “to accept
and carry out”; but to accept this decision was satisfactory. We shall await 15 November to read. the

165. Nor has any other cause demanded and willingly
been granted the ultimate sacrifice, regardless of cost.
Let the Israelis, who are at present intoxicated and
deranged by a transient advantage in the mechanical
paradigm, understand that it is the spirit, aroused by
monumental injustice, which can once again restore a
balance of human sanity and legality in relations
amongst nations.
16

report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
ofthis resolution, because there are remedies provided
for in the Charter.

tween the parties. But he failed to say who the parties
were. If he thinks he can decide the future of Jerusalem
and of the people of Jerusalem through negotiations
between aliens-namely, the Government of Egypt and
the Government of Israel-with his blessing, he is mistaken. It is enough that through the Camp David
accords they have usurped the rights of the Palestinian
people: their right to return, ,their right to selfdetermination, their right to-independence and to have
their own State. And yet he comes and tells us that the
future of Jerusalem has to be agreed upon between the
parties. Name the parties, please.

173. Of course, we are aware that the General Assembly, at the iast. emergency special session, voted
overwhelmingly, with only seven dissenters, to
demand that Israel fully comply with resolution 476
(1980), which it had not done. However, on the other
hand, we are greatly concerned and apprehensive
that the Council-has:failed in a major aspect: in resolution 476 (1980) the Council reaffied
its determination to examine practical ways and means, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, to
secure the full implementation of that resolution, in the
event of noncompliance by Israel. In this case;it was
not non-compliance but, rather, defiance, a refusal to
comply.

179. Then he spoke about peace and about the disruption of peace through these Council proceedings.
What peace is he talking about when billions of
dollars are being poured into the Middle East in the
form of bombs and aeroplanes and artillery? Only last
night this was manifested in a very, very atrocious
way in southern Lebanon. And why? Because those at
the receiving end of all these billions wanted to take a
“pre-emptive action”. This is another of the crimes
which are perhaps not merely being encouraged but
engineered by the United States to keep the situation
in the Middle East burning and very, very hot.

174. We are really concerned about the credibility
of the United Nations. We will maintain our faith in this
Organization. If the atrocities by the Tel Aviv junta are
meant to disillusion people about the usefulness,
efficacy and productivity of the Organization, they are
mistaken, because the world still pays great respect
and credence to this institution,

180. The Secretary of State has decided that these
proceedings of the Council are an attempt to restrain
the efforts for peace and that there is no alternative
to Camp David. But does he not realize that Camp
David itself was a malicious alternative to the comprehensive approach for peace? Just look at the timing
of the Camp David accords: they were announced
exactly when the General Assembly had decided that
a peace conference should be convened in which all
parties to the conflict, including the PLO, should get
together within thenframework of the United Nations
under the co-chairmanship of the Soviet Union and the
United States in order to achieve peace in the Middle
East. That was the comprehensive approach to bringing
peace. The alternative was the Camp David approach.
Did it really bring peace to the area? We do not see
it. We, the people who live there, who come from there,
who have our roots there, we do not see,any signs
of peace.

175. We have heard some pontification this afternoon. I am sure the American. administration is grateful
to us for convening this session, because we afforded
its spokesman a platform for his electioneering campaign. But at the outset I would like to say that for an
incumbent tobe elected again, he must be born again
in the principles of the Charter and in the values of
the founding fathers. Whether be uses the United
Nations, the Security Council or whatever, it is improper to misuse this chamber and offend the dignity
of the Council.
176. The Secretary of State. of the United States
said that the conflict is between the issues of the rights
of the Palestinians and the security of Israel. There is
no consideration, whether of security or anything else,
that can justify the nullification of the rights of an
individual or of a people. So there is no conflict there
between rights and security. Rights are not to be
trampled upon under the guise of security. Otherwise
fascism will dominate.

181. Then he reiterated that within five years there
will be full autonomy for the inhabitants of the West
Bank and Gala. In five years there will be no inhabitants of the West Bank and C&a; there will be more
settlements, more usurpers, more thieves. That is what
will be there in five years.

177. That pontification is abhorrent. The Secretary
of State had made an earlier statement in U.S. News
and World Report in which he tended to say that this
action taken by Israel on Jerusalem could not finally
settle the status of Jerusalem because, he thought,
according to that interview, that IsraeI should be
allowed to do whatever it wants, but through the
process of negotiations they would reach agreement
and that agreement would then decide the future of
Jerusalem.
‘,

182. He speaks only of the inhabitants of the West
Bank and Gaza. But what about the fate of the other
two million Palestinians who are denied the right to be
in their homes? For the United States maybe this means
nothing, but for us it is everything.
183. Then he said that he would abstain in the voting.
I am sure that there has been no foul-up in the communications system between the President and his

178. The Sec.retary of State said that the futufe of
the City is not declared: it has to be agreediupon be17

Secretary of State at this junction as was the case in
March.

thing, its principles are wonderful-but listen: if you do
anything against my baby Israel I will not let. you
do it. I will give Israel billions of dollars in the form of
weapons and bombs and whatever else to kill you and
I will just applaud them at the end of the day because
I need maybe half a million votes.” I do not need
those votes.

184. What more should we expect to hear than what
Teddy Kollek announced on television on Sunday
night? He said, “I am an occupier; in principle we are
an occupation force”. Who else can say what their
position or status in the area is if that is what Teddy
KoIIek says? But-and this is a big but-he spoke of
benign occupation and of how much he could offer
those people. Well, foreign occupation cannot be
benign, because it is malignant. It is against the rights
of the occupied; it tramples upon and violates those
rights.

190; We have a number of concerns, Our concern is
not only legislation. Our concern is the fate of the
worshippers, the people of Jerusalem. There are
about. 60$00 Christians and Moslems in Jerusalem.
What will their fate be now? They have had their roots
there fat ages. L’Osservatore
Romano of 30 June
said: “No less than the monuments and Holy Places,
the situation of these communities cannot fail to be
a matter of concern for all.” His Holiness the Pope
is also-and primarily--concerned about the fate of
the worshippers and the people of Jerusalem. For the
sanctuaries and shrines are meaningless-they are
museums-if they-have no worshippers. This should be
the primary concern of the Council: the, future and
the fate of the people.

185. At one point it was announced that the enactment of the law by the Knesset in Tel Aviv was an
act of folly. It was not an act of folly; it was a maliciously designed move to nullify even the Washington
pact. Do we need to be reminded that the Munich
pact was nullified by Hitler’s troops moving into
PoIand? Pacts are signed, but the aggressor, the racist,
the militarist adventurer uses those pacts for his next
move. Hitler did it and the Zionists are doing it now.
This is an explanation for the fact that immediately
after Camp David there was an invasion of Lebanon.
We come to the Council to consider the question
of Jerusalem and there is another invasion of Lebanon.
Fortunately these invasions were repulsed.

191. But let me quote from the 1 July issue of’the
newspaper Ma’ariv, which is, I believe, a Hebrewlanguage paper published in Tel Aviv:
“The Catholic Patriarchate in East Jerusalem has
sent a dossier on the condition of the. Christian
communities in [Jerusalem] and in the towns of
Ramallah, Bethlehem, Beit Jallah and Beit Sahour
to the Vatican. The authors of.the dossier express
the-opinion that the Israeli regime is persistently and
in a variety of ways trying to reduce the Christian
population of the region.

186. This is the Zionist doctrine and the Zionist
operundi in the form of military and racist
aggression and expansionism; it is an exclusivist aim.
We have to believe that we are human beings. We are
not Aryans, not Semites: we are humans, We are not
Jews, we are not Christians: we are. human beings.
This is how we should behave and what we should
believe in. This is why we come to the United Nations.

modus

“The study reveals that 3,000 young people under
thirty were forced or pressured to leave their towns
and to emigrate to other countries within the last
two years. Another part of the study deals with the
seizure of land near Bethlehem, Beit Sahour and
Beit Jallah. It is claimed that the seizure uf that land
for the purpose of establishing Jewish housing
estates on it is creating a situation in which. Arab
owners are encouraged to sell their land to Jews.
Thus, the youngsters’ ambitions are frustrate3 and
they tend to conclude that thereis no future for them
in their own towns.”

187. This act of defiance of the Council was only an
excuse to disrupt the stability in the area. Because
racists--the Nazis, the Zionists-cannot survive in an
atmosphere of peace.
188. The prophet Micah said, “They build up Zion
with blood and Jerusalem with iniquity*‘. These words
of the Bible, of a prophet, are important for us to read
every now and then. They are a forewarning to the
Zionists: they cannot build up their State with blood
and usurp Jerusalem with iniquity and expect peace.

192. Let us see about the fate of the Jews in Jerusalem. Rabbi Uri Blau, who isthe head of Neturei Katia
of the.United States, a Hassidic .Jewish sect which has
had-its ,roots in..Jerusalem, I believe, since time immemorial, musthave addressed a letter to youi Mr. President, of which I have ti copy. Maybe I am not, supposed.tosay this, but I did get a copy andlshould like
to read out two ,paragraphs. One paragraph states:

189. The Secretary of State announced in the Council that his country will never permit sanctions against
Israel. My God, is this not a defiance? Is this not
flouting the Charter’itseIf? Is he telling us here that
the Charter can go to hell because we have elections
tomorrow? If he wants to pontificate about the principles of the United Nations he cannot come and
tell us now that he will never permit sanctions, Let
him wait for the proper moment and then decide
whether he will really abide by the Charter or not. But
he cannot keep telling us, “The Charter is a wonderful

“The recent declaration by the Zionist regime
regarding. the status of Jerusalem is a.:grave step
away, from peace, and towards further violence and
18

gives us cause to reiterate our position and our
request for the guarantee and existence of the
Orthodox Jewish community in the Holy Land.”

sterile resolutions of-the Security Council and of the
GeneralAssembly. Like those resolutions, it does not
serve the cause of peace, nor does it address itself to
the genuine concerns with regard to Jerusalem and its
residents. Instead, it is yet another manifestation of the
outright capitulation to those countries that manipulate
the Council in their relentless and implacable warfare
against Israel.

Another paragraph states:
“The Zionist State has usurped without any justification the holy name of Israel. Torah true Jews
wish to iive in peace and harmonyswith their neighbours and with the community of nations and
deplore the policies carried out by those who misuse
the name of Israel.”

199. In this connection, it is certainly regrettable that
the representative of Egypt should have seen fit to use
this occasion for the purpose of making a series of
assertions and aspersions that were not only extraneous to the subject matter ostensibly before us, but
also contained unsubstantiated and empty charges
against my country in an attempt to justify various
actions by Egypt that are not compatible with the
Ietter and spirit of the Camp David framework
accord. The representative of Egypt knows full well
the motives of the initiators of this debate. He also
knows that the cause of peace in the Middle East
can only be promoted elsewhere, in accordance with
the provisions of the Camp David framework accord
for peace in the Middle East, which to date has proved
the only viable approach to peace in our region.

193. I fully agree with them. We Palestinians want
to live in peace on an equal basis, with the same equal
rights and equal responstbilities. That is why our distant
aim is to establish and live in a democratic State-all
of us-without discrimination. It will not beJudenrein,
it will not be a Judenreich, it will not be a Judensruar.
It will be a country in which human beings live.
194. The PLO, at the meeting of its National Council, had considered the approach adopted by the
General Assembly for a comprehensive peace to be
a constructive approach, conducive to peace. It did hail
the joint statement made on 1 October 1977 by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Secretary of State of the
United States of America in their capacities as CoChairmen of the Peace Conference on the Middle East,
but the Camp David accords and the Camp David
approach were maliciously aimed at torpedoing those
attempts at a comprehensive settlement conducive to
peace in the area.

200. Israel fully adheres to that framework and is
carrying out faithfully its obligations under it. Israel
trusts that Egypt will wish equally to do so and carry
out its obligations in good faith.
201. The Council can no doubt adopt whatever resolutions it likes and for whatever reasons it chooses. The
fact remains that such resolutions cannot and, will not
further the cause of peace, nor are they calculated to
further that cause. But whatever their purpose, they
cannot and will not alter the fundamental reality that
united Jerusalem has been and will remain the capital
of Israel.

195. Finally, I wish to register our gratitude to the
Governments of Venezuela, Ecuador, Colombia and
Uruguay for having at long last decided that their
missions should not be in Jerusalem and that they
should not flout the decisions and the consensus of
the international community. We trust that, in accordance with the resolution just adopted, the other embassies in Jerusalem will also move out.

202. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Egypt
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

196. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel
has asked to speak. I now call on him.

203. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): The representative of Israel has referred to parts of the statement
that I delivered a short while ago.

197. Mr. BLUM (Israel): In my statement earlier, in
what passed for the reasoned deliberations of the
Council, I observed that the atmosphere of utter bias
against Israel prevailing at the United Nations is not
compatible with the balanced. and reasoned approach
required in any discussion of the Council. The outcome
of this-perfunctory debate fully proves my point.

204. First of all, let me say that we are respecting
the Camp David agreement, but what has been done by
Israel is, in our opinion, a violation of it. I think he
should be the last to talk about respect for the Camp
David agreement. His country is continuing to build
illegal settlements in the occupied territories, to enact
legislation to ‘annex Arab Jerusalem, and to expel
elected offtcials. We shall continue to maintain our
respect for the agreement that we have signed and
Egypt will always stand for international legitimacy.

198. The resolution adopted.here today is again-and
not unexpectedly- one-sided, unbalanced, biased,
hostile, tainted and fundamentally flawed. It reflects
once again the well-known obsession and. fixation
that many States-in this Organization have consistently
displayed in their approach towards my country. It
comes in the wake of a tong series of prejudiced and

205: It is from that position that I have made the
attitude of my Government crystal clear, and I hope
19

that the messagi has been received by Israel. I hope,

too, that the representative of Israel will not expect
Egypt to stand idle in the face of provocation and what
we consider violations of the spirit of the Camp David
&eement. We shall take what measures we consider
necessary to translate our respect into practice.
Let me also explain very clearly that no one,
no Government or country, should be under the
illusion that Egypt’s national interests differ from those
of the Arab people and the Moslem nation. I say loud
and clear: they are one and the same. As it .?XMdone
in war, in peace Egypt wili fulfil its historical task of
206.

safeguarding and enhancing the legitimate interests and
aspirations of the Arab people.
The meeting

rose at 7.05 p.m.
NOTES

1 United Nations, TreatySeries,vol. 75, p. 287.

* O#kia/ Recordsof :he GeneralAssembly.SeventhEmergency
SpeciatSewton,8th meeting.
s PapersRehNingto the ForeignRelationsof the united Stares.
7he Parts PeaceCortf4rence1919,vol. X11, Washington, United
States Government Printin

Office. 1947.

.-.

:.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may bc obtained from bookstores and diitriiutors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Scction. New York or Gcnwa.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Lcs publications
dcs Nations Units sent en vcnte dans lcs librairks ct ks apnccs d&ositaifcs
du
mondc cntier. Informcz-vous
oupr&s dc votrc librairc ou drcsscz-vous
A: Nations Units. Section
dcs venta. New York ou Gcnhs.
KAK

HOXYPHTh

HiiAAHHZI

OP~‘AHH3Al~HH

OIl%EJIHHEHHSdX

HANHR

&iWI4RHR
0pr4W434UrlH
~‘be~UXeRRblX
H4"xk
YOXISO
ICyflHTb
4 8UlRI((llbIX
Y4l-4JHXIX
H 4FCXTCt44X
no BCCX paftoxax
Papa.
Hano~uTe
CnpsaKK
06 H3Jt4lfIIIX
B
namex
KIIIWCROY
~araswte
REX nsftuflre
no r~pecy:Opranws4qH4
06aexHnerrHbrx
HasuR.Cenuun
nonpo~~e~3~4~UR.Hb~)-Rop~~n~)Kexena.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE WS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

LX publiicioncs
dc las Nacioncs Unidas estin en vcnta en bircrlas y casas diitribuidoms
en
todat parks dcl mundo.
Consu!tc a su Ebrcro o dirtjase a: Nacioncs Unidas,Sccci6n
dc Vcntas.
Nueva York o Gincbra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

oom

8341462-september 1986-2.050
