S/2012/45

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 January 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 18 January 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
It will be recalled that during the open debate on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
held in the Security Council on 19 October 2011, I informed of my intention to
dispatch a mission to the Gulf of Guinea to assess the scope of the threat of piracy
in the region, and take stock of national and regional capacities to ensure maritime
safety and security in the region and make recommendations for a possible United
Nations response. I also advised that when I received the report of the mission, I
would submit it to the Council. In that regard, I have the honour to share the report
of the mission, submitted to me upon completion of its work (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-20808 (E) 200112

*1220808*

S/2012/45

Report of the United Nations assessment mission on piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea (7 to 24 November 2011)

I. Introduction
1.
In a request to the Secretary-General dated 27 July 2011, President Boni Yayi
of Benin appealed for assistance from the international community to fight piracy in
his country and throughout the Gulf of Guinea. The President pointed out the
negative consequences of piracy and drug trafficking on the economy of Benin, and
called upon the United Nations to consider the possibility of establishing a
mechanism to combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea similar to the anti-piracy regime
currently in place off the coast of Somalia. In response, the Secretary-General
decided to deploy a United Nations multidisciplinary mission to assess the scope of
the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and to make recommendations on possible
measures the United Nations and the international community as a whole could
implement to respond in an effective manner to the dangers posed by that threat. It
should be noted that President Yayi had written earlier, on 9 June 2009, to the
United Nations to request the assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) to help Benin formulate a national integrated programme to fight
drug trafficking and organized crime in the country.
2.
Following President Yayi’s request to the Secretary-General, the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, briefed the Security Council
on 23 August 2011 on the issue of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and announced the
intention of the Secretary-General to deploy an assessment mission to the region.
Subsequently, on 31 August, the President of the Security Council issued a press
statement expressing concern over the growing threat of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea and underlining the need for regional coordination and leadership in
developing a comprehensive strategy to address it.
3.
On 19 October, during an open debate in the Security Council on the matter
“Peace and security in Africa: piracy in the Gulf of Guinea”, convened by Nigeria in
its capacity as President of the Security Council, the Secretary-General confirmed
his intention to dispatch an assessment mission to the region and appealed to the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to work together to develop a
comprehensive and integrated regional anti-piracy strategy for the Gulf of Guinea,
in close cooperation with the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Maritime
Organization of West and Central Africa (MOWCA). He also encouraged them to
build on the existing memorandum of understanding on the establishment of a
subregional integrated coastguard network in West and Central Africa developed by
MOWCA and the International Maritime Organization (IMO). The ECOWAS
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission Deputy Executive Secretary for Political Affairs also made statements
highlighting the key initiatives being taken by their respective organizations to
counter piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. Nigeria stressed the devastating effect of
piracy on maritime navigation and on the economies of the countries in the region,
and underlined that the fight against piracy was a collective responsibility. For his
part, the Permanent Representative of Benin to the United Nations stressed that if
piracy was not addressed properly, it could jeopardize socio-economic development
and foreign investment in the region.

2

12-20808

S/2012/45

4.
Following its debate on 19 October, the Security Council, on 31 October,
adopted its first ever resolution on the issue of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. In
resolution 2018 (2011) the Council expressed deep concern about the threat posed
by piracy and armed robbery to international navigation, security and the economic
development of States in the Gulf of Guinea region, and welcomed the intention of
the Secretary-General to deploy a United Nations assessment mission to the region,
as well as the intention of regional leaders to convene a summit to consider a
comprehensive response to the piracy threat in the Gulf of Guinea. The Council also
indicated that it looked forward to receiving the recommendations of the assessment
mission deployed by the Secretary-General.

II. Background
5.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is not a new phenomenon. Since the late 1990s,
the region has been facing acts of piracy targeting high-value assets, particularly oil
shipments. However, since 2010, incidents of piracy and armed robbery in the area
have risen significantly, making the region the second most acute piracy problem on
the African continent. In its 2010 annual report, IMO listed the West African coast
among the top six piracy hotspots in the world. According to IMO, 58 attacks were
reported in the region during the first 10 months of 2011, as opposed to 45 in 2010.
Twenty-one of the reported attacks in 2011 occurred off the coast of Benin, 14 off
the coast of Nigeria, 7 off the coast of Togo, 4 off the coasts of the Democratic
Republic of Congo, the Republic of Congo and Guinea, 2 off the coast of Ghana and
1 off the coasts of Angola and Côte d’Ivoire. In 2010, while Nigeria reported
25 attacks, Guinea 6, Cameroon 5, Côte d’Ivoire 4, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo 3, and Congo and Liberia 1, respectively; Angola, Benin, Ghana and Togo
did not report a single attack. As a result of robust anti-piracy operations launched
by Nigeria, one of the main targets of pirates, the problem has moved to more
vulnerable countries, such as neighbouring Benin, whose port of Cotonou is located
19 nautical miles from the Nigerian coastal border.

III. Assessment mission
6.
The assessment mission conducted its work from 7 to 24 November in Benin
and Nigeria, under the co-leadership of the Director of the Africa II Division of the
Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, Sammy Kum Buo,
and the UNODC Representative in Nigeria, Mariam Sissoko. Mr. Buo led the
mission during its visit to Gabon and Angola. Other participants included
representatives of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, IMO, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Office in Central
Africa (UNOCA) and the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA). The
main objectives of the mission were: (a) to assist the Government of Benin in the
formulation of a national integrated programme to address drug trafficking,
organized crime and piracy; and (b) to assess the scope of the threat of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea region and explore possible options for an effective United Nations
response.

12-20808

3

S/2012/45

IV. Work of the assessment mission in Benin
7.
In Benin, the mission met with a broad cross-section of national interlocutors,
including President Yayi, other senior Government officials and representatives
from the country’s army, police, navy, port and judiciary institutions, as well as
international partners, including the European Union and members of the diplomatic
corps. Representatives of the mission also participated in a seminar on the theme
“Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea”, with specific focus on Benin, Ghana and
Togo, which was held in Cotonou from 8 to 10 November and was organized by
France under the auspices of the President of Benin.
Scope of the threat of piracy in Benin
8.
Benin is one of the most vulnerable countries affected by piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. As mentioned in paragraph 5, 21 pirate attacks in the waters off Benin were
reported in 2011, as compared with none in 2010 and 1 in 2009. The majority of
attacks occur at night and target oil and chemical vessels that are stationary while
conducting ship-to-ship transfer operations, usually at a distance of over 40 nautical
miles offshore. The attacks are therefore not seen as isolated or opportunistic, but
rather as systematic and organized.
9.
In the face of the growing number of attacks, Benin lacks the capacity to
effectively deter or pursue attackers. The mission was informed that the pirates
generally utilize faster boats and more advanced equipment during these attacks
than those operated by the Benin navy. It is unlikely that the pilfered fuel, which
subsequently resurfaces on the black market in the main ports along the Gulf of
Guinea, is being stolen and distributed without the collusion of officials at the ports.
In this regard, several Benin officials acknowledged that corruption at the Port of
Cotonou is likely, and that the attacks could not occur without the complicity of
Benin nationals operating on land.
10. Both national and international interlocutors expressed the view that criminal
organizations operating from neighbouring countries are behind many of the pirate
attacks. In particular, they asserted that the crackdown by the Government of
Nigeria on piracy and oil bunkering off its shores had led criminal organizations
operating in Nigerian waters to shift their operations to the waters of Benin.
According to IMO, the number of pirate attacks off the coast of Nigeria decreased
from 48 in 2007 to 25 in 2010 and 14 in 2011.
Impact of piracy on the economy of Benin
11. The economy of Benin is heavily reliant on service and transit fees from the
Port of Cotonou, as well as on cotton exports, for national revenue. It is a lowincome country with a per capita income of $680 in 2010, and a ranking of 167 out
of 183 countries in the 2011 UNDP Human Development Index. Revenue from
activities at the port account for 70 per cent of the national gross domestic product
and 80 per cent of national fiscal revenue. The Port of Cotonou also handles an
estimated 90 per cent of the country’s trade with foreign countries. Owing to the
recent escalation in pirate attacks off the coast of Benin, in August 2011, the
London-based marine insurers’ group — the Joint War Committee — added Benin
to the list of high-risk countries, leading to increased insurance rates for vessels
operating in Benin’s waters. As a result, the number of ships entering the Port of

4

12-20808

S/2012/45

Cotonou has declined by 70 per cent. Statistics of the National Shippers’ Council of
Benin show that tonnage at the port has fallen to less than 6 million tons in 2011, as
opposed to an average annual tonnage of 7 million. This will result in an estimated
loss of $81 million in customs revenue in 2011. In addition, the country is also
experiencing a monthly loss of $1 million in its fishing sector.
12. The decline in revenue is affecting the ability of the State to function in the
short term, and is hampering its efforts to consolidate democratic governance,
implement socio-economic development programmes, institute reforms and attract
foreign investments in the exploration and exploitation of Benin’s offshore oil and
gas reserves. It is also affecting Benin’s trade and economic activities with
neighbouring countries, in particular landlocked States, including Burkina Faso,
Mali and Niger. As one of the major transit ports servicing these landlocked States,
the decline in maritime activity in the Port of Cotonou also affects the economic
activities of these States.
Legal framework
13. The Government of Benin is a signatory to a number of international
conventions, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, the International Ship and
Port Facility Security Code, the Convention on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and the Convention on Facilitation of
International Maritime Traffic. However, it is not a signatory to the International
Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue. Like other West and Central African
States, Benin has committed to implementing applicable IMO Conventions, as well
as the IMO/MOWCA memorandum of understanding.
14. The mission assessed that the country’s legal framework needs to be reformed
to effectively address the threat of piracy. First, the definition of the crime of piracy
is outdated and is not consistent with the definition of piracy under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. For example, in two recent piracy cases
reported by the Benin authorities, suspected pirates were charged with generic
offences, such as armed robbery, premeditated murder and conspiracy. Further,
unless other modes of liability, such as conspiracy, are not criminalized, the
potential for combating piracy and other forms of organized crime will remain
extremely limited. In addition, the universal jurisdiction provided for under the
Convention with respect to the arrest and the prosecution of pirates is not
incorporated in Benin’s Maritime Code. As a result, Benin’s jurisdiction on piracy
acts committed on the high seas is limited to acts committed by its citizens or on
board of Benin’s ships. In addition, while the national Maritime Code contains rules
for the investigation of offences committed at sea by various national authorities and
the handling of suspects arrested at sea, it needs to be updated and streamlined.
National efforts to combat piracy in Benin
15. In addition to recent intensive diplomatic démarches undertaken by President
Yayi to seek regional and international assistance to combat piracy in Benin,
national authorities have implemented several other initiatives to address the threat.
As a first step, the Government has invested in the purchase of military, maritime
and aviation assets to enhance its maritime security capabilities. It has purchased
three new patrol boats and two new surveillance aircraft to supplement the two

12-20808

5

S/2012/45

small in-shore boats currently being used by the navy for patrols. The new vessels,
which are due to be delivered to Benin by an overseas manufacturer in the first
quarter of 2012, will enable the navy to conduct patrols in the exclusive economic
zone. The Ministry of Finance has taken steps to ensure that the national budget
covers the cost of maintenance of these assets. In addition, Benin’s maritime
surveillance system is being enhanced by the installation of two coastal radar
systems that will provide coverage of ship movements within Benin’s waters.
Arrangements have also been put in place for ships conducting ship-to-ship cargo
transfer operations to do so in a designated safe area close to the shore, under the
protection of the Benin navy.
16. The Government has established two national coordination mechanisms to
address maritime security issues: the National Council at the ministerial level and
the Technical Committee at the operational level. At the time of the mission visit,
the National Council, which is expected to develop a national maritime security
policy, had not convened its first meeting. While the Technical Committee has
begun to meet, albeit on an irregular basis, departmental representation has not been
consistent, making it challenging for this mechanism to develop a national policy,
clarify the roles and responsibilities of participating departments and agencies, and
encourage a cooperative approach to maritime law enforcement.
17. Though still in the initial stage, the actions taken by the Government are
bearing some fruit. So far, eight abandoned ships off the coast of Benin, which were
occasionally used as bases by pirates, have been destroyed. In addition, the
authorities are currently carrying out investigations in relation to nine individuals
who have been arrested and detained in connection with armed attacks in Benin’s
coastal waters.
Regional efforts to help combat piracy in Benin
18. As a result of President Yayi’s diplomatic campaign to mobilize regional
support, an agreement was reached with President Goodluck Jonathan of Nigeria,
which led to Benin and Nigeria commencing a six-month joint patrol programme
along Benin’s coast, which began on 28 September 2011. The programme, known as
Operation Prosperity, is being conducted under Nigeria’s tactical command and
Benin’s operational command. Ninety-five per cent of the logistical support for the
joint operation is being provided by Nigeria, including in particular two helicopters,
two maritime vessels and two interceptor boats, while Benin contributes two
“Defender” boats, which have been provided by the Government of the United
States of America. Benin’s contribution to the operation is estimated at
CFA 234,347,490 per month (about $466,000), which is equivalent to 5 per cent of
the total cost of the operation. Since Benin and Nigeria started Operation Prosperity,
the number of successful pirate attacks has fallen. In October, two large tanker ships
suspected of carrying out illegal ship-to-ship operations were captured and handed
over to Benin authorities, while three fishing vessels and a tanker were rescued from
attempted pirate attacks. On 1 November, two more vessels engaged in illegal shipto-ship operations were also captured and handed over to the authorities.
19. Notwithstanding its success, the joint operation faces major constraints,
including the absence of logistical support facilities for vessels being used to
conduct patrols. As a result, the Nigerian vessels participating in the operation must
sail to Lagos for refuelling and repairs. The high operating costs also constitute a

6

12-20808

S/2012/45

big challenge. To ensure the sustainability of these joint patrols, adequate facilities
will need to be constructed in Cotonou to support refuelling, maintenance and
storage of supplies used in the joint operations. The joint programme will be
reviewed by both countries at the end of its six-month term, in March 2012, with a
view to deciding whether the arrangement will continue. Given the limited capacity
of Benin to singularly prevent pirate attacks in the country’s waters, the
discontinuation of these patrols beyond March 2012 could severely undermine the
maritime security of the country.
International measures to support anti-piracy efforts in Benin
20. In addition to requesting the support of the United Nations, President Yayi also
wrote to several Member States to seek assistance in addressing the threat of piracy
along the coast of Benin. The responses, including from Belgium, China, France and
the United States, have been very encouraging. Some international partners are
already providing technical support or have committed to bilateral programmes with
Benin in support of its maritime security strategy. The Government of France is
funding a three-year project referred to as the “Priority Solidarity Fund: support to
the reform of maritime security sector in the Gulf of Guinea”. The project, which
will cost an estimated $1 million, is aimed at building the capacity of the national
security forces of Benin, Ghana and Togo to enable them to provide effective
maritime security. The Government of China has also agreed to fund the purchase of
a ship, while the Government of the United States has pledged $300,000 to help
with the development of a national maritime strategy. In addition, at the time of the
mission visit, Australia and the United States also pledged to deploy assessment
missions to Benin.
21. The European Union is also a key partner in the fight against piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea through the implementation of a programme on maritime piracy, of
which Benin and other West and Central African countries are beneficiaries. The
programme, which was launched in November 2010, focuses, inter alia, on maritime
security and safety, maritime information-sharing and enhancing the operational
capacity of coastguards and law enforcement agencies.
Recommendations to combat piracy in Benin
22.

Following are recommendations to combat piracy in Benin:

For the Government of Benin:
(a)

Adopt a national maritime security strategy;

(b) Establish an interdepartmental national maritime security committee,
comprised of national agencies and ministries responsible for maritime safety and
security, including, inter alia, transport, maritime, port, police, navy, gendarmerie,
customs, finance, border control, fisheries, energy, foreign affairs and the interior, to
implement the national maritime security strategy. The committee would serve as
the main national interlocutor on issues related to maritime security, including for
building partnership with international stakeholders;
(c) Adopt a united front with neighbouring coastal countries to prevent
pirates from shifting from one port to another;

12-20808

7

S/2012/45

(d) Accede to the 1979 International Convention on Maritime Search and
Rescue and the 2005 Protocols to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and develop enabling legislation to
bring these Conventions into national law;
(e) Undertake a thorough review of the legal framework in the country to
enable it to effectively prosecute piracy and armed robbery at sea, and to counter
unlawful acts against the security of maritime navigation, port facilities and offshore
platforms;
(f) Develop a strategic communication plan to sensitize and educate the
public about maritime policies and raise maritime awareness;
(g) Develop land-based patrolling, surveillance and information-gathering
systems to further enhance maritime security, including by developing a “water/
waterside” watch programme; promoting public outreach programmes to encourage
port workers, fishermen, waterfront communities and seafarers to observe, record
and report to coastguards and law enforcement authorities; and developing an
information-sharing culture and framework for data collection, analysis and
dissemination;
(h) Ensure that standard operating procedures for ships conducting ship-toship operations in waters off the coast of Benin are developed and promulgated to
shipping industry organizations and IMO;
(i) Make use of the system, tools and services of the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL), utilize existing networks and coordinate with
international bodies to support law enforcement with respect to crimes committed at
sea;
(j) Provide training for members of the judicial system, including
magistrates and prosecutors, on maritime law enforcement issues, in coordination
with the navy and the Maritime Authority;
(k) Strengthen the judiciary, through the provision of assistance to
prosecutors and courts, on aspects of maritime law enforcement, focusing on crimes
such as piracy, drug trafficking, human trafficking, the dumping of waste, illegal
and unregulated fishing and small arms trafficking;
(l) Develop a national maritime security plan that sets out current
capabilities, identifies gaps, outlines future requirements for maritime security
sector governance and reform, and provides justification for continued investment in
maritime security;
For international partners:
(a) Provide funding and support to ensure the presence of adequate patrols
off the coast of Benin, for example, through the continuation of the Nigerian/Benin
joint maritime patrols, pending the operationalization of an effective national
maritime security force;
(b) As an immediate step, contribute funds for the purchase by Benin of
naval vessels and aircraft, or donate supporting infrastructure, radar systems and
other equipment, as well as assist with capacity-building to enhance the maritime
security capabilities of Benin;

8

12-20808

S/2012/45

(c) Over the long term, provide assistance with information-sharing and
capacity-building to strengthen the maritime security sector of Benin and to enable
national security institutions, especially the navy and air force of Benin, to conduct
more effective patrols and maritime surveillance;
For the United Nations:
(a) Assist in coordinating international assistance to support the efforts of
Benin to combat the threat of piracy;
(b) Provide technical assistance to Benin in developing enabling legislation
to bring international maritime instruments into national law;
(c) Assist national authorities in developing a national integrated programme
to fight piracy, drug trafficking and organized crime;
(d) Assist Benin and other MOWCA member States to implement the
memorandum of understanding on the establishment of a subregional integrated
coastguard network in West and Central Africa.
Scope of drug trafficking and transnational organized crime in Benin
23. Benin has become a major port of embarkation for drug couriers and for the
trans-shipment of large quantities of cocaine and heroin from South America to
Europe. In April and June 2011, authorities seized a shipment of 200 kg of heroin
and 450 kg of cocaine, respectively, in the Cotonou Port. In addition, 200 kg of
heroin and 500 kg of cocaine destined for Benin were seized in Pakistan and
Colombia in April and May 2011, respectively. Cannabis is locally cultivated and
consumed or exported to Nigeria for further processing. In addition, amphetaminetype stimulants, originating in Asia and Nigeria, are also widely trafficked and
consumed in Benin. Trafficking in counterfeit medicine is also prevalent.
24. Transnational organized crime networks are especially active in the areas of oil
bunkering and trafficking in cocaine, children, counterfeit medicines and cigarettes.
Illicit trafficking operations involving alcohol, cement and cars are also on the rise.
Several factors make Benin a soft target for traffickers, including limited law
enforcement capacity, porous borders and Benin’s role as a major import-export
hub.
25. Child trafficking is widespread and fuelled by the poverty of rural families.
Children are taken to work for little or no salaries in shops or fields in foreign
countries. Cases of child trafficking for prostitution or pedo-pornography have also
been reported. Trafficking in petroleum has generated an underground industry that
thrives on the purchase and sale of smuggled fuel. Attempts by the authorities to
tackle this issue in August 2008 resulted in violent clashes with the police.
According to local estimates, 80 per cent of the petroleum sold in Benin is
smuggled, which has led to the closure of many lawful petrol stations, which cannot
profitably compete against the illegal operators.
26. There is an increasing incidence of armed robberies against businesses and
banks and theft of luxury vehicles. The mission was informed that bandits have also
successfully targeted Government payroll convoys. The proliferation of small arms
was reported to be on the rise since the summer of 2011.

12-20808

9

S/2012/45

27. Benin’s 1,989 km of land borders with Togo, Burkina Faso, Niger and Nigeria
and 121 km of coastline on the Gulf of Guinea are very difficult to secure. Lagoons
and rivers, which are sometimes used by criminals in speedboats, have also proven
to be difficult to police and control. Moreover, the major road connecting Lagos to
Accra is frequently used for criminal activities.
28. The European Union is funding the development by INTERPOL of a police
information system for Benin and Ghana. Under this system, a single database on
organized crime will be created and made available to all 15 West African States.
Legal framework to fight drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
in Benin
29. Benin is a party to major international conventions related to drugs and crime,
including the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances of 1971, the United Nations Convention against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations
Convention against Corruption. It is also a party to several anti-terrorism protocols.
Moreover, the country has enacted several laws to fight particular forms of
organized crime, including Law No. 97-025 dated 18 July 1997, on drug and
precursors control; Law No. 2006-14 dated 31 October 2006, on money-laundering
prevention, detection and criminalization; Law No. 2011-20 dated 30 August 2011,
on corruption and Law No. 2006-04 dated 10 April 2006, on child trafficking. The
country also has law enforcement units that specialize in the investigation of drug
trafficking and child trafficking and a financial intelligence unit that focuses on the
detection and the prevention of money-laundering.
30. However, the overall legal framework and justice system in the country need
to be reviewed and reformed. In particular, the Penal Code of Benin and the 1967
Code of Criminal Procedure are both outdated. The mission was informed that
revised draft texts had been submitted to the National Assembly but were yet to be
examined. The implementation of national legislation and international legal
assistance instruments is very limited. For example, anti-corruption and anti-moneylaundering laws exist but are rarely enforced. In addition, law enforcement agencies
and the judiciary experience difficulties in conducting investigations owing to
several factors, including lack of personnel, resources and equipment, inadequate
training, limited law enforcement capacity and the absence of inter-agency
coordination, especially among the security forces.
Recommendations to fight drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
in Benin
31. Following are recommendations to fight drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime in Benin:
For the Government of Benin:
(a) Review and replace the Penal Code and 1967 Code of Criminal
Procedure, which are outdated;

10

12-20808

S/2012/45

(b) Strengthen State institutions to enable proper functioning of criminal
justice and law enforcement systems, in particular, by providing support to the
different law enforcement agencies;
(c) Provide special assistance to airport and maritime security units to
enhance their ability to interdict smuggling, drug trafficking and other organized
crime operations;
(d) Create and train specialized judicial police entities charged with the
responsibility of combating illicit trafficking and organized crime;
(e) Provide equipment to facilitate surveillance and strengthen forensic
capacity;
For the United Nations:
Assist national authorities to develop a national integrated programme to fight
drug trafficking and organized crime, including piracy.

V. Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
32. After Benin, the assessment mission travelled to Nigeria from 18 to
19 November, Gabon from 20 to 22 November and Angola from 23 to 24 November
to meet with ECOWAS, ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission, respectively,
as well as with national authorities in the three countries. The discussions focused
on an assessment of the scope of the piracy threat in the region and the exploration
of possible options at the regional and international levels to respond to it.
Scope of the threat of piracy in the region
33. The Gulf of Guinea is a geographical area that stretches from Guinea in the
north-western part of the African continent to Angola in the south-central part of the
continent. The region is a growing source of oil, cocoa and minerals. Collectively,
Gulf of Guinea countries produce more than 5 million barrels of oil per day and
more than three quarters of the world supply of cocoa. The region is also rich in
minerals, including bauxite in Guinea, gold in Ghana and unexploited resources
such as iron ore in Liberia and other countries.
34. No country in the region appears to have the capacity to tackle maritime
insecurity alone, with many pirate attacks occurring beyond national territorial
waters and reaching into the exclusive economic zones. Despite the crucial role of
Nigeria in helping one of the most vulnerable countries, Benin, through joint
maritime patrols, a wider approach is needed. Piracy does not only concern littoral
States, but also hinterland and landlocked countries, which depend on the sea for
exports and imports. It is estimated that piracy currently results in an annual loss of
$2 billion to the economy of the West African subregion.
35. Pirates in the Central African part of the Gulf of Guinea mainly target both oil
drilling platforms and ships, with the intention of seizing money, radio equipment
and goods from the crew and the passengers. On some occasions, hostages are taken
for ransom. On the other hand, attacks in the West African subregion generally
occur during ship-to-ship transfer operations, with a view to stealing oil cargo and
other high-value assets. While West African States have just started to seek ways

12-20808

11

S/2012/45

and means to address the piracy threat at the regional level, the coastal Central
African States, most of which are oil-producers, have already begun to organize a
coordinated anti-piracy response.
IMO/Maritime Organization of West and Central Africa memorandum
of understanding
36. In October 2006, IMO and MOWCA convened a meeting in Dakar, in order to
discuss the establishment of a system whereby the various national entities
responsible for carrying out “coast guard functions” could cooperate both
domestically and regionally for the benefit of West and Central Africa as a whole.
That led to the development of the memorandum of understanding on the
establishment of a subregional integrated coastguard network in West and Central
Africa (the IMO/MOWCA memorandum of understanding) adopted in July 2008,
which has been signed by 15 coastal States from the region. The memorandum of
understanding aims at enhancing maritime safety, security and law enforcement
throughout the region and forms the basis of the maritime security strategy within
the African Maritime Transport Charter adopted by the African Union in Durban in
October 2009. It also serves as the basis for national and regional action plans to be
developed by regional States for the implementation of the integrated coastguard
function network.
Central African subregional anti-piracy efforts
37. In addition to becoming signatories to the IMO/MOWCA memorandum of
understanding, Central African countries have joined together under the umbrella of
ECCAS to take collective steps to fight piracy. Despite being underresourced, they
have developed a comprehensive joint maritime security architecture that could
serve as a good model for the entire Gulf of Guinea region.
38. The ECCAS strategy on maritime security was developed at the request, on
26 February 2008, of the Council of Ministers of the ECCAS Council for Peace and
Security. The strategy is built on six pillars, including (i) information management;
(ii) community surveillance through the detection and the sharing of assets; (iii) the
legal and functional harmonization of States’ action at sea; (iv) self-financing,
through a community tax; (v) logistics; and (vi) the institutionalization of a
maritime conference for Central Africa. In October 2009, the ECCAS Committee of
Chiefs of Defence Staff adopted a Protocol that provided for the establishment of a
subregional maritime security centre and committed ECCAS member States to the
conduct of maritime operations against piracy. That led to the establishment of the
Regional Centre for Maritime Security in Central Africa (CRESMAC), which is
located in Pointe-Noire, Congo.
39. In implementing its maritime security strategy, ECCAS has divided its
maritime space into three zones: A, B and D. Zone A includes Angola and the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Zone B consists of Angola, Congo and Gabon, and
Zone D covers Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe.
Each of the zones is supervised by a multinational coordination centre and all three
centres are under the command of CRESMAC. Zone D was the first to be activated,
in response to recurring violent pirate attacks in the area since 2006. Joint
surveillance patrols started in that Zone in September 2009. In April 2010, the
ECCAS Council for Peace and Security adopted a funding mechanism that provides

12

12-20808

S/2012/45

for countries in each zone to pool their maritime taxes into a single community tax
for maritime security. In the same vein, Angola, Cameroon, Congo, Equatorial
Guinea and Gabon have also made available their military centres for regional
maritime training.
40. According to ECCAS, the implementation of the strategy in Zone D has
yielded positive results after two years of activity, leading to the stabilization of the
security situation in that zone. There has been a significant decline in piracy activity
in the area, although casual intrusions continue in Cameroon waters and sometimes
onshore. There has also been a decrease in illegal fishing and smuggling in the area.
As a result of the progress it has made in combating piracy, ECCAS proposed to the
mission that the Central Africa subregion should host the proposed joint regional
summit of Gulf of Guinea States on piracy.
41. Notwithstanding these gains, the mission was informed that individual Central
African States were finding it increasingly difficult to continue to finance and
support naval operations on their own, pending the operationalization of
CRESMAC. Accordingly, the need was expressed for substantial assistance to be
provided to regional States and the various coordinating structures already set up in
the subregion, in particular CRESMAC and the multinational coordination centres,
to assist in the effective implementation of the ECCAS maritime security strategy.
42. Gabon, which hosts the ECCAS headquarters, stressed the benefits of regional
cooperation in the anti-piracy field, while highlighting its own national efforts. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon, Paul Toungui, explained that the decision of
the Government to make maritime security the theme of the celebration of Gabon’s
fifty-first anniversary of independence in August 2011 reflected Gabon’s resolve to
continue to combat piracy and to enhance the protection and security of its
coastline.
West African subregional anti-piracy efforts
43. West African States are signatories to the IMO/MOWCA memorandum of
understanding, and the subregion has recently begun to take concrete, preparatory
steps towards building a joint maritime security approach, through ECOWAS. While
the discussion on piracy was initiated at the meeting of the ECOWAS Committee of
Chiefs of Defence Staff held in Cotonou in April 2010, it was only at its January
2011 meeting that a recommendation was made to the ECOWAS Commission to
develop a regional maritime security governance concept. By the time the 15 Chiefs
of Defence Staff and Heads of Navies gathered for the Committee of Chiefs of
Defence Staff meeting in October 2011, piracy and related maritime security issues
along the West African coast had become a significant threat to several Member
States, particularly Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria and Togo. As a
result, a decision was taken by the Committee to task its subcommittee on maritime
security with making recommendations for the development of an integrated
maritime security strategy and an integrated maritime plan.
44. These draft documents will be reviewed by experts on maritime security of
ECOWAS member States before being presented to the ECOWAS Mediation and
Security Council, which is comprised of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and of
Defence and Internal Security. The documents will then be presented to the next
ECOWAS summit of Heads of State scheduled for the first quarter of 2012. The
mission was informed that experts from ECOWAS, ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea

12-20808

13

S/2012/45

Commission are scheduled to meet in Benin in February 2012 to discuss maritime
security issues in the Gulf of Guinea ahead of the planned joint regional summit of
West and Central African Heads of State. The mission was also informed that the
draft ECOWAS integrated maritime security strategy aligns its objectives with
relevant existing maritime-related plans, strategies and initiatives, in particular with
applicable African Union resolutions, guidelines and recommendations, such as the
draft African integrated maritime strategy currently under development by the
African Union.
45. On 18 November, the day the mission met with ECOWAS and Nigerian
officials in Abuja, pirates struck the Nigerian coastline again, attacking a United
States oil company ship. During his meeting with the mission, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, Olugbenga Ashiru, stressed the unrelenting
determination of the Government of Nigeria to eliminate the piracy threat from its
coast. To that end, he saw great mutual value in regional cooperation, in order to
deny pirates safe havens anywhere in neighbouring ports or territories. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs informed the mission that, in addition to the ongoing joint
maritime patrols with Benin, Nigeria had also undertaken joint operations with
Cameroon and Chad.
Gulf of Guinea Commission
46. The Gulf of Guinea Commission was created in 2001 in Libreville but only
became operational in March 2007, when its Executive Secretariat was set up in
Luanda. Its membership includes eight States, seven in the Central African
subregion (Angola, Cameroon, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe) and one in West Africa
(Nigeria). The Commission was established in response to the need for a permanent
framework for consultations and negotiations on common threats and challenges in
the region with respect in particular to maritime security. Its mandate includes the
promotion of regional consultations for the prevention, the management and the
resolution of conflicts that may arise from the delimitation of borders and the
economic and commercial exploitation of natural resources within the territorial
boundaries. In the absence of a meeting of its Assembly of Heads of State and
Government during the past three years, the activities of the Commission have been
limited mainly to the day-to-day functioning of its secretariat.
47. The Gulf of Guinea Commission explained to the mission that it could serve as
a bridge between ECOWAS and ECCAS, with a view to harmonizing their policies
and activities in the common Gulf of Guinea region. The Commission also
advocated for adjusting its membership to include all the countries in the Gulf of
Guinea area. The Secretary of State for External Relations of Angola, Manuel
Domingos Augusto, informed the mission that Angola, both in its national capacity
as a country with one of the largest coastal areas in the region and in its capacity as
Chair of the Gulf of Guinea Commission, plans to host a Gulf of Guinea
Commission ministerial meeting and a Gulf of Guinea Commission summit
conference in the near future to press for a more robust role in the fight against
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

14

12-20808

S/2012/45

Maritime Organization of West and Central Africa
48. MOWCA was established to ensure a cost-effective shipping service for
subregional countries focusing on promoting safety and combating pollution. It
unifies 20 West and Central African coastal States and 5 landlocked States. The
coastal member States of MOWCA are Angola, Benin, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mauritania, Nigeria, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo; and the landlocked member
States are Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic, Chad, Mali and Niger. The
overarching decision-making body for MOWCA is the General Assembly of
Ministers of Transport of Member States, meeting at ordinary sessions every two
years and at extraordinary sessions if necessary.
49. Although little mention was made of MOWCA during the mission meetings
with national and regional interlocutors, it should be noted that the organization has
initiated several programmes to strengthen cooperation in the shipping industry, to
tackle issues of vessel and littoral security and to improve maritime policing and the
protection of the environment.
Collective regional concerns
50. In both Central and West Africa, regional interlocutors underscored the need
for implementing African solutions to African problems. While some expressed their
openness to the idea of having foreign warships patrolling in the Gulf of Guinea,
similar to international naval operations off the coast of Somalia, many others
cautioned that a robust international naval response in the Gulf of Guinea would be
a highly controversial issue, especially given broad regional wariness over
perceptions of external interference. It was also felt that the introduction of foreign
warships into the coastal waters of the Gulf of Guinea to prevent potential pirate
attacks might be more destabilizing than helpful if it also attracted criminal or
terrorist attacks targeting the foreign warships.
51. There were repeated calls from various interlocutors for the United Nations to
play a facilitation and coordination role with respect to the issue of piracy. It was
widely agreed that as a neutral intergovernmental body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the United Nations was the ideal
forum to mobilize the leaders, countries and organizations of West and Central
Africa towards a joint maritime security framework for the Gulf of Guinea and,
eventually, to mobilize and coordinate international assistance to support those
regional efforts. It was also widely proposed that the United Nations assist in
ensuring that there would be no duplication of efforts or gaps in addressing the
threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. In particular, matching identified needs with
adequate resources was seen as vital.
52. Some interlocutors stressed that while the United Nations should assist
regional organizations to build capacity, the world body should not itself implement
regional initiatives, which should remain the responsibility of ECOWAS, ECCAS
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. Those regional organizations, the mission was
told, would own the process, while operating under a mandate sanctioned by the
Security Council.

12-20808

15

S/2012/45

53. All interlocutors underscored the importance of ensuring the involvement of
the African Union in any initiative related to maritime security on the continent, as
well as the participation of hinterland countries in any regional maritime security
strategy. In addition, most stressed that any comprehensive maritime security
strategy should go beyond addressing piracy and should encompass policies to
combat the threats of other acts of transnational organized crime, including drug
trafficking, illicit fishing, illicit dumping of toxic waste, and illegal or clandestine
immigration or migration.
Collective regional requirements
Surveillance system
54. Although a joint maritime force arrangement exists within ECCAS, there is no
joint arrangement for effective patrolling and monitoring of the maritime domain for
the whole Gulf of Guinea area. There is no collective surveillance system including
coastal radars covering the Gulf of Guinea coastline, even though some States have
begun installing and operationalizing national coastal radars, notably under the
framework of bilateral defence cooperation programmes with France and the United
States.
Funding
55. The absence of a sustainable process for equipping and funding maritime
security and safety activities hampers the ability of States to operate optimally in
this domain. Such funds could be derived from regular State budgetary
appropriations, contributions from the major stakeholders in the maritime sector or
levies on commercial activities in the maritime environment. The funds could then
be used to procure and sustain maritime security equipment and trained personnel,
or to implement approved capacity-building programmes for the relevant maritime
agencies.
Information-sharing
56. No formal system of information-gathering and exchange exists between
States or organizations in the region. Efficient coordination of inter-agency
activities, including the maritime operations centres, will require the establishment
of common procedures, particularly on joint operations and information-sharing.
Standard operating procedures and joint training programmes on maritime policing
operations will also need to be developed.
Legal framework
57. Most ECOWAS and ECCAS member States do not have adequate legal
frameworks covering actions at sea and policies to address piracy and armed
robbery against ships. It is necessary to consider the enactment of national maritime
legislation to regulate the activities and the areas of cooperation with other
neighbouring States.
Maritime domain awareness
58. The maritime domain is a multidisciplinary sector involving military, civilian
transport, fishing, recreational activities and naval defence interests. Several

16

12-20808

S/2012/45

national administrations in the region, however, appear to have limited awareness of
the full ambit of the maritime domain. As a result, sea challenges are generally
relegated to the military sector, ignoring legitimate civilian interests, in particular
with regard to transport and commerce. Consequently, there is a need to raise
appropriate awareness of the maritime domain in its broadest possible scope, both at
the national and regional levels.
Recommendations to combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
59.

Following are recommendations to combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea:

For regional stakeholders:
(a) The regional summit of Gulf of Guinea Heads of State, called for by
ECCAS, ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission, and supported by the
Security Council in its resolution 2018 (2011), should be convened as early as
possible in 2012, with a view to developing a comprehensive regional strategy to
combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea;
(b) Pending the proposed regional summit, ECCAS, ECOWAS and the Gulf
of Guinea Commission should consider adopting immediate measures to ensure
greater levels of cooperation among them in their efforts to promote maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea, taking into account the provisions of the
IMO/MOWCA memorandum of understanding. In that connection, they should
specifically consider integrating their maritime surveillance, information-gathering
and protection activities, as well as consider joint approaches to shipowners,
insurers and international law enforcement agencies, on matters relating to maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea;
(c) ECOWAS, ECCAS, the Gulf of Guinea Commission, and regional States
should closely coordinate with the African Union on efforts to tackle the threat of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea region;
(d) Awareness of the importance and the relevance of maritime security
should be mainstreamed into the national policies of regional governments and
promoted in public. Governance of the maritime security sector should also be
strengthened in those national policies;
(e) ECOWAS and ECCAS member States should consider initiating and/or
intensifying joint patrols at sea in the Gulf of Guinea;
(f) In order to further enhance maritime security, West and Central African
States should develop land-based patrolling, surveillance and information-gathering
systems, including by developing a “water/waterside” watch programme; promoting
public outreach programmes to encourage port workers, fishermen, waterfront
communities and seafarers to observe, record and report to coastguards and law
enforcement authorities; and developing an information-sharing culture and
framework for data collection, analysis and dissemination;
(g) With respect to ship automatic identification systems, West and Central
African States should conduct needs assessments, including analysis of key choke
points and critical areas, to review existing infrastructure, and to determine what
further equipment and training is required;

12-20808

17

S/2012/45

(h) In order to use long-range identification and tracking of ships data, West
and Central African States should establish a national long-range identification and
tracking data centre or utilize other data centres to meet the International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea regulatory requirements and the
Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue obligations; inform IMO of which data
centre will be used; analyse the cost of port State tracking based on current port
traffic; and consider creating custom polygons in critical areas for coastal State
tracking;
(i) ECOWAS and ECCAS member States should consider taking measures
to build capacities to criminalize acts of piracy and to support the development of
judicial institutions dealing with the issue;
(j) The law enforcement agencies of ECOWAS and ECCAS member States
should consider taking steps to be connected to existing regional and international
networks for combating organized crime, including criminal activities at sea. In
particular, they should consider joining the secure global police communications
system of INTERPOL, referred to as I-24/7, allowing them to share information,
coordinate their activities and access INTERPOL databases;
For international partners:
(a) Provide logistical support to ECOWAS and ECCAS to improve their
capabilities to counter piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, in particular with regard to
infrastructure, radar, communications equipment and training of maritime security
personnel;
(b) Support ECOWAS to set up a joint coordinating centre, similar to the
ECCAS Regional Maritime Security Centre in Pointe-Noire, which would provide
ECOWAS with the capacity to collect and disseminate data related to maritime
security in West Africa;
(c) Provide logistical support for the information-sharing centres to be
established under the IMO/MOWCA memorandum of understanding and the
ECCAS Regional Maritime Centre in Pointe-Noire and for a similar centre for
ECOWAS, once set up, as well as for the three ECCAS multinational coordination
centres based in Angola, Congo and Cameroon;
For the United Nations:
(a) Taking into account relevant activities being carried out by IMO and
other United Nations entities in the region, as well as provisions of Security Council
resolution 2018 (2011), the United Nations should work with ECOWAS, ECCAS
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission to facilitate the earliest possible convening of
the joint regional summit of Heads of State of the three regional organizations to
develop a comprehensive anti-piracy strategy for the Gulf of Guinea. The United
Nations should also assist with preparations for the successful organization of that
summit;
(b) As requested by the three regional organizations, the United Nations
should help mobilize resources to assist in building the national and the regional
capacities, and in coordinating international assistance for maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea, in close consultation with regional States and organizations;

18

12-20808

S/2012/45

(c) IMO should continue to work with Governments, shipowners, insurers
and maritime industry representatives to develop guidance for seafarers in the Gulf
of Guinea;
(d) The United Nations should work with ECCAS, ECOWAS and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission to organize an international donors’ conference to mobilize
resources to acquire and maintain infrastructure and equipment to support maritime
security operations in the region.

VI. Concluding observations
60. The growing incidence of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea constitutes yet another
major threat to the peace, security and economic interests of both coastal and
hinterland States in the region. The consequences of inaction could be catastrophic,
especially for oil-producing countries that are frequently targeted for their highvalue petroleum assets, and countries like Benin, which rely extensively on their
ports for national revenue. Some interlocutors expressed concern over possible
political motivations for some of the pirate attacks that may seek to use piracy as a
weapon to affect political developments in specific regional States.
61. In response to the increase in the number of piracy incidents globally, several
private commercial ship operators are considering employing, or have already
engaged, privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships. This has
implications for coastal States regarding aspects related to the embarkation, the
disembarkation and the carriage of such personnel, as well as their firearms and
security-related equipment, which will need to be discussed at IMO and at the
regional level in order to clarify the positions and policies of States on these issues.
Some interlocutors proposed to the mission that these private companies,
particularly those focused on offshore oil and gas extraction, should be encouraged
to subsidize or offset the costs of maritime security by paying higher licensing and
tax fees into a common maritime security fund.
62. The mission found that all countries in the region are very concerned about the
growing threat of piracy, although the nature and the level of their responses vary.
Some countries have demonstrated political will at the highest level to combat the
threat and have already initiated a number of preventive measures towards that end.
However, the phenomenon of rapidly increasing incidents of piracy caught most
countries in the region unprepared. The authorities in Benin, for instance, mentioned
that, since the Port of Cotonou was inaugurated on 1 August 1965, it was only in
2009 that the first pirate attack was recorded.
63. The mission noted the determination and the resolve of individual regional
States to address the growing threat. It was, however, apparent that their national
and regional capacities varied and were limited overall. As such, the mission
concluded that most countries in the Gulf of Guinea region could not alone prevent
or manage effectively the threat to maritime security in their coastal waters.
Furthermore, even though ECCAS member States had developed and deployed a
relatively comprehensive collective anti-piracy architecture over the past three
years, their commendable efforts were still limited in scope and effectiveness, and
did not cover the entire Gulf of Guinea region.

12-20808

19

S/2012/45

64. The mission concluded that any viable or lasting regional strategy to combat
piracy may also need to take into account the root causes, which drew from high
levels of youth unemployment, wide income disparities within society, the
uncontrolled circulation of illicit weapons and the prevalence of corruption.
65. The joint maritime patrols by Nigeria and Benin represent a model for
inter-State cooperation to combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. The mission,
however, sees this initiative only as a temporary solution. A longer-term strategy
would require a broad synergy of efforts among concerned regional States to prevent
pirates from seeking sanctuary in any country in the Gulf of Guinea from which
they could attack neighbouring States. For such a regional strategy to take effect, the
mission found that substantial assistance from the international community would
be required. In particular, regional States welcomed the support of the United
Nations, especially the dispatch by the Secretary-General of the assessment mission
to the Gulf of Guinea and the adoption of Security Council resolution 2018 (2011).
They called for continued and intensified United Nations engagement to build on
that momentum. Regional States and organizations also highlighted the need for
crucial logistical assets, in particular aircraft and naval boats and ships for
surveillance and patrol purposes. As an immediate first step, it is critical to provide
resources to Nigeria and Benin to maintain their joint patrols pending the adoption
of a more permanent and longer-term arrangement.
66. In addition, it is vital that the United Nations, especially following the
adoption of Security Council resolution 2018 (2011), work with ECCAS, ECOWAS
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission, the three regional organizations engaged in
combating piracy in the Gulf of Guinea region, to convene, as soon as possible, the
joint ECCAS, ECOWAS and Gulf of Guinea Commission summit, welcomed by the
Council as a forum to develop a comprehensive anti-piracy strategy for the region.
67. The United Nations is particularly well placed to play a coordinating role in
this domain. It could in particular encourage regional States to act, mobilize
international support for regional activities and help coordinate international
assistance to ensure that the requirements for an effective anti-piracy strategy and
plan of action for the Gulf of Guinea are met.
68. The mission would like to express its profound appreciation for the support
extended to it by United Nations Resident Coordinators and the respective United
Nations country teams in Benin, Nigeria, Gabon and Angola. Their generous and
collegial assistance contributed immensely to the smooth conduct of the work of the
mission. The mission also extends its gratitude to the ECOWAS Commission, the
ECCAS secretariat, the Executive Secretariat of the Gulf of Guinea Commission and
the Governments of Benin, Nigeria, Gabon and Angola for their cooperation.

20

12-20808
