52

General Assembly-Fifth Session

at their disposal information on the implementation
of the recommendations approved by both bodies in
matters relating to Chapters X[I and XIII of the
Charter,
Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare a list, classified by subjects, of such
resolutions, including in each case the text of the operative part of the document ;
( b) To report to the sixth session of the General
Assemlily on the measures taken by the :\drninistering
Authorities to implement such resolutions, using as
a source the reports of the Trusteeship Council :
( c) If there has been no action on tlw part of an
Administering Authority in respect of any particular
resolution, to set forth the reasons given concerning
that matter.
316th plenary meetin.r;,
2 December 1950.
437 (V).

Educational advancement
Territories

in

Trust

The General Assembly,
Considering that the promotion of educational advancement of the inhabitants of Trust Territories is
essential for their progressive development as early as
possible towards self-government or independence,
Reco.r;ni:::ing that, while notable progress has already
been achieved in the educational development of the
Trust Territories, considerable efforts are still re<Juired
in this field,
C onsidcring that the establishment, in so far as is
practic~ble, of comprehensive and long-range plans
to achieve such educational development is desirable,
1. Necommends that the Trusteeship Council continue to devote particular attention, in consultation with
the 1:-dministering Authorities and the specialized
agencies, to long-range programmes of educational development in the Trust Territories, with a view to
et;t.abling the inhabitants of those Territories to takr
over the responsibilities of complete self-government
at the earliest possible date;

. 2. Requests that the Trusteeship Council include in
its annual reports to the General Assembly its observations on the various long-range educational programmes undertaken in the Trust Territories, and the
progress made in respect thereof.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.
438 (V).

Rural economic development of the
Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the equitable distribution and the
proper utilization of the land togrther con,,tit11tf' 0ne
of the essential conditions in ensurinc:, maint:iini1w
and promoting the economic and social advancement
of inhabitants of Trust Territories,
Recognizing that all Trust Territories are among
the under-developed areas of the world,

1. Recommends the Trusteeship Council:
(a) To study the prevailing policies, Jaws and practices which in the Trust Territories relate to land, land
utilization and the alienation of land, taking into account the present and future needs of the indigenous
inhabitants from the standpoint of the basic objectives
of the I ntcrnational Trusteeship System, as set forth
in Article 76 of the Charter, and the future economic
requirements of the said Territories, as well as the
social and economic consequences of the transfer of
land to 11on-incligenous inhabitants;
( !, ) To make such recomnwnclations to the Administering 1\utl10ritics concerning the prevailing policies,
laws and practices referrrd to above as may hr conduci\e to thr economic and social developm~nt of the
indigenous inhabitants of the said Territories and as
the Council may see fit to make in the light of the
stndv undertaken in pursuance of sub-paragraph (a)
above:

2. Requests the Tmsteeship Council to report to the
next regular session of the General Assembly on the
work donr in this connrxion.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.

439 (V).

Technical assistance for Trust
Territories

Thr (;nzcral Asscm/,fy,
Considering that, in pursuance of the objectives of the
Trusteeship System as set forth in the Charter, it is
indispensable that Trust Territories he developed in the
i 11tercst s of the indigenous inhabitants,
Noting that the development of the Trust Territories
might be improved by additional technical assistance,
Notiny that, under the expanded programme of technical assistance for economic development of underdeveloped countries ( resolution 222 (IX) of the Eco11m11ic and Social Council), the Trust Territories are
eligilile to receive technical assistance upon the request
of the i\d111i11istcring Authorities concrrned,

1. nrmt•s the attention of the Administering Authorities to the facilities available under the expanded programme of technical assistance, as well as to the regular
progra111111es of technical assistance of the United Nations and the specialized agencies for economic development, social welfare services and training for public
admi11istration;
2. Draws the attention of the Economic and Social
Council, the specialized agrncies and the SecretaryCrneral to the nerd to extend to the Trust Territories
such technical assistance as they may be in a position to
render, in order to establish a sound basis for the progressive development of the inhabitants towards selfgovernment or independence;
3. Recommends that the Administering Authorities,
on behalf of the Trust Territories, make full use of these
sources of technical assistance and make appropriate
applications to the agencies involved ;

Resolutions adupted on reports of the Fourth Committee
4. Recommends that the Administering Authorities
submit to the Trusteeship Council information on all
applications made in implementation of the present
resolution, ancl on the manner in which technical assistance received from the United Nations or the specialized agencies has been integrated into the long-range
programmes for the development of the Trust Territories.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.

440 (V).

Abolition of corporal punishment in
Trust Territoriei.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 323 (IV) endorsing the
recommendation of the Trusteeship Council for the
immediate abolition of corporal punishment in the Trust
Territories,
Noting the several statements contained in the report2 of the Trusteeship Council to the present session
of the General Assembly to the effect that such punishment is still being applied,
Recommends that measures be taken immediately to
bring about the complete abolition of corporal punishment in all Trust Territories where it still exists, and
requests the Administering Authorities of those Territories to report on this matter to the General Assembly
at its next regular session.
316th plenary meeting,
2 December 1950.

441 (V).

The Ewe problem

The General Assembly,
. Noting the action 3 taken by the Trusteeship Council
m respect of the Ewe unification movement and related
questions in the Trust Territories of Togoland under
French administration and Togoland under British
administration,
Noting, in particular, the endorsement 4 by the Trusteeship Council of the decision of the Administering
Authorities concerned to establish an expanded Standin!; _Consultative C~mmission for the purpose of ascertammg the real wishes and interests of the peoples
concerned, and the expression" by the Council of the
hope that the Administering Authorities would take all
appropriate steps to ensure that the Commission would
equitably represent the different sections and groups,

53

Aclcl.5) against the methods of election prescribed by the
:\d111ini~tni11g .\uthority of Tognla11d under French
aclmini~tration and the allegation that persons have
])('en arrested and imprisoned because they wished to
have indigenous customs observed in the elections,

Notinu the comments to the contrary contained in
othf'r related petitions (T /Pet.7 /163-T /Pct.6/197; T /
I'ct.7 /165--T/l-'et.C>/lCJ(): T/l'ct.7 /165-T /Pet.6/lC)() /
Add.I),
X otin_q the declarations" rnac!e on these matters by
the representative of France in the Fourth Committee
on 18 and 31 October 1950,
l. Rcco1;11i::cs the great importance of the Ewe problem, am! impresses upon the Trusteeship Council and
the Administering Authorities concerned the importance oi finding an adequate solution as soon as possible
and in foll accordance with the real wishes and interests
of the people concerned;
2. lmpressrs, in particular, upon the Administering
Authorities the necessity of conducting elections to the
Standing Consultative Commission in a democratic
manner that will ensure a true representation of the
people;

3. Rerommcnds that the Administering Authority of
Togoland under French administration investigate
promptly the practices complained of in the petition of
the President of the C'omitc de l'Unitc togolaise and in
other petitions on the subject with a view to ascertaining whether the methods of election which have been
applied ensure that the views of all sections of the population are faithfully reflected, and report thereon to the
next session of the Trusteeship Council for such action
as the Council may consider appropriate in the light of
the relevant discussions in the Fourth Committee and of
the results of the investigations of the Administering
Authority of Togoland under French administration;
4. Requests that the Trusteeship Council devote a
special chapter or sub-chapter of its annual report to the
next session of the General Assembly to setting forth
all the steps undertaken in connexion with the Ewe
question.
316th plenary meetinq,
2 December 1950.

442 (V). Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration

Fhr G rneral Assembly

Noting the complaints made by the President of the
C omitc de l' Unit/: togolaise in a petition to the Secretary-General (T/Pet.7/160-T/Pet.6/194; T/Pet.7/
160-T /Pet.6/194/ Add.I;
T /Pet.7/160-T /Pet.6/194/
Add.2; T/Pet.7/160-T/Pet.6/194/Add.3; T /Pet.7 /
160-T/Pet.6/194/Add.4;
T /Pet.7/160-T/Pet.6/194/

Approves the draft Trusteeship Agreement for the
Territory of Somalilancl under Italian administration, as
contained in document A/1294.7
316th plenary meeting,
2 n{'cembcr 1950.

2
See Official Records of the Ceaeral Assembly, Fifth Session,
Supplement No. 4.
8 See Trusteeship Council resolutions 14 (II) 108 (V) and
250 (VII).
'
'See Trusteeship Council resolution 250 (VII).

Ibid.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session. Fourth Committee, 153rd and 162nd meetings.
7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session,
Supplement No. 10.
5

6
