S/PV.7318

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7318th meeting

Friday, 21 November 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Bishop/Mr. Quinlan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Llanos
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

14-64281 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1464281*

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
Special Envoy Nabarro, Special Representative
Banbury and Mr. Mauget, as well as the representatives
of Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Mali.
Today’s meeting continues the very close
engagement of the Security Council on the Ebola
outbreak, which the Council has declared to be a threat
to international peace and security. Ebola was last
discussed in the Council on 14 October (see S/PV.7279).
The briefings today will provide us with a crucial
opportunity to discuss the evolving nature of the crisis,
the challenges faced by Ebola-affected countries on the
ground and the mobilization of the response.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Guinea, Liberia, Mali and Sierra
Leone to participate in this meeting.
The presidency also acknowledges the specific
requests of some countries to participate via videoteleconferencing and regrets that that was not possible
for technical reasons.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Anthony
Banbury, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission on
Ebola Emergency Response; Mr. David Nabarro,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Ebola; and
Mr. Thomas Mauget, Head of the French Red Cross in
Guinea.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Nabarro.
Mr. Nabarro: I am delighted to have this
opportunity to speak to the Security Council today.
Two months ago, the Council adopted resolution 2177
(2014). It was a memorable day, for two reasons. At that
time, we were aware that the outbreak was advancing
very rapidly. We were also clear that a major and
intense response was needed. On that day, a resolution

2/35

21/11/2014

was adopted with enormous support. Today for me is
also memorable. The reasons today are a combination
of hope and fear. There is hope, because the signs are
good, particularly in Liberia. But there is also fear,
because the virus is unforgiving. Any complacency and
it will punish us. I wish to thank the Security Council
for its continued attention to the current Ebola outbreak
and its consequences.
Much has happened since we last met. The response
capacities available to national and local authorities
have expanded substantially. The United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response is coordinating
support for what national Governments are doing, and
it is strengthening capacity in districts, counties and
prefectures. The degree to which societies are engaged
in the response has deepened. When societies take
responsibility for responding and partners align their
support, the authorities are able to react rapidly and
effectively. We are seeing that where the response
strategy is being implemented fully, transmission is
decreasing. While the total number of cases continues
to rise, the overall rate of increase really has begun to
slow. That is a good sign.
But the results are uneven among and within the
affected countries, and we are seeing quite a lot of
variation. The curve is bending in enough places to
give us the hope I described at the beginning. Because
transmission is still intense and rapid in many locations
and because the outbreak has spread geographically, we
realize that we still have a lot more to do. We see hot
spots in northern Guinea and western Sierra Leone, and
new transmissions in Mali. We must remain vigilant and
persevere with a flexible and well-adapted response. If
we take our eye off the ball, case numbers will climb
again, and we will all count the cost. The outbreak and
the threat that it poses to the region and the world will
not be over until the last case is identified, isolated and
under treatment.
The primary credit for progress in the fight against
Ebola goes to the communities that have made difficult
decisions to abandon generations of traditional practices.
Social mobilization has been the key to success — from
the safe burial of those who have died and caring for
the sick to limiting physical contact and improving
hygiene. Good medical care is also critical. That means
Ebola treatment units and community care centres
that are staffed by health personnel who know how to
treat Ebola. It means quicker identification of cases
as well as rapid contact-tracing and follow-up. Where

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

those ingredients are present, the rate of transmission
slows. But where they are absent, communities remain
vulnerable. And the fact is that too many communities
remain vulnerable.
As the Council has emphasized, Ebola is not
simply an urgent public health crisis, it is a complex
emergency. Ebola and the fear and stigma that it creates
have affected health-care provision, education, food
security, trade and economic well-being. We encourage
all engaged in the response to align their support so
that authorities can promote resilience, repair damage
and hasten recovery. That recovery starts now, even
during the outbreak, beginning particularly with the
restoration of essential services. In the longer term,
we must all work with the countries concerned so that
they can build back better and be able to prevent future
health crises of this kind.
The members of the Council and United Nations
States Members have already shown solidarity
and generosity by providing material and financial
assistance to the affected countries. But winning the
battle is going to require considerably more resources
and effort. We have met our initial short-term target
for the Secretary-General’s Ebola Multi-Partner Trust
Fund of $100 million dollars. We thank all who have
so generously contributed. The money committed is
being disbursed quickly to fund critical programmes.
But by the end of the year, we would like to see much
more in the Fund in order to cover the cost of unfunded
priorities. Looking at it more broadly, we estimate
that the United Nations system will need $1.5 billion
through to March 2015 in order to play its part in ending
the outbreak. Much has been committed, but there is a
shortfall of over $600 million dollars. I am sure that we
will meet that shortfall. The affected countries will also
need support in order to enable the recovery of their
economic, social and health-care systems.
Another immediate priority is for self-sufficient,
staffed and equipped international responders. Again,
Governments from Africa, the Americas, Asia
and Europe have been generous, but more skilled
health personnel are needed to provide assistance
wherever it is most required — especially in remote
districts — because there is a need to chase this virus
down and root it out from its last hiding place. That
will require breaking the chains of transmission by
identifying and treating all cases and tracing their
contacts so that everyone in West Africa and beyond
is safe.

S/PV.7318

The longer the Ebola outbreak continues, the
greater the impact will be on the affected countries
and the greater will be the chance of its spreading to
other countries. That will require a continued, urgent
response from the international community. First,
we must mitigate the risk Ebola presents to health,
development, peace and security by ending the outbreak
as soon as possible. Secondly, we must ensure that
essential services can be maintained and that stability
can be preserved. Thirdly, we must start to look at
recovery and consider what it will involve.
As the Council knows well, strong systems and
institutions are the foundation of peace and prosperity.
Let us do our utmost to ensure that there are no more
outbreaks like this one ever again.
The President: I thank Mr. Nabarro for his
comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Banbury.
Mr. Banbury: It is a pleasure to appear before the
Security Council to share the latest developments on
the Ebola crisis and response by the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER).
When the Security Council met in September and
adopted resolution 2177 (2014), almost 5,000 people
contracted the Ebola virus that month. There was a
rapid acceleration in cases and some very frightening
worst-case-scenario projections about what might
happen. While those worst-case scenarios have not
arisen, it is still the case that Ebola is a very serious
crisis threatening the entire region and that it poses
a global threat. A total of eight countries have had
Ebola cases within their borders, and many more are
threatened today.
The countries of the subregion that are at highest
risk, according to the World Health Organization, in
many cases do not have the capabilities or the systems
to respond quickly and effectively in the case of the
exportation of an Ebola case to one of those countries.
Even now, while the worst-case scenarios did not
materialize, their remain parts of Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Guinea where we see increasing case-loads and
indeed, in some cases, rapidly increasing case-loads
that are posing both big risks and big challenges.
Ebola is also a very complex emergency, and it is
very difficult to combat. While more than 5,400 people
are known to have died, it is certainly the case that
many more than that have actually died. Those are the

14-642813/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

total reported cases, but we know that the real number
is no doubt significantly higher and that many more
people are still going to die — people who have not
yet become infected, who will become infected and are
going to die from this virus.
But beyond the human toll, Ebola is taking a
devastating toll on the social and economic livelihoods
of the most affected countries. This is a message I heard
repeatedly and quite strongly from the Heads of State
of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, as well as from
Government officials at all levels, down to the préfet
or district level. Even when Ebola was no longer a very
prevalent disease in their communities, its aftereffects
were widespread in the economies and livelihoods of
these communities.
There are many statistics that can demonstrate the
impact of Ebola beyond the health impact. The Liberian
Minister of Finance recently reported that, while the
Liberian economy had been projected to grow at 5.9 per
cent, it is now projected to shrink by 0.4 per cent.
UNICEF has reported more than 3,300 Ebola orphans.
In the three most affected countries, 10,000 schools are
closed and more than 2 million children who should be
in school are now not able to go to school. The World
Bank has reported that, in Liberia, 46 per cent of the
workforce at the time of the outbreak of the Ebola crisis
is now unemployed — almost half the members of the
workforce have lost their jobs since the outbreak began.
One of the impacts of all this is that, as the virus
spreads in countries, the needs of their Governments
to respond — including the financial needs — are
increasing significantly, but Government revenues are
decreasing. The gap between available means and needs
is therefore getting larger on a virtually daily basis.
There are many significant operational challenges
posed by the Ebola crisis. One of the most difficult is
the unknown nature of it. The world has never faced a
crisis like this before. Those countries have not; their
health-care systems have not; their societies have not;
nor have the United Nations health experts. We are
therefore obliged to fight this invisible enemy with
tools that we are forging at the same time that we are
putting them into use.
In addition, the Governments and countries most
affected do not have well-developed systems, be they
health-care systems, surveillance infrastructure,
road and transport infrastructure or communications
infrastructure; nor do the United Nations or
non-governmental organization partners have the kind
4/35

21/11/2014

of infrastructure and geographic presence throughout
those countries that are now necessary in order to
effectively combat this disease.
In part because of all these reasons, the SecretaryGeneral decided to establish UNMEER following the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2177 (2014) and
General Assembly resolution 69/1. The attention that
the Security Council has paid to the Ebola crisis has,
I believe, been extremely important in mobilizing the
international political will and resources necessary to
effectively combat the disease.
In UNMEER’s first 30 days of its existence,
we were very focused on deploying the necessary
capability on the ground. What we were trying to
achieve in 30 days in terms of information collection,
analysis, planning, deployment and the establishment
of operational capability is something that would
normally be done sequentially for a United Nations
mission over period of several months, and we tried to
do it all simultaneously and combine it in essentially
a 30-day period. I believe that, to a very large extent,
we were successful at that. We established a presence
in four countries; we are operational in the three most
affected ones. We have the leadership teams and the
necessary operational capability in place to carry
UNMEER operations. We are additionally deploying
more and more staff not just to the three most affected
countries but to remote locations in those countries,
where the disease is increasingly spreading and where,
in the end, we will have to fight it.
I should pause here for a minute to talk about
today’s developments concerning Mali. While I said
that the Mission was operational in three countries
and had established a presence in four, today,
following consultations with President Keita of Mali,
the Secretary-General directed us to immediately
establish a presence in Mali to support that country’s
national efforts to stop the disease before it spreads.
The Secretary-General is drawing on important lessons
from the current crisis and is determined that the
United Nations system take rapid and decisive action at
an early stage on the crisis in Mali before it has the kind
of devastating impact that some of Mali’s neighbours
are experiencing.
UNMEER is a unique mission, tailored in many
ways to deal with a unique and unprecedented crisis. It
is unique in many ways. It is the first emergency health
mission and the first United Nations system-wide
mission. At its heart, it is a crisis-management mission,
14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

with the singular objective of stopping Ebola. That is
the Mission’s only objective. It is also unique because
of the way in which it is structured and focused on the
things that it must achieve, including safe burials, case
treatment and contact identification and tracing. That
means that the Mission is organized and structured
around the outcomes that it must achieve, as opposed
to the inputs it has been offered. We have put in place a
comprehensive 30-, 60- and 90-day plan, along with an
operational plan based on the objectives embedded in
the 30-, 60- and 90-day plan.
The operational plan is an absolutely necessary
precondition for success. We need a plan that is
achievable and that will, if achieved, accomplish the
identified objectives. That is an essential element of
good crisis management and one of the values that
UNMEER can bring to the table. Our work in the
operational area — those outcomes to which I just
referred, including case identification, safe burials, case
treatment and so on — are supported by five underlying
enabling activities: logistics; information management,
which is absolutely essential to accomplishing our
operational objectives; human resource mobilization,
not only with respect to UNMEER but in terms of
contact tracers; social mobilization; and the payment
of workers. UNMEER will not itself undertake all
of those activities. We will work on some of them,
but most are being carried out by others, including
United Nations agency partners working within the
UNMEER framework, as well as the non-governmental
organizations that are playing such an important role in
bringing the crisis under control. In that regard, I would
like to pay tribute to Médecins Sans Frontières, with
whom I have met on all my trips and from whose advice
I have benefitted greatly. They have done outstanding
work in dealing with the Ebola crisis from its outset in
March.
As the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
noted, we are starting to see significant improvements
in the crisis response. We have received some very
encouraging news. We know that the worst-case
scenarios of exponential growth have not materialized.
The new cases every week are declining or are at least
stabilizing. In terms of response, the latest World
Health Organization figures show that, for known
cases, we are achieving 55 per cent of our target in
terms of case isolation, and 87 percent in the case of
case burials. Those are very significant achievements
compared to where we were when the Council last met

S/PV.7318

on this subject (see S/PV.7279). However, we are far
from ending the crisis.
First of all, those numbers look better than they
are, because they refer to case isolations and safe
burials of known cases. The real number of cases is
much higher, so the achievement percentages are going
to be much lower. And even while we see important
progress in some areas, we see dramatic declines
in others with rapid acceleration in cases. Guinea in
particular is facing some difficulty. It has not received
the attention and resources from the international
community that Liberia and Sierra Leone have. Even
though the numbers in both those countries are higher,
the complexity of the response in Guinea, for a variety
of reasons related to geographic dispersal, aspects of
some of the communities, security concerns, as well
as resources from the international community, make
the challenges in bringing the crisis in Guinea under
control particularly severe. As a result, UNMEER is
enhancing its attention to the situation in Guinea and
is trying to focus additional resources there, even as
we try to do everything we can to support the efforts in
Liberia and Sierra Leone.
I would like to underline one of the important
reasons for success in the areas where progress has
been achieved, as pointed out by Special Envoy
Nabarro: communities themselves are taking action and
changing their behaviour to protect themselves. That
has been absolutely essential, and the United Nations
takes absolutely no credit for the work and actions of
the communities. However, it must be said that another
reason that we have seen important progress has been
the response by Governments, non-governmental
organizations and the United Nations system. I believe
that we have been able to prove that the strategy we
have adopted works when we apply it. It succeeds. That
is very heartening, but it also presents especially large
challenges, because the necessary operational response
is very complex. It requires a lot of moving pieces. It is
operationally complex and resource-intensive. It takes
a lot of people, infrastructure and assets to do all that
is required in an area facing an Ebola outbreak. That
means that the goal that Mr. Nabarro spoke of, which
we all share — the goal of zero transmission, where we
see the last case under treatment — is going to require
a tremendous increase in the resources on the ground
in a dispersed geographical area. We are not going to
be able to succeed based only on work in the capitals,
much less in Accra.

14-642815/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

I would also like to highlight that we know not only
the strategy that works, but also some of the underlying
factors for success. In addition to the plan to which I
referred earlier, it is essential to have strong Government
leadership and a crisis management structure in place.
I am happy to say that in Sierra Leone, Guinea and
Liberia the Governments have taken a leadership role,
and there is strong support from UNMEER and other
partners for the crisis management structure. It is
working to varying degrees, but it is in place in each
country. We also need to ensure that there is a coherent,
coordinated international response. Again, I think that
is getting better on a daily basis in each of the three
countries, thanks in part to the role that UNMEER has
been playing. However, it is clear that much more must
be done to bring this crisis under control. Bending the
curve was hard, and getting to a declining case-load
was very hard. Getting it down to zero is going to be
much harder. The amount of effort, resources, contact
tracers, mobility and hard work in the most remote
areas required to bring it down to zero is going to be
very significant. There is a long battle ahead of us.
One of the great challenges we face is the increased
geographic dispersion of the disease, which has
significantly expanded the requirements of having
resources on the ground. Therefore, in order for us to
get ahead of the disease — not react to it, but to be
able to defeat it where it is — we need not only greater
geographic dispersal of capabilities, but more mobility
and a rapid response capability that includes the
contact tracers, health experts, laboratory capabilities,
social mobilization and the burial teams and the
accompanying infrastructure. It is highly challenging,
but will be absolutely necessary.
In conclusion, I believe we should be very
heartened, as Mr. Nabarro said in his remarks, by
the progress achieved. Those responsible for that,
especially the Governments and communities, as well
as the non-governmental organization community,
should take great pride in their achievements.
But we are deep in the midst of this Ebola crisis — a
very dangerous crisis that poses today, and will pose
tomorrow, a very serious threat to the people, societies,
communities and countries that are now affected, as
well as other countries throughout the world. As long
as Ebola is present and spreading in one country, we
know that it is a danger to all countries.
This is a unique challenge. The attention of the
Security Council is deeply welcomed. Right now we
6/35

21/11/2014

must work hard, we must work fast, we must work
smart and we must work until the disease is finished.
The President: I thank Mr. Banbury for his timely
and comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mauget.
Mr. Mauget (spoke in French): At the outset, I
want to commend the Council’s devoted attention to the
reality on the ground, as evidenced by having given me
the floor.
The French Red Cross has been involved alongside
the Guinean Red Cross since April in combating the
Ebola crisis through community-based activities. I
now have the heavy responsibility of sharing our daily
struggle with Ebola and the difficult reality, as well as
the hope that coordinated global action will, as swiftly
as possible, contain the epidemic.
On 18 November, the French Red Cross welcomed
the first patients in the first Ebola treatment unit.
Although the unit was built in record time, it became
operational due to the remarkable mobilization efforts
undertaken by Doctors Without Borders in Macenta, in
the Guinea forest region, and the commitments from all
levels of the French and Guinean authorities. The region
is the original epicentre of the Ebola epidemic, where
it has now been raging for nine months without stop.
The epidemic has affected all sectors of the population
without distinction. In Macenta, those who are ill are
referred to the centre or arrive on their own to receive
medical care. Given the high hopes of the response
community in the Macenta centre, it has provided an
additional asset in the form of hope for survival for
those who are ill. Nevertheless, the centre alone will
not be able to curb this formidable epidemic.
Ebola is raging in Macenta as we speak. Our teams
are overcoming the challenges one by one in order
to increase our capacity as quickly as possible, but
they are not able to address the totality of the needs.
Establishing access channels to essential provisions
and mobilizing Guinean and international medical
and non-medical personnel are essential conditions
in strengthening our response capacity as soon as
possible. Biosecurity for the operation’s staff is also a
central part of the intervention.
The epidemic in Guinea is not yet under control.
In recent weeks, there has been an upsurge of cases in
the infection zones, new cases in new provinces and
re-emergence in areas once considered cured. The

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

effects of the international mobilization efforts have
started to materialize on the ground. We therefore
welcome the commitments made by Governments, the
United Nations and humanitarian actors. Despite that,
Ebola is always one step ahead. The epidemic is ahead
of us, forcing us to react in view of the humanitarian
imperative, without the ability to anticipate or to limit its
development. Strengthened international mobilization
efforts are necessary to generate concrete action to
respond to the needs on the ground. Moreover, diverse
efforts are needed to ensure the proper implementation
of all required elements in this struggle.
The action of the Red Cross is based on the five
pillars of its response strategy: medical care; funerals
carried out safely and with dignity, and disinfection;
awareness-raising and communication; the monitoring
of contacts; and psychosocial support for people and
staff on the ground. Coordination of those factors around
the areas of outbreak will one day make it possible to
contain the epidemic. On the ground, daily coordination
meetings, hosted by the prefect coordination unit in the
fight against Ebola, play a fundamental role in ensuring
such efforts, especially related synergies.
Among the essential non-medical activities
in this fight, we must highlight those carried out,
courageously, since the start of the epidemic by the
volunteers of the Guinean Red Cross: transporting the
ill, disinfection and ensuring safe burials. Since March
they have responded to warnings about suspected cases
and deaths in communities. They are the ones who
have been exposed both ethically and physically. They
risk exposure to the epidemic by working in the most
affected communities and dealing with people who are
suffering. They fetch the sick and bring the bodies back
in body bags. It is a terrible task that the volunteers of
the Guinean Red Cross carry out with determination.
Their commitment will lead to breaking the chains of
transmission and recurrence both today and tomorrow.
Again I would highlight to the Council my
admiration for those volunteers who have been daily
stigmatized by their families and neighbours. In
Macenta, some have been made to move regularly, some
have been abandoned by their spouses and children,
without a word, and some have lost their loved ones.
Today, our role and that of the international
community remains, above all, to assist those who
help — those whose translate national and global
strategies in each community and outbreak area of the
epidemic, down to the affected households.

S/PV.7318

The task of the Guinean workers, whether from the
Guinean Red Cross, the military or civilian society,
continues to be undermined by the people’s mistrust.
As such, awareness-raising remains essential to an
effective reference base. That work must be carried out
daily.
During the morning coordination meeting in
Macenta, new outbreaks are identified. Outreach teams
leave to open the doors of the communities to volunteers
from the Guinean Red Cross, who are responsible for
monitoring case contacts.
Sometimes we fail, faced with overwhelming
cultural resistance and the terrible feeling that the
struggle will never end. If we do not gain access to the
community, the transmission paths will not be stopped
in time. The epidemic moves from here, to there,
depending on the movements of the people who have
been in this border region. To succeed, we must move
beyond traditional awareness-raising messages and
win the confidence and the ear of the people where they
live. We cannot defeat Ebola without the participation
and contributions of the affected populations.
As a national member of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, and
as our colleagues in non-governmental organizations
on the front line of the Ebola crisis have noted, the
implementation of our work is a new challenge. The
Council recognizes the difficulties we face in mobilizing
competent human resources that are ready to deploy
in the field to face a complex epidemic. Aside from
the medical personnel, we need water and sanitation
specialists,
field
coordinators,
administrators,
logisticians and many other talents. The global media
coverage and some decisions on managing the return of
personnel exposed in the field can affect the recruiting
of international talent. States’ commitments to ensure
safe medical evacuation is essential to providing the
best guarantees to all participants, without regard to
nationality.
Finally, let us not forget our Guinean colleagues,
who in case of contamination must also be able to
receive optimal care and psychosocial support. The
other great challenge is the logistics of supplying
essential products to areas that may be very remote.
The production, purchase and transport of those critical
materials are undertaken along a precarious chain of
supply, and any disruption of the process could cause a
slowdown or even a halt in these activities.

14-642817/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

In this tense and uncertain situation, we can still
find a few “happy” endings: the cured patient who
leads community outreach meetings; the nursery that
welcomes the children of patients and strives to support
them; and the joy that overcomes our teams when a
community is opened to response and a transmission
chain is broken. Those small victories belong to the
workers on the ground and are are often due to solidarity
among the people in the field, whatever their institutional
affiliation: Red Cross, international non-governmental
organizations or United Nations agencies. The World
Food Programme, which is shouldering tasks in Guinea
that are not traditionally part of its mandate, has been
most helpful with its construction of care centres and
air transportation of people and freight.
To conclude, I also wish to say that Guinea is a
wonderful country, with genuine positives, and that
Guineans are charming and welcoming. Despite Ebola,
life there goes on and must go on. The indirect impact of
the epidemic remains to be tallied, but we already know
that health services have been significantly affected,
that food security could become a real concern, and
that the overall pace of development has slowed. As
humanitarian actors, our primary objective is to help
contain the epidemic, not only for reasons of health, but
also so that the pace of development will resume.
I thank the Council for its attention and I hope
it will contribute to the overall consideration of the
Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Mauget for his briefing
and acknowledge in particular his outstanding frontline
service with the French Red Cross in Guinea. I should
also acknowledge that Mr. Banbury and his staff have
been working long days in combating Ebola. I think it
is around midnight in Ghana, so we deeply appreciate
his participation.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council reiterates its grave
concern about the unprecedented extent of the
Ebola outbreak in Africa, which constitutes a
threat to international peace and security, and
the impact of the Ebola virus on West Africa, in
particular Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. The
Security Council expresses its appreciation for
the crucial contributions and commitments made
by the Member States of the region, to continue to

8/35

21/11/2014

lead the ground-level response against the Ebola
outbreak, as well as to address the wider political,
security, socioeconomic and humanitarian impact,
including on food security, of the Ebola outbreak
on communities and the need to plan for the longer
term recovery in the region, including with the
support of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
Security Council underscores the continued need
for robust contact tracing, social mobilization and
community-level engagement efforts, especially
outside of major urban areas in the most affected
countries.
“The Security Council stresses the importance
for the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response (UNMEER) to continue to strengthen
coordination with the governments of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone and all national, regional
and international actors, including bilateral
partners and multilateral organizations, including
the Mano River Union, African Union, Economic
Community of West African States, European
Union, World Bank Group and the United Nations
System, in order to more readily identify gaps in
the response effort and to utilize all Ebola response
assistance more fully and efficiently, particularly at
the local level. In this regard, the Security Council
requests that the Secretary-General accelerate
efforts to scale-up UNMEER’s presence and
activities at the district and prefecture level outside
of the capital cities.
“The Security Council expresses its concern
about the recent reported Ebola infections in Mali.
The Security Council recognizes the important
steps taken by the government of Mali, including
by appointing an Ebola Incident Coordinator to
lead a whole-of-government response. The Security
Council affirms the importance of preparedness
by all Member States to detect, prevent, respond
to, isolate and mitigate suspected cases of Ebola
within and across borders and of bolstering the
preparedness of all countries in the region. The
Security Council recalls the International Health
Regulations (2005), which aim to improve the
capacity of all countries to detect, assess, notify
and respond to all public health threats.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts
undertaken by UNMEER to provide overall
leadership and direction to the operational work
of the United Nations System, as mandated

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

by the United Nations General Assembly. The
Security Council underscores the need for relevant
United Nations System entities, including the
United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions in West Africa, in close
collaboration with UNMEER and within their
existing mandates and capacities, to provide
immediate assistance to the governments of the
most affected countries.
“The Security Council lauds the critical,
heroic and selfless efforts of the first-line
responders to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa,
including national health and humanitarian relief
workers, educators, and burial team members,
as well as international health and humanitarian
relief workers contributed by the Member States
of diverse regions and non-governmental and
intergovernmental organizations. The Security
Council expresses its condolences to the families
of the victims of the Ebola outbreak, including
national and international first-line responders.
The Security Council urges all Member States,
non-governmental, intergovernmental and regional
organizations to continue to respond to the
outstanding need for medical personnel, as well
as related critical gap areas such as personnel with
expertise in sanitation and hygiene.
“The Security Council underscores the
critical importance of putting in place essential
arrangements, including medical evacuation
capacities and treatment and transport provisions,
to facilitate the immediate, unhindered and
sustainable deployment of health and humanitarian
relief workers to the affected countries. The
Security Council welcomes the steps announced
by Member States and regional organizations to
provide medical evacuation capacities for health
and humanitarian relief workers, as well as other
treatment options in situ.
“The Security Council notes the considerable
efforts of the international community to scale-up
its coordinated response to the Ebola outbreak and
the important progress on the ground as a result
of these contributions. In this regard, the Security
Council commends those Member States, which,
in concert with other actors on the ground, have
opened Ebola Treatment Units and provided other
crucial support in the affected countries. The
Security Council urges all Member States, bilateral

S/PV.7318

partners and multilateral organizations, to expedite
the provision of resources and financial assistance,
as well as mobile laboratories; field hospitals to
provide non-Ebola related medical care; dedicated
and trained clinical personnel and services in Ebola
Treatment Units and isolation units; therapies,
vaccines and diagnostics to treat patients and limit
or prevent further Ebola infection or transmission;
and personal protective equipment for firstline
responders. The Security Council calls on Member
States, especially in the region, to facilitate
immediately the delivery of such assistance to the
most affected countries.
“The Security Council emphasizes that
the dynamic needs on the ground in the most
affected countries require that the international
community’s response remain flexible, in order
to adapt to changing requirements and rapidly
respond to new outbreaks.
“The Security Council strongly urges Member
States, as well as airlines and shipping companies,
while applying appropriate public health protocols,
to maintain trade and transport links with the most
affected countries to enable the timely utilization of
all efforts aimed at containing the Ebola outbreak
within and across borders of the region. While
recognizing the important role that appropriate
screening measures can play in stopping the spread
of the outbreak, the Security Council expresses its
continued concern about the detrimental effect of
the isolation of the affected countries as a result of
trade and travel restrictions imposed on and to the
affected countries, as well as acts of discrimination
against the nationals of Guinea, Liberia, Mali and
Sierra Leone, including Ebola survivors and their
families or those infected with the disease.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/24.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia.
The Ebola outbreak in West Africa is
unprecedented in its scale, its reach and its impact,
and it is much more than a health crisis. This outbreak
has serious humanitarian, economic and social
consequences — rising food prices, closed schools, lost
livelihoods — and it threatens political stability.
The Council has rightly determined that the Ebola
crisis is a threat to international peace and security.

14-642819/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

The human impact of the virus is one of its cruellest
features, denying our most basic instincts: for a
mother to comfort a sick child, for a family to take in
a sick relative or for a person to receive a traditional,
dignified burial. These are terrible reminders of the
human tragedy of Ebola, beyond the horrific death toll,
which has climbed to nearly 5,500 people. The current
outbreak has infected over 15,000 and left an estimated
3,300 children orphaned.
Women are being disproportionately affected, as is
so often the case. They are exposed to Ebola at higher
rates than men. They care for infected loved ones.
They make up the majority of front-line health-care
workers. We must ensure their needs are prioritized in
the response.
The Council was warned in October that the spread
of the virus was badly outpacing the response, and that
the consequences of failure would be catastrophic (see
S/PV.7279). The briefings we heard today confirm that
we have started to pull together in this critical race to
catch up and stop Ebola.
At the Brisbane Group of 20 Summit last week,
leaders underlined their commitment to ensure the
international effort extinguishes the outbreak. The
response being mobilized under the leadership of the
affected countries and the coordination of the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER) has begun to yield results.
I will make three brief points.
First, complacency is our worst enemy. The
epidemiological curve has started to bend. We are
making progress towards the initial 70 per cent targets
for isolation, treatment and safe burial by 1 December.
We are starting to see important behavioural changes
that can help contain the spread. But we are not there
yet. The gains to date could easily be reversed. The
spread of Ebola may have slowed in some areas — down
to as low as 80 new cases reported in Liberia last week,
from a peak of over 450 per week — but the virus is
still spreading and is proving elusive. We have also
seen the risk of further countries being affected, with
Ebola cases now reported in Mali. The examples from
Senegal and Nigeria show that Ebola can be beaten.
It is crucial that countries of the region enhance their
preparedness and vigilance to lower the risk. More
broadly, appropriate screening measures can play an
important role in stopping the spread of the outbreak.

10/35

21/11/2014

Secondly, the response must adapt to the evolving
nature of the outbreak. Overall progress has been offset
by spikes in new cases, particularly in remote areas out
of reach of the response thus far. Our response must be
able to shift geographic focus to areas of need and to
rapidly respond to new outbreaks. Sufficient numbers of
medical personnel need to be deployed on a sustainable
basis. And we need clear, timely information from
UNMEER on where the current gaps are and how they
can be rapidly filled.
We must also deal with the secondary impacts of
the crisis, including the breakdown of national healthcare systems. We cannot focus only on Ebola, while a
pregnant woman is left to die in childbirth and while
preventable diseases go untreated. And we must also
support early-recovery efforts. Jobs and livelihoods
will be crucial to getting families back on their feet and
to underwriting social stability.
Those efforts require a comprehensive response
that involves all parts of society — Government,
the private sector and local communities, as well as
non-government organizations and the international
community.
Thirdly, Australia is committed to doing its part
in the international response. Australia will provide
$20 million to fund and staff 100 beds for Ebola
treatment as part of the United Kingdom-led efforts
in Sierra Leone, and it will provide $2 million to
fund technical personnel for non-front-line roles in
logistics, training and water and sanitation. We have
heeded Mr. Nabarro’s call for quick and flexible
financial resources, providing an early contribution
of $10 million to the United Nations Trust Fund, in
addition to $8 million already provided to other frontline services. And we are providing $2 million to help
our own immediate region — Papua New Guinea,
Timor-Leste and Pacific island countries — to increase
their preventative capacity. That brings Australia’s total
commitment to date on Ebola to $42 million, and we
will of course continue to assess where we can best
contribute.
Let me conclude by paying tribute to the heroism of
the front-line health-care workers who are working to
save lives and reduce suffering at great personal risk.
Over 300 of them have died from the disease. Nearly
600 have been infected.
We know how to beat Ebola. We owe it to the
victims of this terrible disease and to all of our citizens

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

to provide our full and unwavering support to overcome
this threat.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Thank you,
Madam President and Foreign Minister Bishop, for being
here to preside over this crucial meeting. I also thank
Special Envoy Nabarro and Special Representative
Banbury for their briefings. To Mr. Mauget, we express
our gratitude for his remarks — but even more for his
service, just as we are grateful for the service of all
the doctors, nurses, burial team members and others
on the front lines of this effort. We also thank the
representatives of Guinea, Liberia, Mali and Sierra
Leone for being here today and for the valiant efforts of
their people and their Governments to stand up to this
deadly virus. We stand with them.
I would like to take a moment to recognize the
passing of Marcel Rudasingwa, the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER)
Ebola Crisis Manager in Guinea. I met Marcel in
Conakry last month. He had just recently arrived, but
he brought great energy to a really tough assignment,
and his unexpected death this week from heart attack
is an enormous loss for his family and for the United
Nations family.
Two months ago, on 18 September, at its first
emergency meeting on Ebola, the Council was
addressed by a Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF)
worker, Mr. Jackson Niamah, from Liberia’s capital,
Monrovia. He said people were dying outside the gates
of the clinic where he worked because there were no
beds to treat them. Jackson said, “I, along with my
colleagues, cannot fight Ebola alone. ... the international
community must help us.” (S/PV.7268, p. 6)
It was a reckoning. Up to that point, not nearly
enough had been done to curb Ebola’s deadly spread.
In an unprecedented resolution (resolution 2177 (2014)),
the Council recognized that the outbreak constituted
a threat to international peace and security and
committed, right alongside the General Assembly, to
marshalling the resources to stop it.
Two months later, the outbreak continues to grow.
When we met in September, more than 2,500 had died;
today, more than 5,000 have died. In September, 5,500

S/PV.7318

people had been infected; today, more than 15,000
have been infected. The fight is not only ongoing, but
it is still tilting in Ebola’s favour. Yet we are beginning
to see the impact of the international community’s
collective response. The results so far prove what we
have said all along: we know how to win this fight. The
United Nations set a target, to be achieved within 60
days, of 70 per cent of burials being completed in a safe
and dignified manner in order to reduce new infections
from unsafe burials, and the international community
is working towards meeting that goal.
As part of my trip to the most affected countries,
at the end of October, I visited Sierra Leone’s capital,
where I saw first-hand how the command and control
capacity of recently arrived British troops and civilians
in support of their Sierra Leonean counterparts, burial
teams and a robust public information campaign went
from safely burying 30 per cent of victims within 24
hours of being reported to 98 per cent. That was all in
less than a week.
We set out to improve the accuracy, accessibility
and efficiency of Ebola testing, knowing that prompt
and reliable results are critical to slowing the spread of
the virus. In Bong county, Liberia, I visited a United
States Navy-run Ebola testing laboratory, which had
cut the time Liberians in the area waited for test results
from up to five days down to three to five hours. On
4 November, only 33 out of 53 Ebola-affected districts
in the affected countries had the ability to transport
samples to a laboratory within 24 hours of collecting
them, according to the World Health Organization
(WHO). By 17 November, all 53 districts had that
capability.
We know this data is imperfect, and by no means
the full story. Underreporting is a huge issue in the
affected region. Not every victim’s body is reported,
and some unsafe burials take place under the radar.
Even if every district could get samples to a laboratory
in 24 hours, that says nothing about how fast the results
come back. But, even accepting the limits of the data,
there is no question that our collective efforts are saving
lives. In the past month, the average number of reported
cases per week in Liberia fell by a third, thanks in large
part to the robust international effort in support of the
Liberian Government’s leadership.
At the beginning of October, Sierra Leone’s
Kenema district had the second-highest number of
infections in the country, with 429 cases. As of two days
ago, not a single new case had been reported in Kenema

14-6428111/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

in all of November, in large part due to the efforts of
non-governmental organizations working with local
authorities and communities. Were it not for the
dramatic increase in the global response, Ebola would
have continued to spread exponentially in the region,
infecting and killing many thousands more people and
placing our collective security at even greater risk.
But it would be a huge mistake to think that just
because we are seeing signs of progress we are on track
to stop this outbreak. It would be reckless to think that
just because we hit some of our benchmarks we have
contained the virus’s deadly spread. Last week, 533
new cases were confirmed in Sierra Leone, the highest
weekly tally since the outbreak began in that country.
In Guinea, people in rural villages only kilometres
away from the outbreak began have still never even
heard of the virus. We are facing a new outbreak — of
course, in Mali.
Our response needs to be fluid, nimble and regional.
We need to move with the virus, swiftly adapting to
flare-ups and plugging gaps when they emerge. As
Guinea’s Minister for Foreign Affairs so eloquently said
when we met in Conakry, “if there is one sick person
in Monrovia, then the epidemic is not over in Guinea”.
I would like to highlight five key ingredients for
not just bending this exponential curve, but ultimately
ending it.
First, the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response must help coordinate and better
target the work of multiple United Nations agencies,
Member States and organizations to maximize the
effectiveness of our collective response. That entails
identifying the evolving gaps, determining what is
needed to fill them and communicating that information
to Governments, organizations and agencies involved
in the effort as quickly as possible. That will require
UNMEER to hire quality staff and scale up operations
faster and get teams out of the headquarters and into
the field, where they can better assess what is needed
and immediately plug those gaps at the local level. The
presidential statement that we as a Council agreed to
today (S/PRST/2014/24) reflects that imperative in its
request that the Secretary-General
“accelerate efforts to scale up UNMEER’s presence
and activities at the district and prefecture level
outside of the capital cities”.

12/35

21/11/2014

Secondly, donors must tailor their contributions to
the needs of the moment rather than what best suits our
capitals. For example, as the trajectory of the epidemic
changes, we recognize that it is now more effective
to support community care centres and build smaller
10- to 20-bed Ebola treatment units (ETUs) across a
wider area than to build a single ETU with 100 beds.
We must constantly asks what the most effective way
is to focus a dollar, a euro, a yen, a mark or a pound on
stopping Ebola today. If the answer is something other
than what we are doing, we have to change course, and
even turn on a dime.
Thirdly, we need more international health-care
workers to support heroic national health responders.
ETUs are useless without doctors and nurses to staff
them sustainably. Approximately 1,000 international
health-care workers will be needed on an ongoing
basis. Yet in the face of unprecedented demand, groups
like MSF and the International Medical Corps have
highlighted the challenge of recruiting volunteers.
In that context, I must add that when one looks out
two months it is not at all clear that the supply of
international health-care workers, even the supply we
have today, can be sustained two months from now.
We commend the countries that have sent or pledged
foreign medical teams and the brave men and women
who serve in them — from Sweden and Norway to
China and the Republic of Korea. The list is long and it
is growing longer.
As part of the African Union’s efforts, Nigeria,
Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which recently helped stop
an outbreak of Ebola within its own borders, have
promised to make more than a thousand health-care
workers available. More countries need to send teams,
and those that have already sent them must maintain a
pipeline of trained replacements so that the supply can
be replenished in the coming months.
The European Union’s recent commitment to
provide medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) and treatment
in Europe for international health-care workers infected
with Ebola, an effort that the United States will
support with our MEDEVAC planes, has been crucial
to getting more countries to announce commitments.
Governments must also knock down the obstacles that
stand in the way of volunteers joining the effort. That
means making it easier, and not harder, for volunteers
to travel to the affected countries, and treating them

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

like heroes when they return, rather than stigmatizing
or isolating them.
Fourthly, we need to do a better job of protecting
health-care workers and other volunteers from the
affected countries, who should be able to serve their
countries without fearing for their lives. Last week,
Liberia reported that 28 health-care workers had been
infected in the previous 30 days. This week, Sierra
Leone lost its sixth and seventh doctors to Ebola. And
yesterday a doctor died of Ebola in Mali.
Approximately 330 health-care workers have died in
this outbreak. Health-care workers need better training
and better equipment to prevent more deaths. To help
meet that demand, the United States has opened a new
centre in Monrovia, which graduated its first class of
150 Liberian health-care workers, and has established a
mobile training unit that will move around the country
to train Liberians. The United States also opened a 25bed hospital to treat international and Liberian healthcare workers and Ebola responders — the Monrovia
Medical Unit — which is currently staffed by United
States Public Health Service officials.
While the needs of health-care workers who
bear the highest risk will come first, United Nations
peacekeepers serving in Liberia should also have access
to the United States-run facility in the very unlikely
event that they should need it. The peacekeepers in
the United Nations Mission in Liberia — civilians,
troops and police — will be remembered for rising to
the occasion and joining this historic effort, rather than
pulling out at Liberia’s time of greatest need.
Fifthly, and finally, we need to invest more in
preparing neighbouring countries to prevent new
outbreaks and contain outbreaks swiftly when they
occur. That is why the United States is working with
international organizations, including WHO, and
officials from more than 40 nations through the Global
Health Security Agenda, which is increasing the
preparedness of national health systems to respond to
infectious disease threats and making global health
security an international priority. As the recent events
in Mali make clear, if even a single link in the chain
of responsibility is broken, the welfare of an entire
country or region can be put at risk. Ebola punishes us
for every mistake.
When people survive Ebola in the affected
countries they are often given an official certificate
declaring them Ebola-free. I met several survivors

S/PV.7318

during my trip to West Africa. No matter what their
individual experience, not one seemed to feel fully free.
A 24-year-old former school teacher in Guinea, Fanta
Ulene Kamara, told me she had lived three lives: her life
before Ebola, her life in the hell of her infection and her
life as a survivor. She said the stigma she has suffered
since beating the virus had made her current life the
hardest. Friends stopped talking to her and avoided
her when they ran into her in public. When, at the end
of our meeting, I went to give her a hug goodbye, she
demurred and offered fist-bump — afraid, perhaps, that
she might infect me. Even she did not seem to fully
believe that she was free.
I tell Fanta’s story because we can build all the
ETUs required, have access to fast, reliable laboratory
results, have plenty of contact teams and healthcare workers — we can check all those boxes and
more — and if we do not tackle the fear and the stigma
that still reigns in much of the affected region, we will
continue to fall behind. We will not shake ourselves
free of Ebola.
In Fanta’s story, though, there is also reason for
hope. Besides being an Ebola survivor, Fanta is now
an Ebola caregiver. She works in a Médecins Sans
Frontières clinic where her very presence shows
patients that the virus can be beaten. And for those who
do survive, Fanta provides counselling, preparing them
for the stigma that regrettably still awaits them outside.
We are a long way from being free of Ebola, but if
we choose to fight, if we do what we have seen works
to beat back this deadly virus, we will find the bravest,
most selfless partners in the world by our side, and
there is no fight more noble than that.
The President: I would like to acknowledge
Ambassador Power’s personal commitment to this
challenge, including through her recent visit to West
Africa.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Nabarro and Special Representative
Banbury for their briefings. I also listened attentively
to Mr. Mauget’s presentation.
The Ebola outbreak in West Africa has recently
slowed down somewhat, and the number of new cases
in Liberia and Guinea has fallen, showing that the
international efforts to combat the disease have begun
to take effect. The relevant countries and international
and regional organizations such as the United Nations,
World Health Organization (WHO) and African Union

14-6428113/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

(AU) have worked enormously hard to that end, which
China appreciates.
Meanwhile, the momentum of the outbreak’s spread
has not been fundamentally contained. It is still a grave
threat to the lives, personal health and public-health
security of West Africans and others in the wider world.
Rather than relaxing our efforts, we in the international
community should work harder to counter the Ebola
epidemic. China believes, first, that the international
community should continue to take steps to consolidate
the results that have already been achieved at this
stage. We hope that the United Nations and the WHO
will further strengthen their monitoring and prevention
of the disease, collect and analyse information on it
rapidly, comprehensively and accurately and determine
its future development, in order to scientifically guide
and coordinate the international efforts.
Secondly, the relevant parties should live up to their
assistance commitments with concrete contributions.
The effort to combat Ebola is at a key stage now, and
China urges that they honour their aid commitments
speedily, helping the countries affected to halt and
eliminate the epidemic as quickly and effectively as
possible and to increase the confidence of those affected
in the possibility of completely beating the disease.
Thirdly, the countries affected must get active
assistance in carrying out post-Ebola reconstruction.
The current epidemic has undermined the political and
security situation, economic and social development
and the well-being of the people in those countries. The
international community should focus on their postEbola needs, get to work on plans as soon as possible,
and fully help the affected countries to strengthen
their public-health and other essential systems so that
they can get back onto a path of peace, stability and
development as soon as possible.
A disaster knows no borders, and neither does
our love and solidarity. The Chinese and African
peoples are brothers and sisters, and when our African
brothers suffer from this disease, the Chinese people
genuinely feel for them. We are duty-bound to help
Africa. Since March, when the epidemic erupted, the
Chinese Government has provided four batches of
emergency assistance, worth a total of RMB750 million
or approximately $120 million, the largest amount of
health-related foreign aid since the founding of the
new China. In order to deliver the related assistance
as quickly as possible, the Chinese Government has
even chartered planes to transport the materials to the
14/35

21/11/2014

affected areas at the earliest date for distribution and
use. So far the first three groups of assistance measures
have all been implemented, and the fourth group is
being implemented step by step.
With Chinese assistance, the construction of a
treatment centre in Liberia is now being stepped up and
is expected to be completed by the end of this month.
By then the centre will be operational, only one month
after President Xi Jinping’s announcement of the fourth
group of assistance measures. Last weekend, the first
team of 163 health-care workers tasked with managing
and operating the treatment centre had already arrived
in Liberia. It is particularly worth noting that the
treatment centre built with the Chinese aid will be open
to all, including the local population, which shows that
Chinese assistance is truly community-oriented and
people-centred. China has now also become the first
country to help build a treatment centre in the affected
region and send its health-care workers to manage and
operate it.
In the meantime, a 40-member Chinese team
has also arrived in Sierra Leone with the aim of
continuing with monitoring work in mobile labs. There
are currently about 400 Chinese health-care workers
in the affected States. In the next few months, there
will be altogether 1,000 Chinese health-care workers
and public-health experts making tours of service to
the front lines in affected areas in order to train the
local health-care workers to do lab testing, observe
symptoms and give treatment. China has also provided
equipment, including mobile virus-testing labs and
biological safety labs, as well as the most urgently
needed supplies such as grains, medicines, protective
gear, incinerators, ambulances, trucks and motorcycles.
In view of the latest developments in the epidemic,
China’s fourth group of aid measures is already being
geared to post-Ebola needs, with a focus on helping the
affected countries strengthen their public health security
systems and capacity-building. Earlier this month,
China’s first team of public-health trainers arrived in
Sierra Leone to begin their work. China is also actively
considering building a pathogen-and-tropical-disease
prevention, treatment and research centre in Africa,
and sending experts to participate in the construction
of an AU disease-control centre. We also plan to train
10,000 health-care workers and community-level key
control personnel. In order to contain the spread of the
outbreak, China has provided disease-control materials
and equipment to the three countries affected, as well

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

as to their neighbours, including Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Côte d’Ivoire. We have also
contributed $6 million to the United Nations Ebola
Multi-Partner Trust Fund and $2 million each to the
WHO and the AU.
Mr. Quinlan took the Chair.
In addition to the assistance from the Chinese
Government, Chinese enterprises in affected countries,
such as Guinea, have also contributed, in cash and in
kind, to the campaign against Ebola and to honour
their social responsibility. Many of those enterprises
have remained open and continued their production
in support of the local economy, a fact that the host
States have greatly appreciated. China’s assistance in
Africa’s fight against Ebola has fully demonstrated that
China and Africa, as friends, can truly share in good
and ill together. Along with the rest of the international
community, China will continue to contribute, within
its abilities, to the joint fight with Africa and its peoples
against the Ebola epidemic.
The President: I should mention that Foreign
Minister Bishop apologizes for her need to depart
before the end of our meeting, but she has a flight to
Australia very shortly.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. David Nabarro, Mr. Anthony Banbury and
Mr. Thomas Mauget for their relevant briefings on the
development of the Ebola epidemic. The emergency
meeting of the Security Council on the Ebola epidemic,
held on 18 September (see S/PV.7268), made it
possible to assess the scale of the epidemic’s threat to
international peace and security.
It is true that there have been encouraging signs
on the ground in recent weeks, but the Ebola epidemic
is unpredictable and it continues spreading to other
African countries, such as Mali, at present, which is
unfortunate. The fact that non-African countries have
been affected and their citizens counted among the
victims justifies the fear of the threat of the Ebola
virus epidemic to international peace and security. The
consequences of the disease are numerous. There are
more than 5,000 dead out of the more than 9,000 people
affected. Public institutions, such as schools, are shut.
It would appear that the official figures are below the
real ones. Ebola weakens everything that was built in
the post-conflict period in Liberia and Sierra Leone,
and makes it difficult to implement Security Council
sanctions for those countries.

S/PV.7318

International assistance is crucial in the fight
against that disease. Resolution 2177 (2014), sponsored
by 134 countries and adopted by consensus by the
Security Council members, shows the degree of the
international community’s mobilization in response to
that extraordinary threat. The historic momentum of
solidarity against the pandemic called for promises of
assistance, which materialized on the ground.
Chad commends the resilience of the affected
countries, which have not fallen prey to panic, and
we pay tribute to the victims, including the medical
personnel who have given their all in caring for the sick
and paid for their dedication with their lives. Given the
international dimension of Ebola, we call for greater
mobilization by the international community in order to
eliminate that scourge. The media must play a positive
role in raising awareness and not conveying through
their coverage images that sow panic and desolation.
We are pleased at the measures taken by the United
Nations to prevent the spread of the Ebola virus in the
field, in particular the quarantine of United Nations
staff before any deployment from affected countries,
awareness-raising and education on the means of
transmission and prevention measures for non-affected
countries. Further prevention measures must be taken,
for example, the building of treatment centres and the
enabling of traceability to find the source in order to
ensure that proper care is given.
We commend the tangible, but still scant, results
in the attempts to contain the spread of Ebola. We call
on the international community to redouble its efforts
to strengthen the response to the epidemic. In that
regard, we encourage doctors, medical services and
international partners to go into the field in order to
support those who are already there. Besides the fears
raised by the Ebola pandemic, we must also avoid
stigmatization. Measures to suspend air service to the
most affected countries are not the best solution. In that
regard, we call on the airlines that continue to serve
those countries to maintain their service.
In conclusion, we believe that a cure for Ebola is
what is needed.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting at
a crucial point in the Ebola epidemic. I thank the
briefers, Mr. David Nabarro, Mr. Anthony Banbury
and Mr. Thomas Mauget, as well as the Ambassadors
of Guinea, Liberia, Mali and Sierra Leone. Through

14-6428115/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

them, France wishes to pay tribute to the victims and to
the local and international personnel who are working
closely with the sick to provide them with assistance.
Progress in the struggle has been noted and we
welcome it, but it remains insufficient and too many
locations are affected. Moreover, the cases in Mali are
an additional source of concern. We thank Mr. Nabarro,
Mr. Banbury and all United Nations personnel involved
for their actions, both at the strategic and operational
levels. We also encourage the continued efforts of
the United Nations to deploy personnel as near as
possible to those affected on the ground. We deplore
the sudden death of Mr. Marcel Rudasingwa, who led
the United Nations mission in Guinea, and we offer
our condolences to his family, to his loved ones and to
Rwanda.
The struggle against the Ebola epidemic has
mobilized France at the highest level. Last week,
our Secretary of State, Ms. Annick Girardin, visited
Guinea, together with the European Union Coordinator,
Mr. Christos Stylianides, on the occasion of the opening
of the treatment centre in Macenta, in the Guinea Forest
Region, the heart of the worst hit zone. The centre
is operational and has an initial capacity of 50 beds,
which could be significantly increased if necessary.
Ms. Girardin also travelled to Mali to express France’s
solidarity with that country and to immediately
strengthen our assistance to prevent the spread of the
disease. President François Hollande will travel to
Guinea next week to underscore France’s support for
that affected country.
In this race against time with the Ebola virus, as
has been eloquently recalled by others, we would like to
commend the commitment, the courage, the devotion of
the non-governmental organizations, such as Médecins
Sans Frontières and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, that are on the front lines in the struggle,
as Mr. Mauget’s riveting briefing reminded us. Their
interest in receiving on-site treatment or medical
evacuation in the event of an infection is fully justified.
That is why France is setting up a treatment centre for
all staff — national and international — involved in
the Ebola response, without distinction of nationality.
The centre is being built in Conakry and should be
operational by the end of December.
Moreover, France has ensured the establishment of a
European mechanism for the treatment of international
staff, including their medical evacuation to Europe. As
part of that mechanism, which is already operational,
16/35

21/11/2014

France places its own evacuation capabilities at the
disposal of international personnel. Our efforts to
provide relief for the population, training and advice fit
into the United Nations strategy to establish mid-size
treatment centres in the middle of the epidemic hotspots.
We have intensified our response, in particular in
Guinea. Eighty French civil security agents are working
hard to set up two new treatment centres that will open
in Beyla and Kérouané in mid-December. They are also
participating in strengthening the centre in Forécariah.
French civil security will also renovate the Manéah
school in Conakry that will host the training centre for
Guinean staff, both medical and non-medical, involved
in the fight against Ebola, in addition to the training
provided in France. The Pasteur Institute is stepping
up its activities, which will be in Guinea over the long
term, with the creation of a Pasteur Centre of Expertise
in Conakry.
Finally, in response to the request from the United
Nations and with the consent of the Guinean President,
Professor Alpha Condé, we are strengthening the
coordination of international assistance with the United
Nations system and in support of the Guinean national
coordination against Ebola. In total, more than 100
French health workers are thus engaged on the ground.
We are also working in Mali, where we have sent
several French medical experts to assist the national
Malian coordinator in facilitating health checks at
Bamako airport and assess the capacities of Malian
health structures to treat the ill.
All of those measures should help us defeat the
epidemic by isolating the virus and not the countries
concerned. Isolation is counterproductive in the short
term and harmful to their economic development
in the long term. Beyond the urgent response to the
epidemic, we cannot underestimate the magnitude of
the economic and social consequences of the crisis.
Long-term reconstruction and recovery will require
coordinated efforts and assistance from the countries
of the subregion in preparing their health-care systems
to combat the virus. The United Nations will have to
adopt an integrated, tailored and differentiated strategy
to bolster resilience to such health-care shocks. That
is the very thrust of the commitment of France, which
will continue to work side by side with the countries of
the region.
The President: I thank the Permanent Representative
of France especially for France’s lead in Guinea.

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Allow us first of all to convey
our high regard and appreciation to Her Excellency
Ms. Julie Bishop, your Foreign Minister, for her direct
and useful engagement through the Council over the
past three days; it is unprecedented for a Foreign
Minister to show such interest and presence. We wish
her a safe journey back home.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for having
convened this very important debate, not only because it
pertains to our region but also because, according to the
Security Council’s own attestation, we are dealing with
a disease that poses a threat to international peace and
security. For that reason, we wish to thank Mr. David
Nabarro, Mr. Anthony Banbury and Mr. Thomas
Mauget for their very useful briefings. We also thank
the ambassadors of Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Mali for their presence. We welcome Ambassador
Power back from her trip to our region.
We have received sobering reports from high
officials of the United Nations today who have been
charged with the responsibility for leading the global
response in the fight against the Ebola outbreak.
Vigilance, perseverance and flexibility was the
message that was conveyed by Mr. Nabarro; we have
to pay heed to that message. The lack of capabilities,
the requisite infrastructures and trained personnel and
inadequate logistical means continue to militate against
the successful campaign to defeat this complex and
deadly virus, as it was characterized by Mr. Banbury.
Stock-taking of this nature, as we are engaging in
right now, is essential to effectively assess the progress
of our collective response to what has been described
as the worst single Ebola outbreak in history. We take
positive note of reports indicating that the epidemic
may be levelling off. According to the World Health
Organization (WHO), the case incidence by week,
currently placed at 1,000, is unlikely to exceed present
levels. We find this encouraging. More, however, needs
to be done to achieve our ultimate goal of the complete
eradication of the Ebola virus. The support of the
international community remains crucial in the fight
against the disease.
In this regard, we would like to acknowledge the
importance of such subregional initiatives. The States
members of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) have made significant financial
contributions to enhance the response capacity of the
most affected States in the subregion and bolster the

S/PV.7318

multisectoral regional architecture to defeat the disease.
We also acknowledge the efforts of Member States
and international organizations, including the African
Union and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
that have made financial donations and sent medical
teams and military personnel to support the fight
against Ebola. We note in particular the pledge made
by European Union members of more than €1 billion, in
addition to expertise and other support on the ground in
the affected countries. We pay tribute to the Red Cross,
Médecins Sans Frontières and other non-governmental
organizations working on the front lines, often at great
risk to their personnel.
On our part, in addition to the $3.5 million
contributed by the Federal Government of Nigeria
to the ECOWAS Regional Solidarity Fund, a further
$1 million has been pledged. Nigeria will also send 500
health volunteers to the affected ECOWAS countries.
Nigeria was declared Ebola-free by WHO on
20 October 2014 following 42 days of no reported new
cases. Health officials were able to eradicate Ebola
from Nigeria by adhering to the guiding principles of
disease control, which involve identifying and tracking
down those who might have been in contact with Ebola
patients. That effort took them to 26,000 households in
one instance alone.
Community engagement and a sense of duty on the
part of the citizens were instrumental to the success
of the process. This demonstrates that the fight against
Ebola can indeed be won. We will nevertheless remain
vigilant and strengthen screening at our ports of entry
in order to consolidate the success we have achieved in
eradicating Ebola.
The Ebola outbreak has undermined the foundations
of economic prosperity, security and social stability
in the countries affected in our subregion. Countries
emerging from conflict and those in the phase of postconflict reconstruction are particularly vulnerable to the
effects of the disease, which has the potential to reverse
the modest progress recorded thus far. Mechanisms
need to be put in place to foster any further outbreak
of the epidemic and mitigate its impacts. Isolation or
the imposition of restrictive measures on the affected
countries or the region as a whole is not the right way
to go about meeting the challenge. What the affected
countries need is sustained and targeted assistance to
contain and eradicate Ebola rather than being unfairly
isolated or stigmatized.

14-6428117/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

The Secretary-General’s five-point approach is
therefore the right way to go. Support for the mission
of the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response is also crucial. The protocols approved by
the World Health Organization do not advocate border
closures, travel restrictions or the stigmatization of any
individual on the basis of his or her nationality. We
therefore urge Member States to refrain from taking
any action that could exacerbate what is already a
difficult situation.
As Mr. Banbury had warned, there is a long battle
ahead of us, and plenty of hard work confronting us.
Finally, I wish to say that Nigeria remains firmly
committed to the fight against Ebola and that we shall
not relent until this insidious disease is completely
eradicated in our region.
The President: I will pass on the words of the
representative of Nigeria to Foreign Minister Bishop.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United Nations System Coordinator on
Ebola, Mr. David Nabarro, and the Head of the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response,
Mr. Anthony Banbury, for their comprehensive
briefings and for their leadership and tireless efforts in
coordinating the United Nations response in the fight
against the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. I also thank
Mr. Thomas Mauget for his briefing and dedication.
Our thoughts are with the families of more than
5,000 victims and patients, as well as with all the
courageous and dedicated doctors, health-care and
humanitarian relief workers, educators and burial team
members who, at a risk to their own lives, have been
doing all within their power to stop the further spread of
this deadly disease. Although the exponential increase
in Ebola cases is no longer evident, the virus continues
to claim lives. The European Union (EU) Ebola
Response Coordinator, Commissioner Stylianides, and
Commissioner for Health Andriukaitis paid a visit to
the most affected countries in West Africa last week.
One conclusion from the visit was that the affected
countries are still in urgent need of international
support. Our collective response should flexibly adapt
to the changing dynamics of the epidemic. Efficient
operational coordination among key actors at the
country level should be further strengthened.
Our attention should also be focused on
strengthening response capacities, preventive and
awareness-raising measures in the neighbouring

18/35

21/11/2014

countries, notably Mali, which has registered new Ebola
cases, and Guinea-Bissau, which is still very fragile
and where Ebola, if it should get there, would have
devastating consequences. My delegation commends
the African Union and Economic Community of West
African States leadership in galvanizing efforts in
the region, including through the deployment of the
African Union Support to the Ebola Outbreak in West
Africa, which is overseeing the rapid deployment of
trained medical and support personnel to the affected
countries. We also commend other bilateral and
multilateral donors for their sustained commitment.
Lithuania has contributed through the World Food
Programme and is closely coordinating responses with
its EU partners. The European Union leaders earlier in
October committed to strengthening the comprehensive
EU response to the Ebola epidemic, setting a target
of €1.1 billion. Among other steps, the EU has sent
medical and humanitarian experts, deployed mobile
laboratories, shipped vital supplies to affected countries
and set up a system for the evacuation of international
and humanitarian workers who have contracted Ebola
for treatment in Europe.
Ebola has struck countries that have only recently
emerged from devastating conflicts — Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone. The outbreak has turned into a
complex emergency with significant political, social,
economic, humanitarian and security dimensions
that the Governments of the affected States have
been working tirelessly to address since its outset. It
threatens to cancel the hard-won reconstruction and
development gains of those countries. The Ebola crisis
has affected basic health care, food security, livelihoods
and education, with a disproportionate impact on
vulnerable groups, such as pregnant women, children
and the elderly. Ebola orphans have emerged as a major
issue, demanding enhanced efforts on the part of the
United Nations and other international partners to
ensure adequate child protection. Ebola survivors face
stigmatization when reintegrating into their daily lives.
While we focus our efforts on ending the Ebola
outbreak, it is crucial to have a parallel advanced
reflection on the post-Ebola phase, which will require
comprehensive and coordinated long-term strategies to
rebuild the capacities of the health-care systems and
strengthen the resilience of post-conflict societies. We
remain ready to actively engage with our partners in
such efforts.

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): We
thank our United States colleague Samantha Power
for having requested the convening of this debate. We
hope that the continued commitment of the Security
Council and the General Assembly will provide the
support necessary to the ongoing efforts to defeat the
Ebola epidemic in West Africa. I would especially like
to thank Special Envoy David Nabarro and Special
Representative Anthony Banbury for their briefings and
tireless efforts. I particularly wish to thank Mr. Thomas
Mauget, Head of the French Red Cross in Guinea, for
his account from Conakry of the work on the ground.
On behalf of Luxembourg, I wish to pay tribute to
the heroic commitment of thousands of national and
international volunteers who, at the risk of their very
lives, are trying to contain the Ebola epidemic in West
Africa. I also wish to express my sincere condolences to
the authorities and colleagues of Rwanda for the loss on
17 November of Mr. Marcel Rudasingwa, Ebola Crisis
Manager for Guinea under the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER).
Although the latest situation report of the World
Health Organization (WHO) offers a glimmer of
hope, the time is not ripe for complacency. On the
contrary, the efforts of the international community
must be pursued and intensified. As our colleague from
Lithuania reminded us a moment ago, the European
Union and its member States have committed to
mobilizing over €1 billion. Many are sending medical
and humanitarian personnel, mobile laboratories or
specialized equipment and supplies. The European
Union Emergency Response Coordination Centre has
been activated, and within that framework Luxembourg
is providing medical evacuation capability to repatriate
international humanitarian workers who might be
infected with the Ebola virus. As of mid-December,
two aircraft of the specially equipped Luxembourg
air ambulance will be available to evacuate patients
infected with the Ebola virus. All member States, the
United Nations, its agencies and relevant international
organizations can call on that capability, which is
critical to supporting humanitarian personnel deployed
on the ground.
Moreover, since early this month, my country
has mobilized strategic air transport capabilities that
have allowed the delivery of humanitarian equipment
to Conakry, Freetown and Monrovia. This logistical
operation has strengthened UNMEER and the World
Food Programme capacity to respond to the Ebola

S/PV.7318

epidemic by providing them, inter alia, with medical
vehicles and communications equipment valued at
€1 million. Luxembourg’s total contribution to the fight
against the Ebola epidemic and to the preparation of
countries in the region today is over $2 million.
The spread of the Ebola virus to Mali is a distressing
development. We are nevertheless convinced that the
rapid reaction of the Malian authorities, partnering
with WHO and UNMEER, will make it possible to
quickly contain the virus. The case of Mali illustrates
the importance for Member States of the region to
prepare, prevent, track, isolate and treat all Ebola
cases as quickly as possible. They need our support to
strengthen their capacity in this area. For our part, we
are supporting a regional programme established by
the Red Cross to assist Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Mali, the Niger and Senegal.
We welcome the responsible attitude of all Member
States that have maintained their transportation and
trade with the countries most heavily affected by the
epidemic. We also commend the airlines and maritime
transport companies that continue to provide their
essential services for the economy of the countries of
the region.
Beyond the emergency, we must already begin
preparing for the post-Ebola scenario. The Guinea
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
which I have the honour of chairing, is working actively
to that end with the authorities of the Republic of Guinea
and with the Liberian and Sierra Leone configurations
of the PBC. On 3 November, the three configurations
held a joint meeting to assess the multifaceted impact of
the Ebola epidemic. After the meeting, we sent a letter
to the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
requesting that he ask the Secretary-General to assess
the impact of the epidemic in the areas of security, local
governance, political institutions, social cohesion and
sustainable economic development. That assessment
will make it possible for the international community
to better support the recovery of Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone over the longer term. The Peacebuilding
Commission will have a role to play in this context, as
recognized in presidential statement S/PRST/2014/24,
which we have just adopted at the initiative of the
United States.
To conclude, I would like to assure the Council
of my country’s full and complete commitment to
contribute concretely to the unprecedented effort of the
international community to free the affected countries

14-6428119/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

from the Ebola virus and thereby to eradicate that threat
to international peace and security.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
I want to add my thanks to those of others to Special
Envoy David Nabarro, Special Representative Anthony
Banbury, and Thomas Mauget for their tireless work in
combating this epidemic. I do not want those thanks to
sound formulaic. They are deep and heartfelt. I would
also like, through the four ambassadors of the mostaffected countries, to convey our admiration for all
the national and international health workers who are
working in the most-affected countries and to offer
them our continued wholehearted support.
We heard today that Ebola continues to attack lives,
livelihoods, societies and economies. In some places
we are making progress in containing the disease,
but in others it continues to spread. The global battle
to counter that threat is also increasing, but not at a
sufficient pace. We must do more, not only to extinguish
the current crisis but also to lay the foundations for
tomorrow, for the recovery of West Africa and its
people. If we succeed in outpacing the disease, as is
our goal, tomorrow may come sooner than we think.
Preparations for that must start today.
The United Kingdom continues to play its part
in the global battle against Ebola. I am going simply
to list what we do, not for the purpose of saying how
much we do, but in order to say that much more needs
to be done. So far, we have committed $350 million to
combating the disease. Alongside civilian staff, 820
United Kingdom military personnel are currently on
the ground in Sierra Leone supporting national efforts.
Since our last such Council meeting (see S/PV.7279), the
United Kingdom has increased our package of support,
which includes 750 treatment beds for up 8,800 patients
over six months. The first United Kingdom-funded
treatment centre opened in Kerry Town, and five more
are being built.
We are also supporting others to deliver critical safe
burial work and World Health Organization training for
over 800 health workers a week. The United Kingdom
naval ship Argus and three helicopters are facilitating
greater mobility and logistical support for heroic
medical teams and aid experts. We are also working
critically to deliver 200 community health-care centres
across Sierra Leone over the next two months and
are rolling out our own command-and-control model

20/35

21/11/2014

to districts. However, in the words of our Foreign
Secretary, who spoke from Sierra Leone last week, “We
are beginning to see early signs of impact, but despite
our and others’ efforts, this battle has only just begun.”
We thank those already making a critical
contribution, including Australia, Denmark and the
Netherlands, which are working so closely with us
in Sierra Leone, as well as Cuba, China, Venezuela,
France, the European Union more widely and the
United States and so many others for helping the people
of the countries most affected. We call on existing and
potential partners to explore whether they can help in
filling two key missing pieces in our contribution to
Sierra Leone. First, we need more health-care workers to
staff the six Ebola treatment centres that are being built.
We can provide pre-deployment training, in-country
training and guidance for any Member State able to
deploy a large number of staff on rotation. Second, we
need laboratory technicians and biomedical scientists to
help United Kingdom staff run the laboratories. Rapid
and accurate diagnosis of Ebola is critical to treatment
and containment.
We have heard today that the United Nations,
through the United Nations Mission for Emergency
Ebola Response (UNMEER), is ramping up efforts in
the three most-affected countries and Mali. It is right and
critical that UNMEER continues to buttress regional
preparedness while battling the current outbreak. The
challenges remain huge. David Nabarro highlighted the
need for a further $600 million in contributions. The
United Kingdom has contributed $30 million to the
United Nations multi-donor trust fund. We are grateful
to David and Tony for providing the strong political
leadership and operational direction that are necessary
to lead the international effort.
We all need to support UNMEER in its critical
functions. Those include, in particular, coordinating
the United Nations system, including the agencies
on the ground, and building partnerships with other
actors at the Headquarters, country and district levels;
harnessing the global supply chain with a platform
extending to the district level; rapidly mobilizing and
coordinating resources, including scaling up staffing;
communicating with all stakeholders so that we can spot
gaps together, share analysis and create solutions; and
focusing on all the most affected countries, including
preparedness and contingency planning for the longer
term.

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

By planning today for the reconstruction and
recovery efforts of tomorrow, the United Nations must
continue to play a key role. The Group of 20 underlines
strong global support for all actors playing their part.
Collectively, we must also move faster in supporting
the development of vaccines and stand prepared to
deploy them at scale should the circumstances require.
I would also like to join others in highlighting one
pressing need, which is the rapid scaling-up of skilled
health workers and other staff, not just in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Guinea, but in those three countries in
particular and at the district level. We must reach every
person in need.
The Council must continue to keep the world’s
attention on this threat to international peace and
security. Ebola’s attack on West Africa is an attack on
all of us. The international community must continue
to fight it together.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this very
important meeting. I also thank Mr. Anthony Banbury,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission for Emergency
Ebola Response (UNMEER); Mr. David Nabarro,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Ebola; and
Mr. Thomas Mauget, Head of the French Red Cross in
Guinea, for their briefings.
The Ebola epidemic, which has recently spread
in a number of West African States, has become
more than a general public health crisis and is now
a multidimensional crisis at the political, social,
economic, humanitarian and security levels. It has
expanded beyond West Africa to become a global threat
to international peace and security. In fact, the three
States most affected by the epidemic — Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone — are currently on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Well before the epidemic,
those States were already at a highly vulnerable postcrisis stage. The epidemic has gravely damaged their
economies, which are expected to suffer $32.6 billion
in losses by 2015 if it is not contained. That comes in
addition to the epidemic’s long-term humanitarian and
social ramifications.
This dangerous virus not only kills its victims,
but also leaves a deep impact on the societies where it
spreads. Despite the fact that the rates of contagion in
Guinea and Liberia have recently stabilized, according to
the most recent report of the World Health Organization,

S/PV.7318

we must continue to work to contain and eliminate it
before it spreads to neighbouring States, especially
in the light of the appearance of individual cases in
Mali, which have affected a number of personnnel
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. The threat of further
spread is exacerbated by geographical proximity, free
movement across borders and the connections among
the economies of the regional States.
UNMEER has begun to coordinate activities with
various United Nations agencies and programmes in
order to guarantee the implementation of its mandate
while observing the best possible and effective use of
resources and avoiding duplication of functions.
We therefore call upon all national, regional and
international parties, especially UNMEER, to identify
response gaps with a view to halting the spread of the
virus and treating those affected. Basic services must
be effectively and efficiently provided, as monitoring
and dealing with the spread of the epidemic will require
strengthened coordinated action above and beyond the
parameters of a general debate on the topic. All of the
efforts of the various entities, including the Mano River
Union, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the European Union, the World
Bank, the United Nations system and international
partners must be harmonized in order to achieve that
goal.
According to General Assembly resolution 69/1,
which was sponsored by 154 States, including Jordan,
and which calls for action to halt the frightening
spread of the virus in Africa and for the expansion
of an international response to assist in eliminating
the epidemic in West Africa, we wish to reaffirm the
need to ensure priority for preventive measures to halt
the spread of the epidemic. In that regard, we must
continue with a high-level determination to deal with
the developing and well-thought-out work plans and
mechanisms to strengthen response at all levels. We
also emphasize the important role of national leadership
in the affected countries.
In that context, Jordan has established a national
commission to prepare an executive plan to deal
with the Ebola virus, which includes providing all
of the measures recommended by the World Health
Organization, as well as all requirements for the
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of the epidemic, in
addition to communication with all the relevant parties.

14-6428121/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

In conclusion, we urge the international community
to continue providing this level of support to affected
countries by providing the necessary resources and
assistance, including field hospitals, clinical services,
mobile laboratories and specialized trained personnel
and methods of diagnosis aimed at women and children,
and ensuring increased scientific research and readiness
to combat the epidemic.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Anthony Banbury, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General David Nabarro and Mr. Thomas
Mauget for their briefings on the situation concerning
the spread of the Ebola virus and on the existing needs
of the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response (UNMEER) in combating the outbreak.
We agree that the further spread of the epidemic in
African countries could carry the threat of destabilizing
the situation and potentially be fraught with the danger
of reigniting dormant conflicts and outbreaks of
violence — which could undo the significant efforts
carried out in recent times.
However, Ebola quarantine measures arguably
hamper the cooperation of the United Nations presence
in West Africa, including when it comes to the transfer
of equipment. We pay tribute to the courage of civilian
personnel and military contingents in the Mission, who
remain in the countries of the region in spite of the
gravity of the situation.
For its part, Russia supports international efforts
to combat the epidemic and mitigate its negative
impact on the economy, security and stability of
affected countries. We support the central role to be
played by the General Assembly and United Nations
specialized agencies in this effort. We are making an
active contribution to practical efforts in the area of
the epidemic, consistently stepping up technical and
financial assistance to Ebola-affected countries through
both multilateral and bilateral mechanisms.
Last April, when Ebola had no yet been characterized
as a threat to international peace and security, Russia
began to deploy supplies of medication and equipment
to West Africa through the World Health Organization
(WHO). Our country was among the first to deploy to
Guinea a specialized anti-epidemic brigade equipped
with mobile detection and virological laboratories.
We also began to provide food assistance to affected
countries through the World Food Programme. To date,

22/35

21/11/2014

our overall level of assistance stands at approximately
$20 million.
Russia is active in providing logistical support to
the efforts of UNMEER. In October, at the request
of the Mission, we supplied five civilian helicopters
to Sierra Leone. On 16 November, at the instruction
of Russian President Putin, Guinea received a field
infection hosptial, as well as more than 150 tons of
medical and specialized equipment to deploy it. The
mobile hospital, which is to be staffed by a group of local
doctors, includes a diagnostic ward, three infectiousdisease wards, a resuscitation and intensive therapy
ward, as well as a special diagnostics laboratory. Not
only can the hospital can hold and treat 200 patients
infected with the most dangerous viral diseases, it can
also provide remote functioning during the required
quarantine period. Russia has also helped build a
hospital at the Guinean branch of the Pasteur Institute
in the Kindia region.
Russia is also making a significant contribution
in the area of scientific research into the virus. The
world-famous State Research Center of Virology
and Biotechnology in Russia is conducting research
into developing immuno-biological treatmetn for the
prevention and treatment of Ebola, both vaccine and
immonoglobulin treatment.
Under the auspices of WHO, this year and next our
country will support the introduction of international
medical and sanitary rules, with a view to improving
the preparedness of national health-care systems in
countries in need with a view to responding effectively
and in a timely manner to outbreaks of dangerous
infections such as Ebola. The inter-agency work
includes proposals from the United Nations World
Food Programme, UNICEF and WHO on funding
humanitarian projects in Ebola-affected countries. We
are also considering providing assistance through the
International Civil Defence Organisation, the World
Bank and the multipartner trust fund for Ebola response
of the United Nations Development Programme. Our
proposal still stands on providing, free of charge, two
sanitary aircraft equipped with special capsules for
evacuating patients.
Russia will continue to take part in implementing
an international strategy for combating Ebola, in
cooperation with all interested partners, so as to tackle
the epidemic and to prevent a deterioration in the
overall situation in affected countries.

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this debate on the Ebola virus disease.
I also thank our briefers today, namely, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Mission on Ebola Emergency Response
Anthony Banbury, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral and Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola Anthony Nabarro and Mr. Thomas Mauget,
Head of the French Red Cross in Guinea, for their
respective briefings. We express our appreciation to
our colleague Ambassador Samantha Power of the
United States for her visit to the affected countries,
for her personal commitment to a better international
response and for her relentless advocacy for health-care
workers operating in the field, who should be treated as
heroes, not pariahs. We also appreciate the kind words
of condolences and sympathy from our colleagues on
the demise of Marcel Rudasingwa, an Ebola response
manager in Guinea. Our thoughts and prayers are with
his family.
Over the past month, the world has witnessed the
unbreakability of the human spirit: people from every
corner of the world willing to forgo their comfort
zones and put their lives in danger to assist populations
affected by Ebola. We have been informed about the
sacrifice of entire communities that have abandoned
their traditional practices for the common good, as
well as about the strong leadership demonstrated
by the Governments of Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea. In that period we have also appreciated the
unprecedented mobilization and effective coordination
of the international response, including through the
United Nations Mission on Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER). We are happy to hear that, thanks to all
those efforts, the transmission of the virus is on the
decrease, which raises hope for the eradication of this
epidemic in the near future.
However, as all our briefers today have warned,
this encouraging situation does not mean that we have
sailed away from the danger of Ebola — far from it.
Indeed, as informed by Anthony Banbury and David
Nabarro, the transmission of the virus is still intense,
the response plan remains underfunded, the required
isolation facilities are still needed, the cure is yet to be
available, and the disease is expanding geographically
inside the affected countries and beyond. In this regard,
while expressing concerns about reported cases in Mali,
we welcome the appropriate response of the Malian
Government.

S/PV.7318

We thank all the countries that play a critical role in
fighting Ebola at its source, either by pledging money,
sending health-care workers or military personnel,
establishing treatment units or providing training. At
the continental level, the recent decision by the African
Union Commission to establish the African Union
Support to Ebola Outbreak in West Africa was an
important move to support global efforts in the fight
against the epidemic.
We fully support the proposed concept of operations
of the African Union (AU) mission, and we pledge our
highest level of engagement with and commitment
to the AU mission’s success. We are particularly
encouraged that one of the pillars of the AU strategy
will consist in engaging with media, advocacy groups,
local communities, civil society organizations, social
networks and other relevant actors on the ground to
ensure proper public communication about Ebola.
That communication strategy should especially target
populations in rural and remote areas in the most
affected countries to ensure effective prevention and
fight against stigmatization, which would delay the
eradication of this virus.
Rwanda expresses concern about the socioeconomic
and humanitarian cost of the crisis, including for
education, businesses, national economies and
the livelihood of the affected populations. We are
nonetheless encouraged by the mobilization of
financial institutions and other partners to address the
devastating impact of the virus in the affected countries.
In this regard, we believe that, while addressing the
immediate emergency situation, we should look beyond
this emergency phase and devise strategies on postEbola recovery, in coordination with the Peacebuilding
Commission.
To conclude, let me express the hope that the
international community will maintain the current
momentum, increase its support and contributions and
enhance coordination and information exchange as we
strive for an efficient use of the available resources in
the field. We pledge our continued support to UNMEER
in all its efforts to lead us through this crisis.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Special Envoy David Nabarro and Special
Representative Anthony Banbury for their briefings.
We commend their hard work in coordinating the
United Nations and partners’ efforts to combat the
unprecedented Ebola epidemic and appreciate the strong

14-6428123/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

21/11/2014

leadership of the Secretary-General in spearheading
this challenging task. We also thank the representative
of humanitarian workers, Mr. Thomas Mauget, for his
briefing, and would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the health workers who are risking their lives
at the front lines of the fight against Ebola.

in changing behaviour to reduce the likelihood of
contracting the disease, such as safe barriers, have
led to some progress in tackling Ebola in Liberia. We
call for such approaches to continue. Mitigating fear
and building trust through communication with local
communities is essential.

The Ebola outbreak has taken human lives with
rampant speed. When we had an open debate in the
Council in September (see S/PV.7268), the disease had
claimed over 2,000 lives. Now, however, the death toll
exceeds 5,000. Ebola is turning into a complex crisis,
with profound social, economic and humanitarian
dimensions. A more comprehensive and unified
international response is absolutely crucial in this
regard. Having said that, I would like to share a few
observations on this matter of common concern.

The Ebola epidemic is far from contained, and a
gap anywhere in the response leaves space for the virus
to spread. Some may say that there is finally a light
at the end of the tunnel in Liberia. However, we must
remain vigilant, given the unreported cases of the virus
and the complicated reality of the fight against Ebola.
As the Secretary-General recently said, “Now is no
time to let down our guard”.

First, as a number of actors and resource channels are
involved in tackling this epidemic, close coordination
led by the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response (UNMEER) must be ensured. It is important
that all parties act in coordination with the United
Nations-led effort. UNMEER must continue to identify
and close any gaps for a rapid, efficient and coherent
response to the crisis.
Secondly, it is necessary to consider the long-term
strategy for rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
countries hit by the Ebola outbreak. The Ebola crisis
is ravaging the very fabric of the affected societies and
is threatening the gains made through international
peacebuilding activities in those countries. The recent
precarious food situation in the affected countries,
including the disruption of production and soaring
prices, is also worrisome. Immediate measures should
be taken to ensure food security in those countries.
Thirdly, to ensure sustained international
assistance, it is imperative to reinforce the protection
of health workers, including by providing more
resources and assistance, such as efficient and timely
medical evacuations. Current data from the World
Health Organization indicates that 584 health workers
have contracted the disease and 329 have died, as of
16 November. The high rate of infection among health
workers can be attributed to shortages of protective
equipment, insufficient medical personnel and difficult
working conditions in isolated areas.
Fourthly, we need to continue to pursue
people-based responses in the fight against the Ebola
epidemic. We recognize that community-level actions

24/35

The Republic of Korea has made a contribution
of $5 million to the Ebola Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund, and also pledged an additional $5 million
to support the global response to tackle the Ebola
epidemic. Furthermore, my Government sent an
inter-agency advance team to Sierra Leone this month
to prepare for the planned deployment of medical
personnel to counter the spread of the deadly virus.
We will consistently support and join the global battle
against Ebola until it is put behind us.
Mr. Llanos (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
Australian presidency of the Council for the initiative
to organize this debate on peace and security in Africa
with respect to Ebola, and to the briefers, the Special
Envoy, Mr. Nabarro; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER),
Mr. Banbury; and Mr. Mauget.
We deplore the deaths caused by Ebola and reiterate
our solidarity and condolences to the families of the
victims and the Governments of the affected countries.
We share the priorities laid out in the presidential
statement adopted today (S/PRST/2014/24), and we
would mention a few issues that we would like to
highlight.
Through resolution 2177 (2014), the Council laid
out its work on non-traditional threats and determined
that “the unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak
in Africa constitutes a threat to international peace
and security”. The crisis continues to have an impact
on peace and security, given its direct effect on people
and post-conflict societies committed to transitional
and peacebuilding processes. Situations such as this
generate risks and uncertainties and lead to destabilizing

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

situations to which the Council must pay attention so
as — together with other bodies of the United Nations
system, UNMEER and other relevant stakeholders — to
provide solutions and be on alert comprehensively to the
emergency, providing the conditions for the recovery
of social fabric and overcoming the insecurity of the
population.
We commend the resilience of Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone — post-conflict countries that are
focusing all of their developing institutional capabilities
on tackling this challenge. We hold up in particular the
efforts being undertaken by Mali, and we hope that the
UNMEER visit to Bamako and its establishment in
the country will help ensure Mali has comprehensive
support to face the emergency, including in border
areas. The successful experiences of countries in the
subregion could be instructive.
Together with the valuable efforts and achievements
to date, we single out the work of UNMEER and of the
specialized agencies, and express our gratitude to their
staff on the ground. Regional cooperation deserves
special recognition, including that of the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Peacebuilding Commission through its respective
configurations, and the World Bank. At our own
regional level, Chile is working with the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States and the Union
of South American Nations in developing plans and
updated protocols to face this pandemic by supporting
the activities of the Pan American Health Organization
and the World Health Organization. We also reiterate
our gratitude for the work being done by the Cuban
professionals on the ground.
As the Secretary-General has noted, the longer the
epidemic goes on, the higher the risk that it will spread
to other countries. We underscore the importance
of not letting down our guard and of keeping up
international support, stepping up our responses
and making them more flexible as needs evolve. We
support the strengthening of national capacities,
greater geographical distribution in interventions and
preparedness support for countries in the region. The
urgent efforts under way to meet immediate needs must
be supported by adequate resources and planning so as
not to jeopardize the long-term recovery of the countries
affected, which which must be considered when the
respective mandates of United Nations operations come
up for renewal.

S/PV.7318

We reiterate our call on all stakeholders to strictly
adhere to the protocols for persons who have had
contact with or who have contracted the disease, as
well as for the training of health-care teams deployed
on the ground. If our efforts are to be effective, they
must incorporate the human rights dimension so as to
avoid new forms of marginalization and exclusion. That
is a moral and a political imperative.
In conclusion, my country underscores the need for
commitment on the part of the stakeholders involved
not to isolate the countries affected. We believe that
any such action would undermine their prospects for
recovery. We therefore urge continued efforts to avoid
discrimination against countries or persons.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting on the status
of the crisis situation in West Africa resulting from
Ebola. My thanks go, too, to Mr. Anthony Banbury,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Mission on Ebola
Emergency Response (UNMEER), Mr. David Nabarro
and Mr. Thomas Mauget, Head of the French Red Cross
in Guinea. I thank them for their briefings and above
all for their dedication, and express our admiration for
the work they are carrying out to tackle this serious
epidemic.
Like other speakers, we convey our condolences
to and express our solidarity with the families and
countries of the thousands of victims.
Without a doubt, since our very first meeting with the
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Ms. Susana
Malcorra, and Mr. Banbury, it was clear that we were
facing a situation demanding an urgent response, given
the many thousands of lives at risk in the countries of
West Africa. Since that very first meeting, the Council
has been keenly aware that cooperation tailored to each
country would be crucial in treating those affected
and preventing the transmission of the contagion to
the region and the world, and that we had to avoid the
mistake of being selfish, stigmatizing, discriminating
or isolating, inter alia, by halting trade, closing borders,
suspending transportation or refusing entry to our
countries to persons coming from the region.
I believe that not only did the Council truly listen
to and act on that message, but that the whole world
paid due heed to these urgent needs, despite some
remaining gaps. Even though there appear at times to
be signs of self-interest or insufficient cooperation,

14-6428125/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

this is not the prevalent climate — not in reality, not
on social networks and not in the hearts and minds of
our globalized world, which views the Ebola epidemic
not only as a health problem but, as has been said and
as we have heard, as a multidimensional crisis with
horrific humanitarian, economic, cultural and social
consequences in countries that had been devoting all of
their abilities, intelligence, courage and hope in recent
years to the process of human, social and economic
development.
It is surely crystal clear to the Security Council,
having heard these briefings, how urgent the situation
remains. Cooperation is clear — there is no alternative.
We must all do that we can and must. However, many
possible scenarios arising from this extremely complex
crisis remain uncertain; macroeconomic projections
are uncertain, as are the financial impact and how great
the need will be. This is because we cannot extrapolate
projections to conclude how many millions of dollars
will be needed by the end of 2015, and when we do not
know how this tragic situation will evolve or indeed
deteriorate. Nor do we know the consequences and
knock-on effects, beyond the health impacts, of Ebola.
The World Bank, for instance, has estimated that the
impact of the crisis could reach $4 billion by the end
of 2015, while the Ambassador of Jordan noted that it
could reach $36 billion through 2016 and 2017. The only
certain and clear thing is that there are victims, that
we must transform fear into solidarity and that, as we
understood from the very first day that an emergency
meeting was held on this subject (see S/PV.7268),
the need to respond in a coordinated and cooperative
manner is urgent, necessary and indispensable.
We also recently heard from the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on the right to food, who said that
the Ebola outbreak ha had severe consequences for
agricultural production, on which two thirds of the
population of West Africa depends. Accordingly, we
should incorporate in our future planning efforts to
ensure cooperation and urgent action to confront the
uncertainty of hunger.
I would like to express our respect for the societies
of the countries of West Africa and their Governments.
It is not just a question of a series of statistics or an
intellectual exercise to say that our solidarity must be
understood as cooperation and as a necessary response
to an emergency. We truly understand the efforts
that all of those countries have made to emerge from
poverty and exclusion. In that vein, I also want to

26/35

21/11/2014

express our deepest respect for those who are working
at the very heart of the epidemic to put a stop to the
scourge. I also highlight the contribution being made
by many countries and many regional and international
organizations. And I stress the commitment of the
various agencies of the United Nations, the leadership
shown by the Secretary-General and organizations like
Médecins Sans Frontières, the Red Cross and many
more.
An Argentine doctor who works as a volunteer
with Médecins Sans Frontières, Carolina Lanclares,
who is out there in the field, spoke clearly about
the logistical challenges. Sometimes when we say
logistical challenges, we picture major investments or
sophisticated equipment. In a recent interview, young
Dr. Lanclares mentioned discovering that were people
infected with the virus in an area that could only be
reached by crossing a river from the closest town, and
that it had been 25 years since a vehicle had crossed
that river. When we talk about complex systems for the
treatment of people infected with the virus, therefore,
we also should bear in mind the day-to-day life of these
people and the possibility more people may fall victim
to technocracies than to the Ebola virus.
Finally, I wish to acknowledge the cooperation
pointed out by the Permanent Representative of China
and that of all countries as well. Why am I mentioning
what the representative of China in particular said? He
mentioned that different countries and organizations
were investing over the middle and long term in the
course of the emergency. I also wish to acknowledge the
United States decision to provide a maximum capacity
treatment centre to assist troop- and police-contributing
countries.
I say this because it has helped us in Argentina to
fight the prejudice, the fear and discrimination that we
very often have to ask the mass media to manage by
exercising the ethics of responsibility. When we can say,
for example, that there is going to be a treatment centre
for those troops and police who are in the field — in the
case of Argentina, we have troops in the United Nations
Mission in Liberia — that there is also a space to give
them medical care, we can thereby overcome fear — by
cooperating. That is how we overcome prejudice — by
demonstrating that we are not indifferent to people who
are out in the field in United Nations missions.
I know that the Group of 20 (G-20) and Argentina
and your country, Mr. President, a member of the G-20,

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

have without any doubt participated in the decisions
of heads of State to cooperate, but what I should say
is that Argentina was able to cooperate — I am not
going to say how much in terms of figures — but we
are cooperating by sharing knowledge that arose in a
State-run viral diseases institute, where a technique
for treating the hemorrhagic fever known in Argentina
as mal de rastrojos was developed. The researchers in
that public institute saw that their knowledge could be
transferred and used in the Ebola response, specifically
by treating the sick with a concentrate of antibodies
retrieved from recovered patients.
This transfer of knowledge and the protocols were
taken up by the World Health Organization. I do not
know if that is very much, but I do believe it is useful
because this area of knowledge is what was used to
treat the Spanish nurse, Teresa Romero who was cured
from Ebola thanks to the serum from a nun who had
previously contracted the virus.
It is essential that we continue following this topic
closely. The Security Council must support UNMEER
in the area of our jurisdiction — the missions in the
field — so that they have all the capacity they need in
order to respond to this unprecedented and very serious
situation and to the challenges that all of humankind is
facing.
I wish to conclude by stating that I listened
carefully to all the speakers, as I always do, but the
Permanent Representative of the United States brought
up an intangible dimension — the cultural dimension,
or subjectivity. Mr. Ladsous mentioned it the very first
day. It is not a question of donning a surgical mask for
people to be safe from contagion. It goes much deeper
than that because touching, hugging, kissing and close
physical caring for the sick are prohibited. Therefore, I
offer my great respect to Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Australia, who said that more women
were providing care than men. Indeed, traditionally,
throughout the world, women are those responsible for
the task of providing care. In truth, I want to express
my solidarity with those caring women. When I look at
the Permanent Representative of Liberia, I think of the
enormous challenge that this epidemic presents for all
of humankind and for women who must refrain from
touching, kissing or hugging. That is why cooperation
is not an alternative, it is an imperative, and that is why
responding to this emergency is not an option; it is a
pressing need for all humankind.

S/PV.7318

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Guinea.
Mr. Touré (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the members of the Security Council
for organizing this second meeting, and for all their
statements, which once again reflect the Council’s
solidarity with the countries seriously affected by the
dangerous Ebola haemorrhagic fever virus, which has
taken the lives of more than 5,000 people and continues
to inflict considerable damage.
I would like to offer the deep condolences of the
Government and people of Guinea to the family of the
deceased, the Government of Rwanda and the United
Nations in the wake of the cruel death this week of
Mr. Marcel Rudasingwa, a leader of the efforts to fight
the Ebola crisis in Guinea. It was not his first mission in
Guinea; he was a valued friend of our country who had
previously served as UNICEF’s representative there.
I would like to express our gratitude to all our
partners, particularly the caregivers of Médecins Sans
Frontières, the Red Cross and others, who have been
making every possible effort to help us overcome the
epidemic. We are especially grateful to the French
Government, which as of 14 November has supplied
Guinea with a major processing centre that is bringing
hope to the people of Guinea in their fight against
Ebola. I would also like to thank Ambassador Power,
Permanent Representative of the United States, Special
Representative Banbury and Special Envoy Nabarro
for their leadership and continuing commitment
to the response to the disease. I further thank the
representative of the French Red Cross in Guinea for
his pertinent briefing.
As of 19 November, the cumulative total of reported
cases in Guinea was 2,055, including 1,224 deaths.
The spread has slowed for the first time since the
epidemic began, and we are seeing a stabilization and
reduction in cases in some places. However, cases have
risen in Мacenta, N’Zérékoré and Kérouané districts
in Guinea-Forestière, the epidemic’s epicentre, and
elsewhere. In those areas, the response to emergency
situations is being ramped up by raising adults’ and
schoolchildren’s awareness with the help of appropriate
media communications; setting up an early-warning
system through community workers, traditional
healers and outreach committees; having Red Cross of
Guinea teams secure burials in the presence of family
members, along with support measures; identifying and

14-6428127/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

monitoring 100 per cent of contacts for a period of up to
21 days, with incentives to remain at home by providing
suitable food; and taking contacts with symptoms into
immediate medical care with secure transport to the
nearest transit or treatment centre.
The Government of Guinea and its bilateral and
multilateral partners — United Nations agencies, national
and international non-governmental organizations,
donors and other international organizations — have
implemented an accelerated plan to combat the epidemic
with the strategic goals of breaking the chain of
transmission in communities throughout the country
by 31 January; halting the appearance of new cases,
whether originating domestically or imported, by
30 April 2015; and strengthening Guinea’s health-care
system so as to improve the provision of care and the
national capacity for monitoring, prevention, early
warning and responding to epidemics.
To achieve those strategic goals, we will focus on
four areas: first, communication through increased
community involvement designed to gain the people’s
trust and improve the local impact of the response;
secondly, close monitoring of 100 per cent of contacts
in order to identify and diagnose cases early; thirdly,
treating and isolating patients rapidly so as to break the
chain of transmission as soon as possible and increase
patients’ chances of survival; and fourthly, ensuring
that corpses have secure and dignified funerals and
promoting good hygiene practices.
The successful implementation of our accelerated
plan basically depends on rapid mobilization of
human, financial and logistical resources; Guineans’
commitment, individually and at the community level,
to halting transmission of the Ebola virus; and ensuring
real-time operational mobilization of resources based on
the transmission trends of the virus. The results of efforts
to date include the completion of three Ebola treatment
centres and construction begun on seven others in the
affected areas; five transit centers with between 10
and 30 beds made operational; the deployment of 903
community workers who will monitor 95 per cent of
contacts; neighbourhood awareness campaigns through
outreach committees and 23 rehabilitated rural radio
stations; the establishment of 13 prefecture coordinators,
enabling decision-making to be decentralized at the
local level; the establishment of 42 active teams tasked
with ensuring dignified, secure burials; and support for
the food needs of affected populations.

28/35

21/11/2014

It is true that the response is beginning to have an
effect on the spread of the disease, and we are learning
which measures do not work and how to improve the
effectiveness of those that produce positive results. We
welcome the fact that the outbreak is slowing in some
places, but the battle is far from over. We must not let
our guard down, because the road is still long and the
challenges enormous, particularly regarding inadequate
real-time management of information from the field;
weak monitoring and evaluation of interventions; and
continued reluctance to accept intervention, mainly
owing to communication problems in some areas.
Added to that is the large number of partners,
which makes coordinating action difficult. In that
regard, it is vital that the deployment of staff from the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
to the affected areas be further speeded up. Indeed,
the implementation of efforts designed to control
infection by treating confirmed cases and monitoring
their contacts is barely enough to stabilize the rate
of new cases. That is exacerbated by mass hysteria,
nationally and internationally, which is an obstacle to
economic activity and creates a social climate that is
not conducive to eradicating the epidemic.
The Ebola crisis has severely tested our healthcare system and affected people’s perceptions of it to
the point that they are abandoning our health centres.
Poor funding of the health-care system, combined with
the sudden outbreak of the Ebola virus, has further
weakened the health-care system. Guinean medical
personnel have also paid a heavy price, with 88 healthcare workers having been infected and 46 of them
having died while doing their jobs.
That is why we believe that the struggle against
the Ebola virus epidemic can be sustainably effective
only if the current health infrastructure in the affected
countries, which was already showing signs of
weaknesses, receives substantial support in conjunction
with the Ebola response in order to continue to treat
diseases not related to Ebola and to address any new
health-care emergency. Due to the current crisis, many
health-care centres are not even functional today. In
that regard, my delegation reiterates once again the
need for a subregional approach. For we are convinced
that a selective, uncoordinated approach to the response
has little chance of succeeding given the porous nature
of borders and the mobility of the population.

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

Coupled with that already worrying picture, we
must recall that besides the medical and humanitarian
aspects, the Ebola virus epidemic continues to have
very negative consequences for the economy, social
cohesion and the political and security situation in the
country. The economic growth rate will be significantly
lower than what it was prior to the Ebola outbreak.
The sudden drop in trade following the closing of the
borders, the decline in agricultural production and the
loss of jobs are affecting household incomes and the
livelihoods of populations, and the most vulnerable
groups — women, young people and the elderly — are
being hit the hardest. The budget deficit continues to
grow because of a sharp drop in revenues and the skyrocketing unbudgeted expenses. Investment projects,
including in the mining sector, have been suspended
because of partners’ reticence. Social tensions, which
are already threatening the social fabric, are evident in
areas where reluctant populations are not cooperating
with the national and international Ebola-response
efforts. Other areas of collateral damage caused by the
Ebola virus include, among others, care for orphans and
families bereaved by the epidemic, the stigmatization
against people who have come in contact with the virus
and Ebola survivors, the situation of food insecurity
in Ebola-affected areas, the decline in health-care
indicators linked to cases of non-Ebola diseases, and
the closure of primary and secondary schools and
universities.
The considerable progress made in recent years
with the support of bilateral and multilateral partners
in terms of economic recovery, social cohesion and
the democratization of political life risks being
compromised by the far-reaching consequences of the
Ebola virus disease. Therefore, we believe that efforts
to support economic and social recovery must be
undertaken now simultaneously with those undertaken
to stop the spread of the disease in the three most
affected countries, which are also all on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission. In that connection, I
would like to thank the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations on Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone for
their commitment to undertaking an in-depth study on
the impact of the Ebola virus on peacebuilding in our
countries.
In conclusion, I want to thank all the donors
that have already contributed to the Ebola Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund. My delegation would like
Council members to join the Secretary-General and

S/PV.7318

the President of the General Assembly in calling on
countries to continue to contribute to the Trust Fund,
as the money raised is still far below the needs to
effectively combat this unprecedented Ebola epidemic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Liberia.
Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to participate in this second
briefing of the Council on the Ebola crisis. I also
extend my appreciation to the members of the Council
for maintaining the focus on this deadly disease and
on the global effort to contain it in the countries most
seriously affected in the West Africa region. I thank
Mr. Nabarro and Mr. Banbury for their briefings and the
deep insights we have become accustomed to receiving
from them. We pay tribute to them for their engagement
and commitment. I also thank the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for sharing
the perspective from Guinea. Liberia is also benefitting
immensely from the valuable support of the Red Cross,
especially for safe burials.
The first meeting and discussion in the Council
on the Ebola virus disease, held on 18 September (see
S/PV.7268), was a turning point in the fight to contain
the Ebola epidemic in West Africa. The initiative of
the Council effectively globalized the response to the
disease and gave great impetus to the international
community to begin a robust scaling-up of efforts. It
gave a welcome boost to national efforts to confront
the disease. It was in this Chamber also that we heard
the announcement of the creation of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, which is
making its presence felt positively on the ground.
That first Council meeting, held under the presidency
of the United States, owes much to the credit and
determination of Ambassador Power. We appreciate
her visit to the region and commend her passion and
commitment. After two months, we can now assert
that modest positive results are being achieved, but the
battle is far from won and the war against Ebola must
be intensified.
In their briefings Mr. Nabarro and Mr. Banbury
confirmed that the rates of infection and death due to
Ebola had declined considerably in Liberia. It is clear,
however, that the Ebola virus disease is not yet under
control. The Government continues to warn Liberians
to remain vigilant and avoid complacency. President
Johnson-Sirleaf recently indicated in a recent statement:

14-6428129/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

“With the determination of the Liberian people and
support from partners worldwide, we have made
good progress in containing the virus. We intend
to continue with stronger support for community
care centres, which support community members
in taking responsibility and ownership in working
with health teams in contact tracing, support to
those quarantined and help to those who face
stigmatization after discharge, free of the virus.
Our next step in this integrative process is to
upgrade regular health-care facilities throughout
the country through training, equipment and
supplies. This will minimize the chances of the
virus recurring and ensure that those suffering from
other diseases will be properly treated. A final step
in the process is obviously to obtain the support of
partners for our economic recovery to reverse the
decline in growth, in delayed infrastructure and in
job creation”.
Recent developments are a source of great
encouragement for us. They have renewed our hope
and lifted the level of optimism within the Liberian
Government and among the Liberian people that
the disease will eventually be overcome. Although
infections are continuing, we believe that the prospects
of the outbreak reaching the 1 million mark by January
2015 are less likely. The worst-case scenario at this
present stage may well have been averted.
I wish to recognize the critical role of the Council,
which garnered support for the international efforts
now under way in our region. We offer our thanks to
all Member States, non-governmental organizations,
regional
organizations,
international
financial
institutions, the private sector and all partners for their
valuable support, and we encourage them to fulfil
their commitments and to remain engaged until we can
together claim victory over Ebola.
We have said consistently that the effects of
this disease upon our society and our people are
multidimensional. As we progress in containing the
disease, we should explore any opportunities that may
arise to address, however preliminarily, some of the
social and economic effects that create tension and
instability and threaten the hard-won peace dividends.
We need to reflect on measures that enable the
Government to fulfil its basic obligations to its people
so as to restore the confidence between the Government
and the people. In that regard, we commend the Chairs
of the three Configurations of the Peacebuilding

30/35

21/11/2014

Commission for the attention that they have given to
these issues. We also see that United Nations agencies
are beginning to frame project proposals around
some of the social issues that are indeed the direct
consequences of the Ebola virus.
Together and individually, the Governments of
the three countries most affected have mentioned
that assistance through budget support is important. I
am pleased to acknowledge and express appreciation
to the World Bank and the European Union for the
significant contributions made in this regard. We also
thank Governments that have made similar gestures at
a bilateral level.
Support for livelihoods remains important. The
people are experiencing hardships in accessing food
due to high prices and the limitations of local supplies.
Farmers have not been able to cultivate, and there are
reports that, as the food-security situation worsens,
farmers are resorting to consuming the seed rice
intended for the planting and local production of rice.
The Ambassador of Argentina has already spoken about
this eloquently, and I thank her. Succinctly, I would say
that we need to avert a food crisis in the New Year.
On the political front, as I indicated at an earlier
meeting of the Council, the Liberian Legislature has
approved December 16 as the date for holding the
suspended senatorial elections. Mindful of the rapid
spread of the disease through contact, the Government,
through the powers granted to the Minister of Health,
has issued a regulation restricting mass rallies during
the campaign period. Acknowledging the difficult
circumstances under which the elections are being held,
our President has appealed to all Liberians to comply
with the regulations, admonishing them that “we can
enjoy democracy only if we are healthy and alive”.
Cognizant of the need for the transparency and
credibility of the polls, President Sirleaf also requested
an Economic Community of West African States
delegation that visited Liberia last Tuesday to provide
observers to monitor the senatorial elections.
I would like to assure you, Mr. President, and
members of the Council that, at this critical time in our
nation’s history, everything is being done to maintain
tranquillity and ensure social cohesion in the country
as we move forward in the response to the Ebola virus.
Finally, as I may not appear before the Council before
2015, I would like to express special appreciation to all

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

of the members that will be vacating the Council at the
end of this year for their support to Liberia with regard
to the Ebola crisis and the peacekeeping operation in
Liberia, the United Nations Mission in Liberia. We
expect to continue our normal collaboration outside
this Chamber as a Member State of the United Nations.
The President: I thank Ambassador Kamara on
behalf of outgoing members for those very generous
thoughts, and I am sure that we will all be continuing
to work very closely.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): What we can take away
today, if nothing else, is that we are nowhere near the
end of this challenge that we all collectively face. What
we can also take away today is that the international
community has fully woken up to the threat that we all
face. It is also quite clear that an investment in the fight
in the epicentre, West Africa, is an investment in our
collective health and security.
We are gratified by the briefers today, but in
particular I would like to single out Mr. Banbury
and Mr. Nabarro, who have remained available to the
three most affected States, giving us information,
clarifications and briefings whenever we seek them. We
are fully aware of the demands on their time; there can
be no two finer public servants of the United Nations.
Sierra Leone continues to suffer from a spike in
the rate of reported cases. The rate of infection remains
critical and depressing, and we look forward to a grim
Christmas period. We are grateful for the setting up
and the establishment of the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response; however, we hope that
it will soon evolve into an institution of sustainable
competence and of excellence in the fight against Ebola.
The effects on our economy and the economy of
Africa and West Africa have been well documented
and noted. Gross domestic product rates, economy,
employment levels, the transportation of food, crops
and agricultural cycles have all been affected. The
most productive members of our community, those
aged from 25 to 55, have been affected. The majority
of our populations, who are women, have been
disproportionately affected by this disease by virtue of
their role as caregivers, nurses and mothers.
We remain resolute, and the President of the
Republic of Sierra Leone, Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma, when

S/PV.7318

required to act, has acted. Our Ebola operations centre
has evolved into the national Ebola response centre,
and the Chief Executive Officer is a former defence
minister who is well respected by His Excellency.
He has called for a sustained and committed
change in the attitude of our populations, in that only
change from our traditional practices will ensure that
rates of proper burial remain at a promising level, as
Ambassador Power has indicated.
There is no time for complacency, and while we can
be cautiously optimistic that things are moving in the
right direction, we know that the fight is going to be long
and hard. Everything that you can think of is needed
in greater quantity. Personal protective equipment,
human technical support, logistics experts, food drops,
sustainable support for livelihoods, incentive payments
for burial teams, all of this is required in greater
quantities.
We acknowledge the efforts of those Council
members that have provided supplies and put their
citizens in harm’s way in West Africa. We are grateful
to those who contemplate further support as they make
an assessment of the situation. We call on the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER) to ensure the rapid deployment of staff and
personnel to the affected States. We call on UNMEER
to ensure that it has a nimble bureaucratic footprint and
that the materials at its disposal at this time are well
deployed and well used.
We also acknowledge the ultimate sacrifice of
those who have fallen. We have lost seven doctors in the
fight, and across the region various communities, towns
and cities have lost valuable health workers. We wish to
record and note the sacrifice of Dr. Sheik Umar Khan,
Dr. Modupe Cole, Dr. Olivet Buck, Dr. Godfrey George,
Dr. Sahr Rogers and Dr. Michael Moses Kargbo, among
those who have fallen, including Dr. Martin Salia, who
recently passed away in the United States. We also offer
our prayers for Dr. Felix Baez Sarria of Cuba, who was
recently diagnosed with Ebola virus disease and is
currently undergoing treatment in Geneva. Our prayers
go to his family and all those who continue to be under
quarantine and in isolation.
We are grateful not only for the lead that the United
Kingdom has provided in Sierra Leone in terms of
support, both human and material, but also for all the
high-level visits that have been paid to Sierra Leone,
including by representatives of the United Kingdom,

14-6428131/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

the United States, the Netherlands, the Republic of
Korea and other high-level delegations that have gone
to show by their presence Sierra Leone that will not be
isolated.
We have thought long and hard about the enigma
of Ebola and its origins in West Africa. There are
various theories, but none of us — neither doctors
nor laymen — can be sure as to where it originated.
Unfortunately, we do not have the luxury to indulge
in philosophical or intellectual debates or exercises,
because we are all geared to the fight in the emergency
phase of this response.
But as other Member States and colleagues have
pointed out, we also have to keep one eye to the future.
For that, we are grateful for Mr. Nabarro’s paper,
which concerns recovery, revival and resilience for the
situations in all countries, looking forward. While we
have lost citizens to the disease, it would be a greater
tragedy if we lose our economies to it as well. As I have
said before, we are being decimated in terms of our
economies and our livelihoods, but if the international
community looks forward not only to the short and
medium terms but also to the long term, we believe that
the interventions of international financial institutions,
working together, will ensure that our economies
recover and remain resilient. We are grateful to Cuba,
which has shown through its fearless medical diplomacy
that it remains committed to the fight. As I have said
before, our investment in this fight in West Africa is an
investment in our collective public health.
We know that the health situation in our countries
prior to the onset of Ebola was precarious. The public
health systems were precarious. With the advent of
Ebola, those public health systems are tottering on
the edge of ruin. We look forward not only to the
interventions of international actors to help us beat
Ebola, but also to rebuilding our public health systems.
It would be a true tragedy if we beat back Ebola and
yet down the road another epidemic should come and
invade our countries.
Ebola, it has often been said, knows no ideology.
It knows no religion. It is no respecter of age. It is no
respecter of creed. Therefore, our response must be
suitably multifaceted and nimble. We are grateful that
members of the Council and all those who have provided
support have set aside ideology, political affiliations
and the normal diplomatic engagements that concern us
to focus on what needs to be done. We as a nation State

32/35

21/11/2014

realize that our primary responsibility is to look after
the health of our citizens. We are grateful for the early
leadership provided by the peacebuilding architecture,
the chairs of the country-specific configurations and the
Ambassador of Brazil to help us focus on the long-term
economic dangers that we face. We are also grateful
to the World Bank Group, the African Development
Bank, the African Union, the Mano River Union and
the Economic Community of West African States for
providing the right political weight to the fight. We ask
that the United Nations system, as it moves forward,
remain fully engaged with African institutions and
other international actors, such as the European Union,
which have also mobilized and will remain engaged.
We as a country and as a region are perplexed by the
origins of this disease, but we are not defeated yet and
we do not intend to be defeated, because with the level
of support of our partners, our friends and members
of the Council, we have no doubt that Ebola can be
beaten and beaten successfully. There are no words that
could properly and appropriately express our sense of
satisfaction or praise those who have gone to the front
line. We are grateful to the survivors who, through their
blood, may perhaps offer a cure. We are grateful to
those who continue to experiment and conduct clinical
trials in Mali, and recently in Sierra Leone and other
countries, to give us a sense of hope and that a solution
in terms of better testing and a possible cure can come
about. From what we hear, some of the testing and some
of the clinical trials might yield fruits by the end of the
year.
We are also concerned about the survivors. For as
we commiserate with the victims’ families, we should
also celebrate the survivors. But it would be a bleak
future indeed if the survivors should beat the disease
yet face a life of orphanhood and without a significant
or satisfactory livelihood to sustain them. The response
that we are all engaged in must be multifaceted, and we
must be fully engaged in the fight.
Why is it that West Africa became the epicentre
this year or last? No one knows, but what we do know
is that the United Nations, with its special skills and
unique talents, can make a difference. As the three or
four most affected countries, we remain available for
briefings and clarifications and to make our presence
felt in all chambers of the United Nations. We are
grateful to the General Assembly for its focus, to the
Security Council and to the peacekeeping architecture,

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7318

but we also know that other institutions and agencies of
the United Nations have joined the fight.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Mali.

The Secretary-General and our Presidents have said
that this extraordinary disease requires extraordinary
measures. We call on all within the Organization and
the Council to help the Secretariat bypass the normal
bureaucratic entanglements and the information silos
to deliver the results we want. For the ambassadors of
the most affected States, this valid battle is personal,
for we have families in harms’ way and colleagues,
members of our communities, who call us and tell
us of the situation on the ground. The cities of our
collective countries have become places of silence in
some regions. We believe that the sense of hope that we
call on the international community to provide will be
sustained and collective and will not relent.

Mr. Doucouré (Mali) (spoke in French): First of all,
Sir, I would like to extend the sincere congratulations
of my delegation upon the accession of your country,
Australia, to the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I also welcome the United
States initiative taken to convene this meeting, whose
aim is to pool our efforts, our minds and our experiences
with a view to containing and eradicating this serious
disease, which from every point of view has a negative
impact on the economies of directly affected countries,
including Mali today.

As the three or four most affected States, we are
suffering the worst of it, but this is a collective fight
in which we know that we have to play our role, no
matter how limited. There are bright sparks of hope.
The rates of infection have decreased in Guinea and
Liberia. We see survivors who appear to be immune.
We see the roll-out of the United Nations Mission. We
see the work of the United Nations Ebola Multi-Partner
Trust Fund. As advisory members of that body, we are
dedicated to making sure that the funds are applied to
the most viable projects — those projects that will fulfil
the strategic objectives of the Trust Fund. For we know
that money in a bank account or money held as petty
cash is of no good to anyone.

I also wish to congratulate Mr. David Nabarro,
Mr. Anthony Banbury and Mr. Thomas Mauget
for their leadership and for the quality of their
respective briefings. In the same vein, my delegation
wishes to thank the United Nations, through
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, for the great
mobilization and the demonstration of solidarity so
promptly manifested towards countries affected by
the Ebola virus. Among others steps in that direction
was the creation of the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response and the recent visit of
Mr. Banbury, Head of that Mission, to Guinea and Mali.
My delegation also wishes to express the gratitude of
the people and the Government of Mali to our bilateral
and multilateral partners, including subregional and
regional African bodies, in their determination to
continue their efforts in the fight against the disease.

There are times at which we can despair; this is not
one of those times. There were times at which we can
think that perhaps the task we face is too much for us.
But when we do that, let us think of those day in and
day out on the front line who have to wear the personal
protective equipment suits all day and change three
times a day, and risk paying the ultimate sacrifice. We
diplomats are away from the front line, and we are not
in immediate danger. It is therefore imperative for all
of us that we do all that we can to support those on the
front line and make sure their actions and words are
matched by our deeds.

Unfortunately, my country recorded its first
confirmed case of the Ebola virus disease on 23 October,
in the Kayes region, in the west of the country. The
patient, a two-year-old girl, reached Bamako from a
friendly neighbouring country on 20 October after the
funeral of her father. The little girl and her grandmother,
who was travelling with her, made a four-hour stopover
with a family in Bamako before going on to Kayes. As
soon as the first symptoms of fever appeared in the
little girl on 22 October, her family had her admitted
to a clinic and then to the Kayes regional hospital as a
suspect case.

The President: I know that I speak on behalf of
all of us when I say we share the determination of the
representative of Sierra Leone. I know we all thank him
for giving us those particular and very powerful images
to take away after this debate.

The teams sent from Bamako to bolster regional
services made the necessary tests and analyzed the
samples, which were positive. Even though she was cared
for immediately, the little girl unfortunately passed
away. Faced with that situation, urgent provisions were
taken to identify the following: first, the host family

14-6428133/35

S/PV.7318

Peace and security in Africa

in Bamako; secondly, the travelling companions of the
little girl and her grandmother; thirdly, the medical staff
who had first contact; and, fourthly, the neighbours of
the residence in Kayes.
All those people were cared for and placed under
strict monitoring. The transportation vehicle was
also found and disinfected. On 10 November, another
patient from a neighbouring country was admitted to a
private clinic in Bamako. The results of the blood test
performed on the two health workers who had contact
with the patient proved positive for the Ebola virus.
Unfortunately, the patient and both health workers all
died of the same disease.
In accordance with its commitments to transparency,
the Government of Mali provides daily reports at the
national and internationals through the Ministry of
Health and Public Hygiene on the eradication of the
Ebola virus in Mali. As of 20 November, the situation
is as follows.
The number of persons who had contact with the
disease counted by the health services and who are
being monitored is 310 in total. Of those contacts, two
new suspects were identified and are undergoing tests
at present. Those linked to the Kayes case are no longer
being monitored, as the emergence of illness occurs
within 21 days. Those contacts are no longer counted,
hence the drop in the number of contact persons in
relation to previous situations. As of today, therefore,
there have been four deaths linked to the patient
coming from the neighbouring country, and one death
in Kayes — the little girl of two — a total of five deaths.
In terms of preventive measures, the Ministry of
Health and Public Hygiene has has a contingency plan
in place for several months, which has been distributed
to technical and financial partners. That plan includes
the following elements: the appointment of a person
with proven expertise as coordinator of the emergency
operational centre against Ebola; the strengthening of
health controls at land borders and airports through
the setting up of quarantines; the opening of two hot
lines for questions from the public; the activation of
standing committees to manage diseases at all levels;
the creation of a coordinating committee for prevention
activities and the care of Ebola; and the establishment
of a rapid response team. In addition, we have stepped
up epidemiological surveillance throughout the entire
country, particularly in the border regions with Guinea,
Senegal, Côte d’Ivoire and Mauritania. We have also

34/35

21/11/2014

established a rapid response team and put in place
provisions for awareness-raising and information that
urge people to avoid unnecessary travel to the epidemic
areas and to observe health and safety measures. Along
the same lines, an isolation centre has been set up in
Kourémalé, on the border with Guinea, which will
be supported by the health services of the armed and
security forces.
As one can see, the Government of Mali, despite its
limited resources, is firmly committed to cooperation
with all segments of society to contain the disease and
expel it from our region, which, one must recognize,
is facing all kinds of innumerable challenges. We call
on the international community for more substantial
and coordinated mobilization in support of the efforts
of affected and neighbouring countries for preventive
reasons.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Government of
Mali, I would like to reiterate our commitment to fully
cooperate with the international community, including
the United Nations, the Economic Community of
West African States, the African Union, the European
Union, other affected countries, as well as bilateral and
multilateral partners, in order to rid our planet of the
spectre of this dreadful disease, which is a true threat
to international peace and security.
The President: Before concluding, I would just
like to repeat Foreign Minister Bishop’s apologies to
our colleagues from the affected countries that it was
not possible to establish for technical reasons the
video teleconferecing from capitals that we had hoped.
The Council should be able to do better, and so the
presidency will discuss with the appropriate members
of the Secretariat how we can fix that problem — if that
can be done — so that we are not constrained by that
technical deficiency again.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
This has obviously been a very necessary meeting. I
think I would quote only Ambassador Marjon Kamara’s
thanks that the Council has “maintained its focus” on
this threat. Her own contribution is essential to allowing
and helping us to do that, as is that of our briefers.
I want to thank David Nabarro in particular for
being able to stay with us for so long today, given the
enormous pressures on what he is doing. Also, thanks
go to Anthony Banbury and his entire team for staying

14-64281

21/11/2014

Peace and security in Africa

with us by video teleconference at such a very late hour
in Accra, particularly since he has, like many who are
there, such long days. I also again thank our earlier
briefer, Thomas Mauget, and all of his co-workers on
the front line.
Finally, I would like to thank our interpreters for
giving the Council this extra bit of time. I am sure that
the Fifth Committee will look at that.

S/PV.7318

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

14-6428135/35
