Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

bly at its thirtieth session of any measure adopted by
those States;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3262 (XXIX) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America ( Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".

2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3263 (XXIX). Establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East,
Desiring to contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security by bolstering and expanding the existing regional and global structures for the
prohibition and/or prevention of the further spread of
nuclear weapons,
Realizing that the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones with an adequate system of safeguards could
accelerate the process towards nuclear disarmament
and the ultimate goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Recalling the resolution adopted by the Council of
the League of Arab States at its sixty-second session,
hel~ in Cairo from 1 to 4 September 1974, on this
subject,
Recalling the message sent by His Imperial Majesty
the Shahanshah of Iran on I 6 September I 974 on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East, 41
Considering that the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones, on the initiative of the States situated within each zone concerned, is one of the measures
which can contribute most effectively to halting the
proliferation of those instruments of mass destruction
and to promoting progress towards nuclear disarmament, with the goal of total destruction of all nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery,
Mindful of the political conditions particular to the
region of the Middle East and of the potential danger
emanating therefrom, which would be further aggravated by the introduction of nuclear weapons in the
area,
Conscious, therefore, of the need to keep the countries of the region from becoming involved in a ruinous
nuclear arms race,
Recalling the Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa issued by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity in
July 1964, 4 ~
Noting that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East would contribute effectively to the realization of aims enunciated
in the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa,
Recalling the notable achievement of the countries
of Latin America in establishing a nuclear-free zone,
4 1 Official Records of the General As.ffmbly, Twenty-ninth
Session. Annexes, agenda item IOI, document A/9693"/ Add.3.
~~ Ibid .. Twentieth Snsiun, A1111exes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.

27

Also recalling resolution B of the Conference of NonNuclear-Weapon States, held at Geneva from 29 August
to 28 September I 968, in which the Conference recommended that non-nuclear-weapon States not comprised
in the Latin American nuclear-free zone should study
the possibility and desirability of establishing military
denuclearization of their respective zones, 43
Recalling the aims pursued by the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 44 in particular
the goal of preventing the further !.pread of nuclear
weapons,
Recalling its resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12 June
1968, in which it expressed the hope for the widest
possible adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons by both nuclear-weapon and
non-nuclear-weapon States,
l. Commends the idea of the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East;
2. Considers that, in order to advance the idea of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East, it is indispensable that all parties concerned in
the area proclaim solemnly and immediately their intention to refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing, testing, obtaining, acquiring or in any other way
possessing nuclear weapons;
3. Calls upon the parties concerned in the area to
accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons;
4. Expresses the hope that all States, in particular
the nuclear-weapon States, will lend their full co-operation for the effective realization of the aims of the
present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ascertain the
views of the parties concerned with respect to the implementation of the present resolution, in particular
with regard to its paragraphs 2 and 3, and to report
to the Security Council at an early date and, subsequently, to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "Establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East".
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3264 (XXIX). Prohibition of action to influt>nee
the environment and climate for military
and other purposes incompatible with the
maintenance of international security, human well-being and health

The General Assembly,
Noting the concern of peoples to consolidate pl'.acc
and to pursue efforts designed to save mankind from the
danger of using new means of warfare, to limit the arms
race and to bring about disarmament,
Bearing in mind that, under conditions of continuou~
scientific and technological progress, new po-;sibilit1e,
arise for using the results of this progress 1101 onlv t,,r
peaceful but also for military purposes,
Convinced that the prohibition of action tn intluent
the environment and climate for military a11d oth:
43 lhid., Twenty-third Senion. agenda item 96. dou•n,:
A/7277 and Corr.I and 2, para. 17.
H Rc,olution 2373 (XXIJ). annex.
