A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/175
2 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.1)]
49/175.

International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming once more the permanent validity of the principles and
standards set forth in the basic instruments regarding the international
protection of human rights, in particular in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1/ the International Covenants on Human Rights, 2/ the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, 3/ the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women 4/ and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, 5/
Bearing in mind the principles and standards established within the
framework of the International Labour Organization and the importance of the
work done in connection with migrant workers and members of their families in
other specialized agencies and in various organs of the United Nations,
Reiterating that, in spite of the existence of an already established
body of principles and standards, there is a need to make further efforts to

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

4/

Resolution 34/180, annex.

5/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

95-77029

/...

A/RES/49/175
Page 2

improve the situation and to ensure the human rights and dignity of all
migrant workers and members of their families,
Aware of the situation of migrant workers and members of their families
and the marked increase in migratory movements that has occurred, especially
in certain parts of the world,
Considering that in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 6/ all
States are urged to guarantee the protection of the human rights of all
migrant workers and members of their families,
Underlining the importance of the creation of conditions to foster
greater harmony and tolerance between migrant workers and the rest of the
society of the State in which they reside, with the aim of eliminating the
growing manifestations of racism and xenophobia taking place in segments of
many societies and perpetrated by individuals or groups against migrant
workers,
Recalling its resolution 45/158 of 18 December 1990, in which it adopted
and opened for signature, ratification and accession the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families,
Bearing in mind that in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
States are invited to consider the possibility of signing and ratifying the
Convention at the earliest possible time,
Recalling that, in its resolution 48/148 of 20 December 1993, it
requested the Secretary-General to submit to it at its forty-ninth session a
report on the status of the Convention,
1.
Expresses its deep concern at the growing manifestations of
racism, xenophobia and other forms of discrimination and inhuman or degrading
treatment directed against migrant workers in different parts of the world;
2.
Welcomes the signature or ratification of, or accession to, the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families by some Member States;
3.
Calls upon all Member States to consider signing and ratifying or
acceding to the Convention as a matter of priority, and expresses the hope
that it will enter into force at an early date;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to
provide all facilities and assistance necessary for the promotion of the
Convention, through the World Public Information Campaign on Human Rights and
the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights;
5.
Invites the organizations and agencies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to intensify
their efforts with a view to disseminating information on and promoting
understanding of the Convention;

6/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/49/175
Page 3

6.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 7/ and
requests him to submit to it at its fiftieth session an updated report on the
status of the Convention;
7.
Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General at its
fiftieth session under the sub-item entitled "Implementation of human rights
instruments".
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

7/

A/49/405.
