S/2005/833

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 December 2005
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter dated 30 December 2005 from the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa to the President of the Security Council, forwarding the annual report of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa in 2005
(see annex).

06-20186 (E) 230106

*0620186*

S/2005/833

Annex
Letter dated 30 December 2005 from the Chairman of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to forward herewith the annual report of the Security
Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa,
which has been agreed by the members of the Working Group.
I would like to request that the present letter, the attached annual report and its
annexes be circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Simon B. Idohou
Ambassador, Permanent Representative
Chairman of the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa

2

S/2005/833

Appendix
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP
ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA FOR THE YEAR 2005
INTRODUCTION
1. The Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security Council on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa was established by the
Note of the President of the Security Council S/2002/207 dated 1 March 2002 with the following mandate:
-

To monitor the implementation of recommendations contained in relevant presidential statements and
resolutions regarding conflict prevention and resolution in Africa;

-

To propose recommendations on the enhancement of cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council as well as with other United Nations agencies dealing with Africa;

-

To examine, in particular, regional and cross-conflict issues that affect the Council’s work on African
conflict prevention and resolution;

-

To propose recommendations to the Security Council to enhance cooperation in conflict prevention and
resolution, between the United Nations and regional (OAU) and subregional organizations.

This mandate was extended lastly until 31 December 2005, in the Note by the President of the Security Council S/2004/1031
dated 30 December 2004.
2. The activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group until December 2004 are recorded in following documents of the Security
Council:
- Note by the President of the Security Council S/2002/607 dated 31 May 2002;
-

Note by the President of the Security Council S/2002/1152 dated 12 December 2002;

-

Note by the President of the Security Council S/2003/1188 dated 22 December 2003;

-

Note by the President of the Security Council S/2004/989 dated 21 December 2004.

3. By the Note by the President of the Security Council S/2005/4 of 5 January 2005, the Security Council agreed that
HE Mr. Joel W. ADECHI Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Benin serves as Chair of the Working Group.
Ambassador ADECHI relinquished his office 26 June 2005. From June 2005 to 19 October 2005, the Working Group was
headed by Mr. Jean-Francis R. ZINSOU, Chargé d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Benin, as Acting Chairman of the
Working Group. By the Note by the President of the Security Council S/2005/660 dated 20 October 2005, the Security
Council agreed that HE Mr. Simon Bodèhoussè IDOHOU, Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Benin serve as
Chairman of the Working Group for the period ending on 31 December 2005.
4. In the year 2005, the Working Group continued its activities in a new context characterized by the following elements:
•

The debate on the recommendations made by High Level Panel on the “Threats, the Challenge and Change” and of
the Report of the Secretary-General “In Larger freedom …” which were issued in the framework of his efforts to
bring forward the reform of the United Nations and which put a greater emphasis on ways and means to meet the
challenge of prevention of threats to the collective security.

3

S/2005/833

•

An assessment was intended of the implementation of the Millennium Declaration and of the Millennium
Development Goals for which conflict prevention and resolution play a paramount role.

•

Africa is still experiencing crisis and conflict situations in many countries of the Continent. Moreover, some countries
which are engaged in post-conflict peacebuilding processes are faced with complex difficulties and are likely to
relapse in conflict if the international community fails to adopt a more efficient approach in its relationship with those
countries. These considerations opened a wide scope of interaction with a variety of stakeholders in the efforts to
reshape the United Nations and to improve its actions in the field of conflict prevention and resolution, especially in
Africa.

5. The Working Group made its task to contribute to the debate on those issues in the framework of its mandate and to
contribute to forging consensus on major issues of the United Nations Reform. In this sense, it worked out a programme of
work identifying some general issues related the ongoing debate and some specific issues, with the aim of promoting
consensus on the need for the development of a comprehensive strategy for conflict prevention and resolution in Africa in
order to streamline the approach to Africa of the United Nations in general and the Security Council in particular. The
mentioned programme of work is attached as Annex III.
6. The Working group followed closely the discussions in the Council and accompanied its work on the African issues it
addressed and met whenever it was felt necessary and to assess the situations and the possible contribution it can bring.
Besides, the working Group organized two major events.
I. - Contribution of the Working Group to the Work of the Council
7. The Council devotes more than 60% of its time and work load to African issues. The Chair of the Working Group held
frequent bilateral and multilateral consultations with its members and the relevant Departments of the Secretariat to promote
a common understanding of the issues the Council is dealing with. The Chair met informally with the Permanent
Representatives of the countries on the Agenda of the Council and of other interested countries and with Special
Representatives of the Secretary General in Africa and held exchange of views with them on the problems of those countries
and the support the Council can give them in the various outcomes of its meetings. Taking into account the sensitivity of
country related issues it was an understanding that the Working Group will not address them as such as agenda items except
in the consideration of horizontal and transversal issues. Such issues were taken into account in the Programme of work of
the Working Group. It considered however the situation in Liberia from the standpoint of the possibility of cooperation with
the ECOSOC.
A- The discussions regarding the Cooperation between the Security Council and ECOSOC
8. The Working Group considered that the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission will solve definitely the
controversial question of the cooperation between the Security Council and the ECOSOC. In this sense, it devoted a great
attention to the debate about the Peacebuilding Commission. To this purpose, it assessed the institutional approach of the
United Nations’ role in crisis settlement, and the importance of the peacebuilding in Africa from the point of view of its
practicality. It mainly addressed the question as to how the coordination of actions between the Security Council and
ECOSOC can be improved to avoid economic crises spilling over into political crises and into an outbreak of violence. The
Working Group should proceed with the consideration of the recommendations made during the Policy forum in this regard,
in order to contribute to the work. The Working Group examined the issue at the occasion of the consideration in the Council
of the preparation and adoption of the Governance and Economic Management Assistance Programme (GEMAP) in order to
provide a strategy for the Government in ensuring transparency and accountability in the management of State resources,
and taking into account the recommendation made by the Secretary General in its seventh progress report on the United
Nations Mission on Liberia, (S/2005/391) issued on 16 June 2005.

4

S/2005/833

9. Taking into account the views expressed in the Council on the issue, the Working Group met especially to assess the
situation from the point of view of the possibility of cooperation between the Security Council and the ECOSOC. During that
meeting held on 29 June 2005, the Working Group agreed that, while such a cooperation in not to be excluded no action can
be taken by the Council until the proposed plan of action was approved by Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Transitional Government. In its Resolution 1626 (2005) dated on 16 September 2005, the Council
welcomed the signing by the National Transitional Government of Liberia and the International Contact Group of Liberia of
the Governance and Economic Management Assistance Program (GEMAP) which is designed to ensure prompt
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and to expedite the lifting of measures imposed by resolution 1521
(2003). The Council also requested the Secretary General to include information on the progress of the implementation of the
GEMAP in his regular reports on UNMIL. The implementation of the GEMAP deserves to receive due attention from the
Peacebuilding Commission.
B- Wrap-Up Session on African Issues on the agenda of the Council
10. An important milestone of the Work of Ad Hoc Working has been the Wrap-up open debate held in the Security Council
on 30 March 2005 under the Presidency of Brazil which favored an extensive exchange of views on the situation in Africa
and on the ways and means to increase the effectiveness of the efforts made by the Security Council to cope with them. The
President of the Security Council addressed a letter to the Secretary General indicating the areas of discussion to be
considered. It is worthwhile to recall here the main results of that debate:
11. As a principal organ of the United Nations, the Council must also be ready for a permanent process of evolution. It should
never cease to question and to improve its methods of work, its political perceptions, and to conduct frequently cost-benefit
analyses of its action. Despite what has been stated in debates and affirmed in many resolutions, in practice emphasis is still
on reaction to African conflicts and not on their prevention. Prevention requires the deepest causes of conflicts, such as
poverty and underdevelopment, to be addressed. There can be no peace without development or development without
peace.
12. The Speakers underscored that it is the politics of poverty and scarcity which give rise to most of Africa’s problems. They
recommended that, while prevention of conflicts should be considered a vanguard task to be tackled by the United Nations
as a whole, the Security Council should enhance coordination and cooperation with other United Nations bodies, in order to
help address deep-rooted social and economic causes of conflict in Africa and ensure development and employment through
fair trade, as a way to prevent either the outbreak or the resurgence of conflicts. For this purpose they welcomed the greater
involvement of the Economic and Social Council in this task, in particular by means of the creation of ad hoc working groups
such as those established for Burundi and for Guinea-Bissau.
13. The Security Council’s experience with the recurrence of conflicts that have long been on the Council’s agenda and the
complexity of those conflicts should lead the Council to take more creative and more inclusive approaches. In many
situations, the underlying economic, social and political conditions which aggravated, or ever gave rise to, a particular conflict
remain throughout the duration of military operations, only to reappear with full-strength once the armed conflict seems to be
resolved.
14. The task of the Security Council is to define the priorities clearly so that the broadest set of international actors - Member
States, regional organizations, United Nations institutions, international donors, the business community and nongovernmental organizations - with the United Nations coordinating, could be drawn into the search for solutions to difficult
problems during the transition period. Only through such a comprehensive and complex approach can the long-term solution
to complex crises in Africa be ensured. It is only when the peace dividends are palpable for the people in countries in conflict
that the probability of recurrence of conflict will subside.
15. The question of the transition from relief activities to the promotion of development is crucial. In this regard, the speakers
called for the creation of a new structure that would address, in an integrated manner, the situation of countries emerging

5

S/2005/833

from conflict. Many were of the view that in the post-conflict phase, immediate peacebuilding efforts are essential for
securing stability and for creating a solid foundation for long-term reconstruction and development. In that phase, a more
comprehensive approach and better coherence are needed.
16. The Peacebuilding Commission should serve as a mechanism for early engagement of the international community with
situations that risk sliding towards conflict. Good offices and other mechanisms for peaceful settlement and conflict
avoidance could be utilized, as appropriate, under the framework of the Commission. It should promote development as the
best means to prevent conflict.
17. They called for the adoption of rules and procedures to put Article 65 of the Charter fully into force, in order to explore its
many potential benefits and deemed the establishment of a peacebuilding commission that would help bring together the
objectives of peace and security on one hand, and sustained development on the other hand, to be the right place for such
and interaction for promoting sustainability. It was stressed that the much needed military action to provide security and
promote fragile peace processes have to proceed in parallel with concrete action to lead people out of the vicious circle of
hopelessness and immediate gain, thereby providing for a sustainable peace.
18. For peacebuilding, the key challenge, among other issues, remains the mobilization of sustained and adequate
international support, including funding and resources. With the concurrence of the Governments concerned, assistance can
be provided in pre-conflict stages: in the governance, economic and social recovery, human rights and humanitarian fields. In
that way, the United Nations as a whole can join together in addressing and overcoming the challenges which face
developing countries of Africa and several other developing countries at the dawn of the twenty-first century.
19. In the case of post-conflict situations, managing the transition from conflict to long-term development and preventing
relapse into conflict have also gained greater attention at the United Nations. The recognition of the inextricable link between
peace and development has opened the window for increased cooperation and coordination between the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council. Some speakers expected that relationship to develop further in an institutionalized
way. There should be closer coordination between the Council and non-governmental organizations that provide
humanitarian assistance, even if it is necessary to maintain a clear separation of humanitarian assistance and military
operations.
20. Many speakers portrayed the promotion of democracy, rule of law and good governance through governance-building
and capacity-building as a way to prevent conflicts. They considered making public institutions work in order to ensure the
rule of law and provide security and basic welfare to the public is a long-term endeavor, as central to the goal of conflict
management and peacebuilding, as well as supporting actions for a better management of natural resources by African
countries at risk of conflict, and combating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. Without prejudice to the right of
all States to import, produce and possess such weapons for the needs of legitimate self-defense and security, the spread of
illicit light weapons was deemed an obstacle to the peaceful settlement of disputes and contributes to prolonging conflict.
Greater support should be provided for initiatives such as the moratorium of the Economic Community of West African
States, which is being transformed into a convention; this could also contribute to the attainment of that goal.
21. I was particularly emphasized that the Security Council should act quickly and resolutely to prevent the prolongation of
armed conflicts and of human suffering and ensure that arms embargoes be more scrupulously respected. The Speakers
suggested that an Improvement of the decision-making process within the Security Council could be reached, inter alia, by
promoting better interaction with other United Nations bodies, regional organizations, mediators and representatives of civil
society related to conflict situations in Africa.
22. The Member States were highly supportive of regular Security Council missions to countries in conflict, which provide a
unique opportunity for members to engage in the realities of the conflicts the Council is seized of. They stressed that the
practice should be maintained and even increased in order to allow the Council to make use of first-hand information
regarding conflicts in Africa, especially the views of those directly linked to conflicts under review and their particular

6

S/2005/833

assessment of the constraints on, and the possibilities for, the action of the United Nations must be duly taken into
consideration to improve its decision-making process.
23. The speakers also stress the need to explore available non-military options, and to promote the effectiveness of
sanctions regimes, in particular through monitoring mechanisms, adequate listing and de-listing procedures, reinforcing the
capacity of Member States to implement sanctions and promoting humanitarian impact assessments. The Council should
refine the way in which it uses sanctions. It is true that the usefulness of that instrument has been demonstrated against
UNITA in Angola and the Revolutionary United Front in Liberia; in those cases, the sanctions were targeted and the political
goals clear-cut. Sanctions must continue to be assessed and monitored on a regular basis by the panel of independent
experts. Sanctions should aim at drying up the sources of conflict. Wherever a United Nations operation is in place, it should
contribute to ensuring that sanctions are enforced in an effective manner. Its mandate and rules of engagement should be
formulated accordingly.
24. The speakers were of the view that if prevention failed, the protection of civilians should be ensured. The Council should
ensure effective and timely deployment of peacekeeping missions. They stressed that the resources of the international
community are not unlimited. Hence, the number of peacekeepers deployed in the field cannot grow indefinitely. The Council,
in close cooperation with the Africans, must in each case define a genuine exit strategy. Due attention should be paid to
Implementing effective disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR), and disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
reintegration and resettlement (DDRRR) Programmes. Such programmes must be effectively supported and implemented in
a regional approach.
25. Many speakers stressed the importance of combating impunity. They recalled that the primary responsibility for bringing
perpetrators to justice belongs to local courts and tribunals. However, in some cases, where local institutions do not have the
capacity to investigate and prosecute, or in cases, where the fight against impunity is hampered by reluctant authorities, the
Council should look to the International Criminal Court (ICC), given its international status, permanent structure and
mandate.
26. They welcomed the closer cooperation between peacekeeping operations and political missions deployed in the same
region, as well as coordination among United Nations offices and agencies in different countries, as well a the presence of
the United Nations at the regional level in West Africa, and in the Great Lakes region, which demonstrates the gains that can
be obtained through their coordinated efforts and joint activities.
27. They stressed that peace processes currently being undertaken in Africa rely on growing regional and subregional
African diplomatic efforts and military components, thus demonstrating the strong and increasingly effective commitment of
African States to intra-African solutions. These efforts should be strongly and efficiently supported by larger international
community.
28. Conflicts in Africa cannot be resolved without taking their regional dimension fully into account. Both preventive
measures and effective conflict management must be designed and implemented through active cooperation with and
support from regional and subregional organizations. It is necessary to harness synergies on a regional basis and make sure
that there are no disadvantages to other countries. They welcomed developments within the African Union to enhance its
capacities for crisis management and to strengthen coordination with the United Nations, with subregional organizations and
with non-African partners, such as the European Union and the G-8. They stressed African ownership and international
partnership could be the synergetic platform for making the most of the investment directed to peace and security in Africa.
29. The Council should explore how to best support the ongoing efforts to build the African Security Architecture and should
work closely with the African Union and regional organizations to advance ways and means of cooperation. That should not
be misinterpreted as a way of extricating the international community from the problems of the continent but, rather, as
evidence of its firm conviction that Africa needs home-grown solutions to its problems. The goal should be to establish
efficient partnerships and an equitable division of labour between the United Nations and African organizations.

7

S/2005/833

30. For many speakers, relations between the United Nations and the African Union must now develop in an institutional
framework that should eventually equip the collective security system with a genuine regional pillar provided with adequate
resources for diplomatic and military intervention. The AU prepared for this by setting up a Peace and Security Council,
which the international community welcomed, and by creating a standby force. Coordination with regional conflict
management machinery in Africa must be ensure by means of regular reports on activities and networks for exchange of
information, which would provide the Council with reliable and timely information to facilitate rapid decision-making.
II- The Policy Forum held on 13 June 2005
31. The Policy Forum held on the topic “Enhancing the UN’s Capacity for Conflict Prevention: The Role of the Security
Council” held on 13 June 2005 was organized in cooperation with the International Peace Academy and the Center on
International Cooperation of the New York University. It focused on the identification of constraints which impeded the UN in
playing an active and efficient role in the management of crises and in the prevention of their escalation into armed conflicts.
The report of the Policy Forum is attached as Annex II.
32. The following keynote speakers addressed the Forum:
•

Professor Barnett R Rubin, Director of Studies and Senior Fellow, Center on International Cooperation, New York
University, spoke on current issues related to: “Assessment of the Possibility for the Security Council to involve in
conflict Prevention Activities”;

•

Professor Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-General and Special Advisor to the UN Secretary-General on Africa,
addressed current issues related to: “Promotion of the role of mediation as a tool for Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa: the role of the United Nations and of the Security Council”;

•

Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-General addressed current issues related to “Institutional approach to
the United Nations Role in settlement of crises and conflict and post conflict peacebuilding in Africa: The practicality
of the Peacebuilding Commission for the future of Africa”.

33. The above-mentioned presentations were followed by questions answers with active participation of the Members of the
Working Group and Invitees from the wider United Nations Membership. The policy forum revealed a gap in the
implementation of the UN Charter, mainly the possibility and the need for the Security Council to be active in the field of
conflict prevention. In this purpose the analytic capacity of the Secretariat should be enhanced, as well as the capacity of the
international community to act quickly to respond to early warnings to prevent the escalation of crises into violent conflict. A
stronger interagency coordination and larger cooperation with regional and subregional actors are required. The Forum
highlighted the need to devise coherent strategies embracing the three types of conflict prevention defined. The Security
Council should contribute through its regulatory activities to reduce the global level of violence.
34.The conclusions of that Policy Forum were crystallized in the Resolution 1625 (2005) adopted by the Head of States at
the Security Council Summit on 14 September 2005 on Conflict Prevention, in particular in Africa. The mentioned Resolution
was not negotiated at the level of the Working Group since it was intended to establish a general framework for conflict
prevention taking into account African realities. But it has been achieved only owing the materials gathered by the Working
Group. It is understandable that the Working Group claims an active role in the follow up of its implementation and has
decided to hold as a priority matter two seminars, one on the Cooperation between the UN and the African regional
organizations and the second on the “Formulation of comprehensive and coherent strategies for Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa in the framework of the implementation of the Resolution 1625 (2005) of 14 September 2005”. While the
first mentioned seminar was successfully organized in December 2005, the second remains an urgent task for the Working
Group and should be organized as soon as possible in close cooperation with the United Nations Secretariat under the
leadership of the incoming Chairperson of the Working Group.

8

S/2005/833

III- The seminar on the Cooperation between the UN and the African Regional Organizations in the field of Peace and
Security held on 15 December 2005
35. The Seminar held on 15 December 2005 was organized with the active support of the Secretariat and was successfully
carried out with its active intellectual participation. It gave an invaluable opportunity for a deep insight in the topic with such
prominent contributions as that of the Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union Commission, HE. Mr. Alpha
Oumar KONARE, the President of the Security Council, HE. Sir Emyr JONES PARRY, and the Assistant Secretary General
for Peacekeeping Operations, HE. Mr. Hedi ANNABI. We were able to attract to the Seminar well-known civil society figures
such as Mr. Vasu GOUNDEN, Founder and Executive Director of the African Center for Constructive Resolution of Disputes
who came from South Africa and Mr. Paul Van TONGEREN, Executive Director of the European Center for Conflict
Prevention, and Head of the Secretariat of the Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed Conflicts. He is based in the
Netherlands.
36. A comprehensive report of Seminar is available as a document of the Security Council. An abstract is attached as
annex I. Rightly, this seminar made clear that the African Peace and Security Architecture is shaped as an integrated
structure composed of subregional mechanisms and is entitled to be part and parcel of the global collective security system
established by the United Nations Charter.
37. The subregional mechanisms still have to be harmonized. It was suggested that this harmonization could be achieved
through the adoption of the model of Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) which is the most elaborated
and the most advanced beside umbrella mechanisms of the African Union. The report presents also critical undertakings for
the reinforcement of the African Peace and Security Architecture, the principles and the priorities of the cooperation in the
field of peacekeeping, the recommendations regarding the rules for the use of force and the full integration of the African
PSA in the system of collective Peace and Security established by the UN Charter, as well as the structuring and the
streamlining of the cooperation and the capacity building.
CONCLUSION
38. The Working Group has made during the year 2005 an active contribution in forging a larger consensus on the need to
develop a culture of proactive prevention of conflict before conflict and of relapse into conflict. One of the major
achievements is the adoption of the Resolution 1625 (2005), which should be thoroughly implemented. The Working Group
has also strongly promoted the idea of the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission and can take pride in its creation
and operationalization. As such the Working Group could serve as a forum for a deeper analysis of the implications of the
Peacebuilding Commission for the Security Council.
New York, 30 December 2005

(Signed) Simon B. IDOHOU
Chairman of the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group
On Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa

9

S/2005/833

ANNEX I
SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION
AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Seminar on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations
in the field of Peace and Security”
New York, UNHQ, ECOSOC CHAMBER, 15 December 2005
------------------------------------REPORT OF THE SEMINAR
INTRODUCTION:
1. In the framework of the implementation of its Programme of Work for the year 2005, the United Nations Security Council
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa chaired by the HEM. Simon Bodéhoussè IDOHOU,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Benin, held on 15 December 2005, in the ECOSOC Chamber, a seminar on the
topic "Cooperation between the UN and the African Regional Organizations in the field of Peace and Security". The
Concept paper is attached as Annex I.
2. The seminar was co-chaired by the Chairman of the Working Group, by HE Professor Ibrahim GAMBARI Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs and by HE. Ambassador Michel DUCLOS, Deputy Permanent Representative of France replacing
HE Mr. Jean-Marc de la SABLIERE Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of
France.
3. The Seminar was open to all Members of the United Nations and Agencies, Programmes and Funds of the United Nations
and NGOs and other Organizations of the Civil Society. Three major items were examined:
- Presentation of the African Mechanism (s) for Peace and Security;
- African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security in the framework of the collective peace and security system
established by the UN Charter;
- Capacity building for the African Mechanism(s) for Peace and Security .
4. During the Seminar the participants heard and discussed a keynote statement of President Alpha Oumar KONARE,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission delivered by Prof. R. Omotayo OLANIJAN, Ag. Permanent Observer of the
African Union. Statements were made by three following Speakers:
- H.E. Sir Emyr JONES PARRY, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, President of the Security Council;
- H.E. Mr. Hedi ANNABI, Assistant Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations;
- Professor Margaret VOGT, Deputy Director of Africa II Division of DPA.
The Statements and comments made are attached as annex III to this report.
The followings personalities were invited and took the floor as Discussants:

-

10

H.E. Professor Judith Mbula BAHEMUKA, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Kenya to the United Nations;
H.E. Mr. Peter MAURER, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of
Switzerland to the United Nations ;
HE Mr. Aboubacar Ibrahim ABANI, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Niger to the United Nations;
H.E. Mr. Maged Abdelfattah ABDELAZIZ, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt to the United Nations;
H.E. Mr. Jagdish KOONJUL, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Maurice to the United Nations;

S/2005/833

-

H.E. Mr. Augustine P. MAHIGA, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations;
H.E. Mr. Michel DUCLOS, Ambassador, Deputy Permanent Representative of France to the United
Nations;
Mr. Vasu GOUNDEN, Executive Director of African Center for Constructive Resolution of Disputes
(African Center for Constructive Resolution of Disputes (ACCORD -South Africa);
Mr. Paul van TONGEREN, Executive Director of the European Center for Conflict Prevention;
Professor Shepard FORMAN, Director of the Center on International Cooperation of the New York
University.

5. Fourteen Non Governmental Organizations both from abroad and based in New York were invited to attend the Seminar.
6. The purpose of the Seminar was to assess the developments of the African peace and Security structure and the
relationships with the United Nations and to workout recommendation on how to streamline them to increase efficiency both
of the United Nations and the African Regional Organizations in coping with the challenges facing them in the field of peace
and security. After thorough consideration of the topic the participants arrived to the following conclusions:
A- AFRICAN UNION PEACE AND SECURITY ARCHITECTURE
7. The essence of the Peace and Security Architecture (PSA) a is to place the entire Continent under a permanent
observation and interpretation of any signals that may be symptomatic of a simmering crisis, with the potential to explode into
a disruptive conflict, whereby those signals will then trigger off remedial action, in short early detection and timely and
effective intervention to deal with crises and conflicts. Emphasis is also placed on the need to promote democratic political
and economic governance: The PSA comprises following components:
- the Peace and Security Council;
- the Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union;
- the Panel of the Wise representing a moral lever for preventing and resolving conflicts;
- Continental Early Warning System;
- Peace Fund (Provision of resources to carry out interventions)
- African Standby Force composed of regional brigades and the Military Staff Committee;
- Regional Mechanisms of Regional Economic Communities (REC). The REC have
B- CRITICAL UNDERTAKINGS FOR REINFORCEMENT OF THE AFRICAN PAECE AND SECURITY ARCHTECTURE
8. The critical undertaking of the Peace and Security Council and the related structures identified by the Chairperson are as
follows:
- The anticipation and prevention of conflicts;
- The promotion and the implementation of peacebuilding;
- The development of a common defense policy for the Union;
- The coordination and harmonization of continental efforts in preventing and combating of terrorism; and
- The promotion and encouragement of democratic practices, good governance and the rule of law, protect human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
- The strengthening of the capability to launch peacekeeping operations to deal with blown out conflicts in all their
dimensions (refugee flows, internally displaced persons, humanitarian services etc.).

11

S/2005/833

C- RULES FOR THE USE OF FORCE AND THE FULL INTEGRATION OF THE AFRICAN PEACE AND SECURITY
ARCHITECTURE IN THE SYSTEM OF COLLECTIVE PEACE AND SECURITY ESTABLISHED BY THE CHARTER
9. African regional and sub-regional organizations had set new norms on the parameters for international engagement in
conflict situations, especially in civil-war contexts and in situations where a State was unable or unwilling to perform its role
and responsibility. The legal instruments establishing the PSA and the regional mechanisms defined the principles and a new
set of rules devised to meet the challenges facing the continent which the UN should take notice of. It was clearly stated
during the seminar that those rules go beyond the Charter in setting up a more voluntarist proactive approach. In this spirit
the African mechanisms established the responsibility to protect. It was emphasized that African states went as far as to
accept the intervention in case of unconstitutional change of government.
10. The Additional Protocol relating to Democracy and Good Governance stated some revolutionary principles emphasizing
the interdependency between peace and security, good governance and democracy in the sub-region of the ECOWAS. So for
the first time in the history of international relations States have accepted a set of rules for exercising state power and
determined sanctions to be applied in case of violations, therewith putting under international scrutiny questions considered
as pertaining to the exclusive jurisdiction of national sovereignty as internal affairs. In this sense, especially as regards the
AU and Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) mechanisms, the two most advanced regional frameworks
which go beyond the UN Charter, in stating that the two mechanisms will be operational even without the consent of the host
country, these mechanisms have given a practical expression to the concept of the “responsibility to protect”.
11. The African PSA appears more and more as an integrated structure designed to be part and parcel of the global
collective peace and security system established by the Charter of the United Nations. The new African mechanisms all
called for their mandate to be endorsed by the Security Council. But the African Union would be ready in certain
circumstances to proceed without the endorsement by the international community taking into account the new norms
established by in the framework of the PSA. The responsibility to protect in principle rests primarily on national states. The
international community should help states fulfill it and starts thinking of exercising this responsibility only when states are
unwilling or unable to do that.
12. In this regard, the participants agreed on following recommendations:
-

-

-

-

12

The UN should embrace the normative evolution in Africa and seek a framework to integrate the African Peace and
Security Architecture and its new norms within the international legal framework and the system of collective
Security established by the UN Charter;
Mechanisms should be established to ensure clear and direct communication between the new organs established
and the UN and to maintain regular exchange of information;
A closer cooperation and a structured relationship should be established between the UN Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. The United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council could hold joint meetings. In this sense the African Union could be requested to provide regular
reports on its activities and those of its subregional organizations in the field of peace and security. The Security
Council should insist on periodic reports and review to allow for a collective review of progress made in the
implementation of given mandates and a transparent determination of when responsibility for the managements of
such operations should be transferred to the United Nations or to a coalition of the willing;
The AU should define more clearly how it will relate to its subregional organizations; the African Union should
remain the coordination center giving mandate to the subregional Organizations;
The United Nations Secretariat should seek to develop a wider menu of arrangements that would allow closer
interaction with the African regional mechanisms and would enable the UN to work with the region at much earlier
stage of conflicts;
The Security Council should support countries in difficulties and wanting assistance before the emergence of a
conflict. They stressed that the Security Council, in cooperation with regional organizations, should better use and
implement Security Council resolution S/RES/1625 (2005) adopted by the Summit of the Security Council on

S/2005/833

-

14 September 2005, on the prevention of conflicts, in particular in Africa and do so while taking into account the
Resolution 1631 (2005).
Severe human rights abuses should be seen as “a threat for bigger problems” and addressed at early as possible;
The African Union has demonstrated commitment in tackling the spectrum of conflict in Africa by putting itself a bit
forward.

D- PRINCIPLES AND PRIORITIES OF THE COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF PEACEKEEPING
13. The participants outlined following principles and priorities for the cooperation between the UN and the African Regional
Organizations in the field of peace and security:
-

-

-

-

-

African states and regional organizations should be involved in a true international partnership, which would have to
be coordinated through the UN;
Cooperation should go beyond peacekeeping and peacebuilding to include conflict prevention and resolution, by
focusing on social and economic problems in the region; stemming from lack of development and distribution of
resources, on political tensions due to marginalization non-participation in the political system, and on
environmental problems such as famines and droughts which tended to exacerbate the already existing social,
economic, and political challenges. They should be included in the international approach to African conflicts; a
particular attention should be given to youth and unemployment problems on the African continent.
The enhancement of regional capacity is and should be pursued as “strategic priority”;
Equal importance should be attached to military preparedness and to capacity-building for the civilian components
of peace operations;
Regional and UN efforts should be mutually reinforcing rather than duplicative or competitive, in order to maximize
efficiency. The comparative advantages of various organizations should be properly identified; it is imperative to
avoid on the one hand, treating the African states as “sub-contractors” of the UN, and on the other hand, putting all
of the responsibility on the Africans themselves; Strengthened regional capacities should reinforce the collective
approach, and thus not diminish the global responsibility in promoting peace and security;
The cooperation should also focus on improving early warning, mediation and negotiation skills, preparedness to
respond to emergencies, peace support with a particular emphasis on civilian issues, and peacebuilding,
addressing issues such as security sector reform and institution building;
Peace consolidation should be seen as the next big challenge for the continent. In that regard, the envisaged
Peacebuilding Commission would present the right forum to assist countries emerging from armed conflicts. Hence
one of the main tasks of the UN today should be to prevent the reoccurrence of conflicts in Africa, prevention
strategies should include peacebuilding.
The UN should organize a “multi-stakeholder conference” in 2010 on “conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
development”. That conference should focus on a “coherent and integrated approach on the prevention of armed
conflict”.

E- STRUCTURING AND STREAMLINING OF THE COOPERATION
14. The participants stressed the need to take following recommendations into account as regards the structuring and the
streamlining of the cooperation:
-

Enhanced cooperation between AU and UN on early warning mechanisms;
Greater recognition of the role of mediators through full support to the Panel of the Wise;
Redefinition of cooperation between UN and AU as regards common interests;
Consideration of modalities and mechanisms for joint meetings of Regional Councils; and
Establishment of a UN-AU Joint Task Team for post-conflict reconstruction;
synchronization of external support according to the stage of development reached by each specific region;
Shift in the logistic assistance from just training to actual and material support;

13

S/2005/833

-

-

Creation of a AU liaison desk at the UN to ensure constant linkages between the two organizations on African
warning mechanisms;
Enhanced cooperation between the UN Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council; and
Greater attention to subregional organizations;
Harmonization of the structure of the subregional mechanisms to enable the logical arrangement of regional
brigades and cooperation between regional economic communities; whereby ECOWAS, can provide a useful model
along which the support from the international community to the African continent can be channeled;
Ascertaining of the African Union role as a coordination center giving mandate to the subregional Organizations
Maintaining the “centrality” of the UN in the strengthening of the cooperation between the UN and regional
organization.

F- CONCRETE STEPS TO SUPPORT THE AFRICAN PEACE AND SECURITY ARCHITECTURE - CAPACITY - BUILDING
15. The participants identified following steps to be implemented in order to support the African peace and security
architecture:
-

Equipping the AU and the Regional Economic Communities (REC) with appropriate management capability for
peace and security operations;
Putting in place a reliable early warning capacity taking into account the contribution of civil society;
Establishing appropriate organizational (less bureaucratic ) to manage the processes dealing with crises and
conflicts ;
Effective mobilization of financial and logistical resources, with emphasis on internal resource mobilization;
Enhancing the role of civil society in peace education and promotion of a culture of peace;
Ensuring operational complementarities with the UN;
Creating enabling conditions for the private sector;
A more proactive role of the UN in coordinating with other international institutions in order to stimulate and not to
substitute regional initiatives ;
Considering Impact assessment on peace building and human rights as an essential tool for fundraising;
Increase of soft tools as essential elements to enhance peace and security (i.e. training of civilians and the
establishment of international standards for military and humanitarian operations);
Improvement of UN good offices capacities to better support capacity building at the regional level; and
Development of closer partnerships with civil society, NGOs and national parliaments;
Training and provision of equipments and the institutional capacity building;
Avoiding duplications;
Sharing and replicating good practices;
Funding of the implementation of the proposal by King’s College in London to set up a training program for young
Africans, intended to provide a clear focus on the relationship between security, human rights, and development,
and to endow the African regional organizations with adequate human resources.

Conclusion:
16. The seminar made clear that the African Peace and Security Architecture is shaped as an integrated structure composed
of subregional mechanisms and is entitled to be part and parcel of the global collective security system established by the
United Nations Charter. The subregional mechanisms still have to be harmonized. It was suggested that this harmonization
could be achieved through the adoption of the model of Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) which is the
most elaborated and the most advanced beside umbrella mechanisms of the African Union. A particular attention should be
paid to the critical undertakings for the reinforcement of the African Peace and Security Architecture, the principles and the
priorities of the cooperation in the field of peacekeeping, the recommendations regarding the rules for the use of force and
the full integration of the African PSA in the system of collective Peace and Security established by the UN Charter, as well
as the structuring and the streamlining of the cooperation and the capacity building.

14

S/2005/833

ANNEX II
SECURITY COUNCIL AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA
Policy Forum Concept: “Enhancing the UN’s Capacity for Conflict Prevention:
The Role of the Security Council.”
(in cooperation with the International Peace Academy
and the Center on International Cooperation of the New York University)
New York UN Headquarters, Trusteeship Council Chamber,
13 June 2005
------------------REPORT OF THE POLICY FORUM
1. The Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa held a Policy Forum at the
United Nations Headquarters, on 13 June 2005 on the topic ““Enhancing the UN’s Capacity for Conflict Prevention in Africa:
The Role of the Security Council.” The Meeting was chaired by Mr. Jean –Francis R. ZINSOU as Chargé d’Affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission, and Alternate Representative of the Republic of Benin to the Security Council, and acting Chairman of
the Working Group in the absence of Ambassador Joel W. ADECHI. The meeting was attended by Delegates of the Security
Council Members States, of Donor Countries, of African Countries, and Representatives of Non Governmental Organizations.
2. During the meeting the following speakers made a statement and answered questions and comments made by the
participants:
Professor Barnett R. Rubin, Director of Studies and Senior Fellow, Center on International Cooperation, New York
University, addressed current issues related to: “Assessment of the possibility for the Security Council to be involved in
Conflict Prevention Activities “;
Professor Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-General and Special Advisor to the UN Secretary-General on Africa,
addressed current issues related to: “Promotion of the role of mediation as a tool for Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa: the role of the United Nations and of the Security Council”;
Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh Assistant Secretary-General addressed current issues related to “Institutional approach to the
United Nations Role in settlement of crises and conflict and post conflict peacebuilding in Africa: The practicality of the
Peacebuilding Commission for the future of Africa.” Due to the fact that Mr. KALOMOH was on mission abroad, his
statement was delivered by his Specail Assistant, Mr Musifiky MWANASALI.;
Mr. Myint–U Thant from the Department of Political Affairs provided concluding remarks.
3. The presentations by the above mentioned speakers stirred an interesting debate on the issues raised. There was a
general consensus about the fact that Conflict prevention refers to activities developed to prevent the outbreak of violent
conflicts which are consistent with other goals of the United Nations. Three types of conflict prevention were defined:
operational, structural and systemic prevention.
4. The possibility for the Security Council to engage in these three types of Conflict prevention was assessed in the light of
recent developments in the field. It was stressed that in order to be more efficient in the field of conflict prevention, the UN,
as a whole, needs to build up an information and analytic capacity with a view to enhancing its ability to develop options for
adequate action. The Member States should authorize the posting of Political Analyst in the UN Country Teams to allow for

15

S/2005/833

the thorough information analysis required. The action by the Security Council depends on the availability of such appropriate
information analysis. It was deemed that the Security Council could effectively involve itself in operational prevention by
taking measures to affect at an early stage the decision making of the parties, by engaging in mediation activities and, if
need be, by imposing sanctions on parties.
5. The need for a close cooperation with the regional and subregional organizations was underscored. Their comparative
advantages should be taken into account. The efforts made by the Security Council to come up with norms and standards in
this field have been welcomed.
6. As regards structural prevention which addresses the root causes of conflicts, more attention should be paid to addressing
the political consequences of economic policies promoted by the International Financial Institutions. This could be effectively
done in the framework of the Peacebuilding Commission. Greater attention should also be devoted to the structural
determinants of conflicts.
7. In the field of systemic conflict prevention the Security Council should promote the establishment of regulatory frameworks
for some activities as trade in small arms, in high value natural resources, and financial sector regulations to curb corruption
and terrorism and the financial transactions to pay for conflict goods. The need to establish mechanisms to shield African
countries from global commodity price shocks was underlined.
8. In general, the UN should develop common benchmarks with regard to the prevalence of violent conflicts in the world and
set goals for its Member States in this regard to reduce the global level of violence.
9. As regards Africa, one main remark made is that the UN has been more successful in conflict management and in conflict
resolution efforts than in Conflict prevention on the African Continent. The constraints impeding an efficient role of the UN in
conflict prevention were highlighted: resistance from the part of the Member States to the kind of intrusive activities which
could enhance the capacities of the UN in this field; the lack of political will to take action of preventive nature even when
there are early warnings; the lack of adequate and predictable resources for peacebuilding activities, etc.
10. As regards steps to be taken for more efficient conflict prevention the following aspects were stressed: the need to fight
poverty and to ensure security, to address the root causes of conflicts, a proper consideration of the regional dimension, to
build national, subregional and regional capabilities for conflict prevention.
11. The following principles were underscored as essential for successful conflict prevention: national ownership of conflict
prevention should be ensured; conflict prevention and sustainable development should be seen as mutually reinforcing; a
successful cooperation of all actors involved should be promoted. The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission was
deemed of a paramount importance for conflict prevention in Africa. It was called on the African leadership to depart from
ways of the past and to make conflict prevention their highest priority. The need of a larger adherence to the peer review
mechanism established in the framework of the NEPAD was emphasized.
12. As regards the Peacebuilding Commission the relevance of the different clusters of issues of Peacebuilding for Africa
were assessed and the comparative advantages of the PBC as a structure based in New York in relation to the activities
developed on the ground were stressed. Is should promote a better coordination between the Security Council and ECOCOC
to better deal with the nexus between peace, security and development. It was stressed that the institutional gap for such
coordination could not be filled with ad hoc arrangements. An interaction between the UN and the regional early warning
mechanisms was deemed highly desirable. The Security Council should support and help in the implementation of African
solutions to the African problems.
13. The participants called for a stronger interagency coordination within the UN. They welcomed the steps taken recently by
the UN in recognizing the regional linkages among conflicts in West Africa and in establishing the UN Office in West Africa

16

S/2005/833

headed by a Special Representative of the Secretary General Mr. AHMEDOU OULD-ABDALLAH. The new Office should
build up its capacities and receive more resources to be able to keep up with mutations of conflicts in that region.
14. In conclusion, the policy forum revealed a gap in the implementation of the UN Charter, mainly the possibility for the
Security Council to be active in the field of conflict prevention. There is a large consensus in the Council as regards the need
to shift from a culture of reaction to crises to the development of a culture of prevention of violent conflicts, both in preconflict and post conflict situation. In this purpose the analytic capacity of the Secretariat should be enhanced. A stronger
interagency coordination and larger cooperation with regional actor is required, as well as the need to devise coherent
strategies embracing the three types of conflict prevention defined.

17

S/2005/833

ANNEX III
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON CONFLICT PREVENTION
AND RESOLUTION IN AFRICA FOR THE YEAR 2005
(CORR. 2)
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Programme of work of the Ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa is
conceived to fit the high expectations the year 2005 raises in United Nations system. The Ad Hoc Working Group
will address the main pending issues of general concern which are relevant for Africa in the ongoing debate on
the establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission recommended by the High Level Panel on Treats, Challenges
and Change and some specific topics which need to be discussed with the aim of helping to define the elements
relevant for the Security Council in devising a comprehensive strategy for Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa. The main goal is to streamline the approach to Africa of the United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular in order to allow for a more coherent action of the United Nations in helping to solve the
problems facing the continent. The conclusions of the discussions will be formulated in a draft Presidential
Statement on elements relevant for the Security Council regarding the formulation of a comprehensive strategy
for Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

In accordance with the recommendations made at the public meeting on the situation in Africa on 29
January 2002, the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa has been established
by the Note of the President of the Security Council S/2002/207 dated 27 February 2002, which also defined the
mandate and the working methods of the Working Group.
Since 2002, the Working Group has carried out its activities to implement its mandate. At the end of each
year, its Chairmen have reported to the Council through letter to its President, outlining the achievements of the
Working Group and its recommendations for the improvement of the approach of the Council on conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa, and on the cooperation with the ECOSOC to this end.
The activities of the Working Group consisted in organizing working level informal meetings and
workshops, with the participation of a wide range of speakers coming from the UN Secretariat, the Regional and
Sub-regional Organizations and the Academic institutions. The Working Group has also contributed in defining
the Terms of reference of various missions of the Security Council to Africa and to the assessment of ways and
means to implement their recommendations.
In the year 2005, the Working Group will continue its activities in a new context characterized by the
following elements:
a) The ongoing debate on the Recommendations made by High Level Panel on the “Threats, the
Challenge and Change”. The High Level Panel has been set up by the Secretary General in the
framework of his efforts to bring forward the reform of the United Nations. It put a greater emphasis
on ways and means to meet the Challenge of prevention of threats to the collective security and
recommended, inter alia, the establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission, with the aim of filling
up the existing institutional gap in this regard;
b) The forth coming assessment of the implementation of the Millennium Declaration and of the
Millennium Development Goals for which conflict prevention and resolution play a paramount role;

18

S/2005/833

c) the African Continent continues to be shaken by crisis or conflict situations in many countries.
Moreover, some countries which are implementing post conflict peacebuilding processes are faced
with complex difficulties and are likely to re-elapse in conflict if the international community fails to
adopt a more efficient approach in its relationship with those countries.
All these elements open a wide scope of interaction with a variety of stakeholders in the efforts to
reshape the United Nations and to improve its actions in the field of Conflict prevention and resolution,
especially in Africa.
How can the Working Group pursue its mandate in this new context? The Working Group is expected to
contribute to the ongoing debates and to try to influence the outcome of the United Nations Reform especially in
its field of competence. In this frame work, it will address some general issues related the ongoing debate and
some specific issues in the framework of its original mandate, with the aim of helping to define the elements
relevant for the Security Council in devising a comprehensive strategy for Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa in order to streamline the approach to Africa of the United Nations in general and the Security Council in
particular.
1- The General issues related with the ongoing debate
1.1-

1.2-

1.3-

the relevance of the distinction between conflict prevention and post–conflict peacebuilding and the
relevance for the Security Council approach to Africa in the maintenance of peace and security. The
relevance of international mediation in the Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa;
the role of regional and sub-regional organizations and their relationship to the UNSC regarding the
threat of the use of force and the use of force; the relationship between the United Nations and
regional and sub-regional mechanisms of Conflict Prevention and Resolution in the light of recent
developments;
Institutional Coordination of the Response to crises and conflict situations in Africa.

2- The Specific issues
2.1-

2.2-

2.32.4-

2.52.63.

The promotion of Democracy and good Governance in Africa in the framework of Conflict
Prevention and Resolution: a comprehensive approach to the challenge of a functioning and efficient
state;
Regional approach to Programmes of Disarmament, Demobilization and Reinsertion and the
Financing of Rehabilitation and social Reintegration of former combatants as a challenge for
peacebuilding in Africa;
The fight against impunity and the protection of human rights in Africa – Assessment of the
consistency and of the capacity of the judicial systems to deal with the Challenge of serious crimes;
Case studies and definition of terms of reference for Security Council missions in certain African
Countries (interaction with the Group of Friends and Contacts Groups operating in the United
Nations);
The formulation of a comprehensive and coherent strategy for Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa;
Formulation of a United Nations sub-regional pilot project for the implementation of the strategy.

Definition of Activities and Chronogram of Action

The consideration of the above mentioned general and specific issues will require a wide range of activities
including closed meetings of the Working Group, interaction with relevant external stakeholders and partners, in

19

S/2005/833

the framework of informal meetings or workshops as well as open debates to be organized by the Security
Council with the participation of other organs and agencies of the United Nations.
-

Activities for the first Semester

During the first semester the Working Group will focus on the general issues while continuing as
necessary its interaction with stakeholder and other competent speakers to their convenience.
3.1•
•
•
3.2-

Holding of closed meetings
March – April 2005, discussion and adoption of the Programme of Work of the Working Group;
Identification of speakers and institutions willing to contribute to the implementation of its Programme
of Work;
Preparation of the first open event of the year.
Holding Informal meetings with guest speakers on the general issues

The Working Group will identify qualified speakers for an exchange of view of the general issues in
order to deepen its understanding of the problems to be addressed. The Working Group will make as appropriate
arrangements with the Secretariat so as to have whenever it is possible a meeting with Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General in African countries so as to exchange views on ways and means to improve conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa.
3.3-

Staging of two open activities in the first semester

In the first semester the working Group shall focus on the consideration of the General issues and will
work out recommendations for the United Nations System as a whole and with specific attention to the work of
the Security Council and carry the assessment of ways and means to implement them. To this end, the Working
Group will organize two workshops. The working group will hold a workshop on the general issues will be held.
3.4-

Activities in the second semester
Consideration of the chronogram of Action for the second Semester

The Working Group shall hold at the beginning of July a closed meeting to assess the implementation of
its programme of work during the first semester and adopt the schedule of work for the second semester.
3.5-

The activities to be performed during the second semester

During the second semester the Working Group will carry on meetings with guest speakers and will in
particular address systematically the specific issues identified in paragraph 2. In this framework, it will organize
informal meetings and work out a theme for one or two workshops in order to identify best practices to be taken
into account in a comprehensive strategy for Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa and reflect on ways
and means to implement them at the regional and subregional level. After the September Summit, it will stage an
open meeting in the Security Council to discuss items relevant from the perspective of the Security Council to be
taken into account in a comprehensive Strategy for Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. The Working
Group will prepare the Presidential statement reflecting the main conclusions of the discussions on a
comprehensive strategy for Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

20

S/2005/833

3.6-

Discussion of relevant items for a Strategy and Presentation of the United Nations Pilot project
for the implementation of the Strategy

The Working Group will examine in close liaison with the Secretariat elements relevant from the
perspective of Security Council for a comprehensive strategy of conflict prevention and resolution in Africa and
ways and means to implement such a strategy at the regional or subregional level, taking into account the
comparative advantages of the regional and subregional organizations existing in Africa.
3.7-

Preparation, adoption and presentation of the yearly report of the Working Group

The Working Group shall hold as necessary closed meetings to elaborate its end of year final report and
adopt it for presentation during the public meeting of the Security Council in the third week of December 2005.

21
