United Nations

S/PV.5801

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5801st meeting
Thursday, 13 December 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Spatafora/Mr. Mantovani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Okio
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Christian
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Burian
Mr. Sangqu
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Wolcott

Agenda
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission to Timor-Leste, 24-30 November 2007
(S/2007/711)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-64195 (E)

*0764195*

S/PV.5801

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission to
Timor-Leste, 24-30 November 2007
(S/2007/711)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Japan, New Zealand, the
Philippines, Portugal and Timor-Leste, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Borges
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2007/711, containing the report of the Security
Council mission to Timor-Leste.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by His Excellency Mr. Baso Sangqu, who will deliver a
statement on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Dumisani
Kumalo, Permanent Representative of South Africa and
head of the Security Council mission to Timor-Leste.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Sangqu.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa was
honoured that Ambassador Kumalo was afforded the
opportunity to lead the Security Council mission that
visited Timor-Leste from 24 November to 30
November 2007. As was explained last week during
our briefing (see S/PV.5791), the purpose of the visit

2

was to address three issues: first, to encourage the
Government, the parliament, the political parties and
the people of Timor-Leste to continue to work together
and engage in political dialogue and to consolidate
peace, democracy and the rule of law, security sector
reform, sustainable social and economic development
and national reconciliation in their country; secondly,
to discuss and exchange views with the Timorese
authorities on ways and means to assist the country in
developing capacities necessary to build on security
and democracy and other gains achieved thus far and to
express the Security Council’s full support for the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and the United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste; and thirdly, to assess progress made on
the ground relating to the implementation of UNMIT’s
mandate.
During the visit, the mission met with various
interlocutors in the Government, including the
President, the Prime Minister and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, and with members of the judiciary and
the national parliament, and it held a meeting with the
leader of the main opposition party and other political
parties.
The mission also held interactions with
non-governmental organizations, women, youth and
church representatives and representatives of UNMIT
and other United Nations agencies on the ground. The
mission also received a briefing from the International
Stabilisation Force led by Australia and New Zealand.
The report presented to the Council (S/2007/711)
covers the following key areas and issues: national
reconciliation and democracy, the general security
situation and security sector reform, capacity-building;
justice and the rule of law, the situation of internally
displaced persons, human rights and socio-economic
development issues. From the report it is evident that,
despite relative progress, Timor-Leste still faces
enormous challenges associated with political
differences among leaders in resolving critical issues
facing the country and socio-economic difficulties
associated with widespread unemployment and
poverty. In the humanitarian sphere, the plight of the
internally displaced persons remains a big task facing
the people and Government of Timor-Leste.
The report clearly indicates that despite these
challenges, the mission left Timor-Leste convinced that
the country is on the right path towards sustainable

07-64195

S/PV.5801

peace, stability, unity and prosperity. In this context,
the mission noted that political dialogue, national
reconciliation and continuous engagement aimed at
resolving challenges facing the country are the crucial
to resolving the country’s challenges.
Much still needs to be done, and the engagement
of the international community cannot be overemphasized. In this regard, we urge the international
community, as well as United Nations agencies and
multilateral financial institutions, to continue providing
resources and assistance for the implementation of
projects
towards
sustainable
and
long-term
development in Timor-Leste.
In conclusion, we once again wish to express our
sincere gratitude to the Government and people of
Timor-Leste for their hospitality, assistance and
cooperation, as well as the entire staff of UNMIT for
providing us with the necessary support during the
Council’s mission to Timor-Leste. We particularly wish
to note the invaluable support from the Government of
Indonesia for assisting the delegation with smooth
transit to Timor-Leste.
Appreciation and gratitude are also extended to
the Security Council secretariat and United Nations
security personnel for their tireless efforts and support
during the mission’s preparatory stage and during the
mission itself.
We commend this report for the consideration of
the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste.
Ms. Borges (Timor-Leste): First of all, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate.
Allow me to express on behalf of the Government
and people of Timor-Leste our sincere gratitude for the
recent visit by the Security Council. In particular, my
delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Kumalo and
members of the delegation for the manner in which
they engaged with all stakeholders, demonstrating
extreme sensitivity, respect and understanding. The
report of the mission (S/2007/711) is comprehensive
and identifies the challenges and priorities that need to
be addressed in order to consolidate peace and
stability.

07-64195

The visit was overwhelmingly positive in that it
provided all stakeholders the opportunity to engage
with members of the delegation in a frank and honest
assessment of the complexities and challenges
currently facing the country. Furthermore, in the eyes
of the Timorese, the visit was a reaffirmation of the
continuing commitment and support of the United
Nations and the international community for
Timor-Leste. That reaffirmation of support and
assistance is timely as the country comes to terms with
the consequences of the crisis and searches for
sustainable solutions for the maintenance of peace and
stability.
The 2006 crisis caused widespread looting and
destruction in the capital, where more than 30 people
died, more than 100 were wounded and tens of
thousands were displaced. We are slowly recovering;
however, tens of thousands of people remain in camps
in the capital and elsewhere. The Government has
pledged to cooperate with all stakeholders to address
the situation of internally displaced persons in an
adequate and sustainable manner.
Law and order have been restored. However, the
relative tranquillity prevailing in the country is a
precarious one and is due in large measure to the
effective role played by United Nations police and the
International Stabilisation Force. This will remain the
case until such a time when our police force has been
reconstructed and turned into a professional, credible
and effective force. This will take two to five years at a
minimum.
While significant progress has been made in
establishing a democratic legal and institutional
framework, centuries of non-self-government and
marginalization, including two decades of violence, the
lack of any meaningful investment in the intellectual,
socio-economic, or physical infrastructure of the
country in the past, and the absence of any lasting
experience in governance and law enforcement have
left the country with profound challenges to its future
stability and prosperity. They are compounded by the
high levels of unemployment, illiteracy and
displacement.
At this critical juncture, the most pivotal short- to
medium-term objectives of the Government continues
to be the further consolidation of political stability and
the maintenance of law and order, while at the same
time gradually improving Timor’s developmental

3

S/PV.5801

prospects by entrenching a culture of democratic
governance and strengthening key institutions. There
will be no political stability without respect for the rule
of law and adequate law enforcement. There will be no
lasting socio-economic development, including foreign
investment, without political stability and public peace
and security.
While development is the ultimate goal, a
premature limitation to this goal without the still
necessary capacities and assistance of the United
Nations in the police and security sector, as well as
their partnership and good offices in support of
institution-building, would unnecessarily jeopardize
the recovery and cautious progress of the past one and
a half years.
In this regard, Timor-Leste concurs with the
recommendation contained in the report of the Security
Council’s mission to Timor-Leste to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT). As stated in the report, all Timorese
interlocutors called for the continued presence of the
United Nations while democratic structures are being
built in the country.
The Government strongly believes that UNMIT’s
mandate should be extended for a total of five years,
until 2012. It foresees a continued need for the present
police and security sector capacities for at least two
and a half years, until 2010, to be followed by a
Security Council-mandated peace-building mission
focusing on governance, police and security-sector
assistance and capacity-building for another two and a
half years, until 2012.
The Government is mindful of the concerns of the
Security Council delegation that the support and
assistance of the United Nations and the international
community be seen as strengthening democratic
institutions, rule of law and self-reliance rather than
fostering a climate of dependency. We are conscious
that the Timorese leadership and the people must make
every effort to consolidate peace and stability in our
country. The crisis in 2006 was of our own making,
and we must take full responsibility with courage and
humility. My delegation wishes to assure members of
the Council that in the meantime, we the Timorese will
continue our national dialogue so that we may
reconcile and heal the wounds of the past which will
further contribute to a peaceful, stable, democratic and
united country.

4

However, the reason for our endorsement of the
Security Council mission’s recommendation for a
mandate extension is not dependency. It is the need to
develop sustainable, democratic institutions and
capacities that have never existed before in TimorLeste. Timor-Leste has been independent for only five
years — a short time frame, considering the enormous
challenges of building a nation. When sovereignty was
transferred to Timor-Leste in May 2002, only the
sketch — the idea of a modern and democratic State —
existed. We had to build our country from scratch.
Yet the crisis of 2006 has strengthened rather than
weakened the democratic institutional framework and
our commitment to the rule of law. For example,
throughout the crisis the civil service continued to
function and salaries were being paid — a remarkable
achievement compared to experiences elsewhere.
Democratic, free and fair elections were held free of
violence, and the National Parliament has come out
strengthened with the active participation by all parties
in matters of national priority, including the budget.
I should like to conclude by expressing our most
sincere appreciation to the United Nations, the Security
Council and to all our bilateral partners for their
continued support since 1999. They responded without
hesitation to our appeals for assistance and have
maintained a continuous presence in our country. Their
commitment and friendship will not be forgotten by the
people of Timor-Leste.
The President: I give
representative of New Zealand.

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I would like to thank
the Security Council mission for the report on their
recent visit to Timor-Leste (S/2007/711). New Zealand
welcomes the mission’s visit as an important
opportunity for the Council to see first-hand the
situation in Timor-Leste, a few months after the
formation of the new Government and two months
before a decision is required on the future mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT).
New Zealand acknowledges that there have
indeed been encouraging signs of progress in TimorLeste this past year. Presidential and parliamentary
elections have been held successfully, and the new
Government has some important accomplishments to
mark its first 100 days in office, such as the adoption

07-64195

S/PV.5801

of a new Government programme and the approval of
an interim budget.
We recognize the complexity of the challenges
that the new Government of Timor-Leste is facing, and
we would like to reiterate our continuing support for its
efforts towards solving these. We would like to take
this opportunity to commend the opposition’s active
participation in parliament as an essential factor in the
functioning of a democratic system.
New Zealand is pleased to see that the security
situation is gradually improving. However, as noted in
the mission’s report, the root causes of last year’s crisis
have not been fully addressed. Underlying political
tensions continue to challenge Timor-Leste’s young
and fragile institutions, and a security downturn could
easily see Timor’s progress set back. Many problems
remain, not least the large number of people who still
live in internally displaced persons camps throughout
Dili.
New Zealand believes that ongoing involvement
by the international community will be needed in order
to support the new Government in working towards
resolving the many issues it faces. We support a strong,
long-term United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. In
this sense, the Security Council visit was very
important and timely, and we hope it will serve to
reaffirm the international community’s commitment to
supporting Timor-Leste.
The review of UNMIT’s mandate in February
next year will be very important. Close attention will
need to be paid to the skill-sets and focus of the police
element within that mission. While New Zealand
believes that United Nations Police (UNPOL) numbers
should be maintained at the current level, attention
should be paid to UNPOL’s make-up to ensure that it
has the required capability to fulfil its two primary
roles: first, to provide security, and, secondly, to
support the durable reform and rebuilding of the
National Police Force of Timor-Leste through capacitybuilding and training in core police competencies. Both
of those targets are equally important to future stability
in Timor-Leste.
New Zealand welcomes the call by the head of
the Security Council mission, Ambassador Dumisani
Kumalo, for the role of UNPOL to be reviewed to
ensure maximum results. New Zealand would prefer
such a review to be done prior to discussions on
UNMIT’s mandate in February, as it would be helpful

07-64195

in assessing the progress UNPOL has made thus far,
and in ensuring that it has the direction, skills-sets and
focus that it needs to carry out its roles in the year
ahead.
New Zealand continues to see the need for
UNMIT to support the Government of Timor-Leste in
reforming and strengthening the justice and security
sectors. Security sector reform is an integral part of
strengthening Timor-Leste’s State and Government
institutions, and it is essential to ensuring that TimorLeste’s security needs can be met in the future.
The report of the Security Council mission
highlighted many of the issues that still need to be
addressed, such as improving cooperation between
security
institutions,
strengthening
the
legal
framework, increasing operational capabilities and
enhancing civilian oversight. We urge the Timorese
Government and UNMIT to work together on
comprehensively reviewing and reforming all aspects
of the Timorese security sector, encompassing the
Defence Force, the Ministry of Defence, the Police
Force and the Ministry of the Interior.
New Zealand remains committed to working with
the international community in assisting Timor-Leste in
the long term. We continue to contribute defence and
police personnel to the International Stabilisation Force
(ISF) and to UNPOL, and we commend the positive
cooperation between the two. New Zealand appreciates
the importance of maintaining stability in Timor-Leste
in order to allow reconciliation and State-building to
take place, and we expect the ISF to remain in TimorLeste for the time being.
In conclusion, New Zealand would like to thank
the Security Council and UNMIT for their ongoing
efforts in Timor-Leste. The Security Council’s interest
is a welcome demonstration that the international
community remains committed to supporting and
assisting Timor-Leste.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): At the outset, Sir, the
Philippines takes this opportunity to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and on having convened this
important meeting to take up the results of the recently
concluded Security Council mission to Timor-Leste. It
also commends Ambassador Natalegawa and other

5

S/PV.5801

members of the Indonesian delegation for Indonesia’s
successful presidency of the Council last month.
Furthermore, it joins other delegations in thanking
Ambassador Kumalo for his exceptionally able
leadership of the mission to Timor-Leste.
This recent mission to Timor-Leste is a clear
reaffirmation of the Council’s commitment to support
and assist Timor-Leste in consolidating peace and
security, which are vital to speed up the process of
democratic governance and the rule of law and to
promote long-term stability in that country. The
mission is also the Council’s best way of getting a clear
field assessment of the situation and of obtaining an
eyewitness account thereof, conveying the strongest
message of encouragement for the Government, the
parliament and the people of Timor-Leste to work
together for national reconciliation and healing, and
sustainable economic and social development.
My delegation has taken note of the briefing
made by Ambassador Kumalo on 6 December 2007
(see S/PV.5791) and the report of the mission
(S/2007/711) and would like to highlight the following
points. First, the Philippines concurs with the mission’s
view that Timor-Leste will continue to need United
Nations assistance in a number of areas, such as, inter
alia, governance, the rule of law, security sector reform
and economic and social development. It is of the view
that, in the pivotal short and medium term, the
Government of Timor-Leste would benefit from
priority action in the maintenance of law and order,
good governance and economic and social
development. The United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) is in a position to provide the
necessary assistance in these areas. The present police
and security forces are helping the Government of
Timor-Leste immeasurably, and their presence should
be continued and further enhanced. The mandate of
UNMIT to promote economic and social development
through the compact between Timor-Leste and the
international community, as stated in Security Council
resolution 1704 (2006), should be given more focus.
Needless to stress, my delegation fully endorses the
mission’s recommendation to renew UNMIT’s
mandate, which will expire on 26 February 2008.
Secondly, my delegation recognizes the abundant
reservoir of international goodwill for Timor-Leste.
This should be sustained. International assistance to
Timor-Leste should be geared towards self-reliance,
but it should not be arbitrarily narrowed or limited. The

6

Philippines has been consistently contributing to
Timor-Leste’s nation-building and other endeavours
over the years. My country sent a 600-strong
humanitarian support mission composed of doctors,
nurses, dentists, construction engineers, agriculturists,
mechanics and explosive ordnance disposal personnel
as part of the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET) in September 1999. Since then, the
Philippines has been successively participating in the
successive United Nations operations in Timor-Leste.
As part of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), the
Philippine battalion was composed of over 707 officers
and enlisted personnel, with former Philippine Army
Chief Lieutenant General Jaime de los Santos
appointed as its first Force Commander.
The Philippines is currently the largest
contributor of individual police officers to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Most of those
officers are in UNMIT, which is the largest police-led
peacekeeping operation in which the Philippines has
taken part. The present UNMIT Police Commissioner
is Rodolfo Tor, Director of the Philippine National
Police.
Aside from peacekeeping, the Philippines has
made contributions in capacity-building, particularly in
human resource development. The Philippines has
extended a human resource development package to
Timor-Leste through the Third Country Training
Programmes of the Japan International Cooperation
Agency. Those programmes have included Englishlanguage training, training in results monitoring and
evaluation, and a foreign service officer cadetship
programme for Timor-Leste diplomats, offered through
the Foreign Service Institute of the Philippines. In
addition, the Philippines is working with Timor-Leste
in facilitating the admission of Timorese students to
Philippine colleges and universities, as well as in
providing vocational training. The Philippines remains
ready to explore other areas of assistance to strengthen
Timor-Leste’s capacities and institutions. The
Philippines hopes that the international community will
do likewise.
Finally, my delegation is concerned over the
mission’s assessment that many of the causes of the
2006 crisis — especially those related to the issues of
governance, the separation of powers and the building
of sustainable institutions — have yet to be addressed.
Those are issues with which new and emerging or even

07-64195

S/PV.5801

newly restored democracies are usually confronted.
Timor-Leste is a part of the United Nations, and any
failure in those areas of concern in Timor-Leste, as
well as in any other State with the same problems,
affects the integrity of the Organization. The United
Nations, through the Security Council, is expected to
act more decisively to address those concerns.
Foremost, of course, is assistance in the building and
strengthening of institutions. My delegation submits
that progress in that field could have been maintained
if the United Nations presence in Timor-Leste had not
been drawn down in 2006.
My delegation continues to maintain that TimorLeste is still one of the best examples of a successful
enterprise conceived and nurtured through the
sustained combined cooperative efforts of heroic
people and their leaders, the United Nations and
regional players and partners. The international
community should see to it that efforts to build TimorLeste are further invigorated and enhanced with
increasing fidelity and vitality, in order to ensure that it
continues to be a success story.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in holding this debate. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Kumalo for his briefing last week on the
Security Council mission to Timor-Leste (see
S/PV.5791). Today’s debate provides an important
opportunity for Member States to express their
continued support for peace, stability and development
in Timor-Leste, as the Council will consider the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) in February next year.
As a member of the core group, Japan has
consistently been a strong supporter of nation-building
in Timor-Leste since the country’s independence. My
delegation is therefore encouraged by the report by the
Council mission that the process of democratization is
making good progress. This year, Timor-Leste
successfully conducted presidential and parliamentary
elections, which constituted a significant milestone for
the country in the process of establishing democracy
and consolidating peace. We are impressed by the
enthusiasm and commitment to democracy among the
people, which was witnessed by the international
electoral observers, including those from Japan. The

07-64195

visit by the Council mission was timely and
contributed significantly to enhancing the work of
UNMIT, whose efforts have been welcomed and
recognized by the country’s people.
There are areas in which more needs to be done.
For instance, as the Security Council mission pointed
out, there still seem to be political differences among
the leadership following the elections. We have full
confidence in the wisdom of the people of Timor-Leste
and their determination to achieve the political stability
and cooperation required for the country’s
reconstruction. In that context, I would like to stress
that the political differences among the parties now can
and should be expressed through their representation in
the Parliament. I also would like to commend Mr. Atul
Khare, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste, for his efforts through the high-level
coordination mechanism provided for in resolution
1704 (2006) to facilitate efficient communication both
within the Government and between the Government
and UNMIT.
Japan also shares the view of the mission that
there is still much work to be done in capacitybuilding, including security sector reform and justice
sector reform. The successful holding of the elections
is a good indication that the situation is essentially
stable and calm. At the same time, we must bear in
mind that it is still volatile, as the level of residual
trauma and fear among the people remains high.
Rebuilding the professional National Police Force
of Timor-Leste (PNTL) is indispensable for the
maintenance of security. The police officers sent by
Japan to UNMIT are doing their part to contribute by,
among other things, assisting in the compilation of a
basic textbook for new PNTL recruits and acting
officers. We are pleased with the efforts by UNMIT to
screen and mentor the PNTL, and we are encouraged to
see that the PNTL is now seeking greater responsibility
in the maintenance of the country’s security. However,
evaluating the extent of the PNTL’s credibility with the
people and the community will be key to deciding on
the transfer of greater responsibility to the PNTL. In
our view, the possibility of transferring responsibility
should be assessed by an expert mission, as the
Security Council mission suggested.
I would also like to reaffirm Japan’s continued
commitment to supporting all efforts aimed at
peacebuilding and development in Timor-Leste beyond

7

S/PV.5801

the peacekeeping stage. Timor-Leste has great potential
as a result of the large amount of funds generated by
oil revenues. The effective and well-planned use of
those funds will contribute to the country’s prosperity.
In that context, the training and capacity-building of
Timorese personnel to manage the funds are critically
important.
Peacebuilding is a long, complex and
multidimensional process. Since Japan assumed the
chairmanship of the Peacebuilding Commission, we
have been actively engaged in promoting assistance for
recovery and reconstruction efforts by countries
emerging from conflict. I am therefore particularly
pleased to observe the progress in the consolidation of
peace in Timor-Leste and will continue to follow
closely the progress of the peacebuilding efforts.
The situation in Timor-Leste is moving towards
stabilization. This time, we must not fail to consolidate
peace. UNMIT should continue to play an important
role to that end. My delegation also understands that
the Government of Timor-Leste would like the United
Nations to consider creating an overlap period in which
peacekeeping operations and the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission would work in tandem, so
that a smooth transition to the consolidation of peace
can be ensured. Japan sincerely hopes that the parties
concerned will consult in good faith and reach
agreement on how best to benefit from the various
forms of support for peacebuilding being carried out in
parallel with United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Portugal.
Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia, as well as Moldova, align
themselves with this declaration.
First of all, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. The European Union
commends the Security Council mission to
Timor-Leste, led by Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo,
and welcomes the comprehensive report on its
findings. We believe that the mission was successful in
identifying the various unresolved challenges that

8

Timor-Leste needs to address in order to achieve
stability and prosperity.
We are also pleased that the mission had the
opportunity to hear the views of the main political
interlocutors — namely, the President, the Prime Minister,
Government officials and opposition leaders — as well as
representatives of civil society, including the church and
non-governmental organizations, of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and of
other United Nations agencies on the ground. We
appreciate the valuable work of UNMIT and, in
particular, of Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste.
The European Union welcomes the progress
achieved in recent months. The successfully conducted
presidential and parliamentary elections held in April,
May and June of this year with high voter participation
were a significant step in the process of strengthening
democratic institutions in Timor-Leste.
However, as the report of the mission to TimorLeste acknowledges, some of the root causes of the
2006 crisis and its consequences have not yet been
solved. The European Union recognizes critical
political, security, socio-economic and humanitarian
challenges that need to be tackled.
At the political level, the European Union
encourages the current Government and the opposition
leaders to pursue political dialogue in order to rebuild
mutual confidence and achieve national reconciliation
in Timor-Leste. Furthermore, it is essential to solve the
Petitioners’ issue in a peaceful manner and to bring to
justice the group of former military who deserted the
National Defense Force.
The European Union also emphasizes the need to
restore confidence in the national defense and security
institutions, as well as in the judicial system, and
encourages the Government to implement the security
sector reform programme.
The humanitarian situation is another element of
concern for the European Union, because it threatens
the political and social stability of Timor-Leste. We
call on the Government to create, as its highest priority,
conditions for the return, resettlement and reintegration
of the internally displaced persons in their local
communities.
Additionally, the socio-economic challenges, like
poverty and unemployment, particularly among youth,

07-64195

S/PV.5801

remain some of the major causes of instability
throughout the country.

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Australia.

As the report has highlighted, the European
Union recognizes that the future of the country lies in
the hands of the people and the Government of TimorLeste. Indeed, the efforts carried out in the country will
only be successful if the Timorese take measures and
find the solutions to their own challenges. Nonetheless,
the Government needs continued and sustained
assistance to overcome capacity shortcomings and
governance difficulties.

Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to again address the Security Council and
to contribute to the Council’s deliberations on
Timor-Leste. We appreciate the visit by the Security
Council that took place and thank those who
contributed to it. We also thank them for their report.
We appreciate the fact that, while in Timor-Leste, they
did liaise with the International Stabilisation Force
(ISF).

The European Union reiterates that the
involvement of the United Nations is vital for the
country’s further stabilization and for helping the
Government to address the many unresolved questions
identified during the Security Council mission to
Timor-Leste. In this context, we support continued
United Nations engagement in Timor-Leste and a
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste beyond February
2008.

I note that the Secretary-General and both
Australia’s Prime Minister, the Honourable Kevin
Rudd, and Foreign Minister, the Honourable Stephen
Smith, will be visiting Timor-Leste tomorrow for
further discussions on these issues.

The European Union and its member States
remain fully committed to the consolidation of peace
and democracy in Timor-Leste. As an example, the
President of the European Commission, José Manuel
Barroso, visited Timor-Leste last month and announced
an additional €63 million aid package to assist projects
related to institutional capacity-building, including
support to the judiciary and the parliament, and to
health and rural development. The opening of a
European Community delegation in Dili in 2008 also
shows the continued support of the European Union for
the people of Timor-Leste.
The European Union is willing to continue to
cooperate closely with the United Nations and the
bilateral and multilateral donors on the ground, in
order to further consolidate peace and democracy in
Timor-Leste and to help the country to achieve
self-reliance.
Lastly, I would like to express that the European
Union is confident that the Government of
Timor-Leste, with the support of the United Nations
and the international community, will be able to
overcome the numerous challenges that it still faces.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hill
(Australia) took a seat at the Council table.

07-64195

Australia has been at the forefront of
international efforts to assist Timor-Leste in laying the
foundations for a stable and prosperous nation. We
have a vital interest in ensuring Timor-Leste’s future
success and have demonstrated our continued
commitment through our substantial development and
security support. We are a leading donor to TimorLeste and make a significant contribution to the
country’s security, including through our leadership of
the International Stabilisation Force.
Australia welcomes recent positive developments
in Timor-Leste such as the successful holding of
elections this year. United Nations efforts in TimorLeste have been integral in creating an environment
conducive to the return of stability. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Atul
Khare, has made a particularly important contribution
in promoting the constructive and peaceful engagement
of Timor-Leste’s political leadership, which has
principal responsibility for achieving good governance
and consolidating democracy.
But, while Timor-Leste has come a long way
since the unrest in April and May 2006, the security
situation remains fragile pending the resolution of
long-term social, political, security and governance
challenges. Timor-Leste’s security institutions remain
weak. The presence of significant numbers of
internally displaced persons in camps around Dili and
the districts remains a concern. Unemployment,
including among Timor-Leste’s young population, is
also unacceptably high, creating hardship for
Timor-Leste’s citizens and fuelling political instability.

9

S/PV.5801

These issues must be addressed as the basis for
Timor-Leste’s long-term stability and prosperity.
The Government and the people of Timor-Leste
recognize the challenges ahead and are working hard to
begin to address them. But they face significant
capacity constraints and will need international support
for some time to come.
Last year’s unrest underscores the importance of
sustained international engagement in Timor-Leste to
lay a solid foundation for peace and prosperity. The
United Nations has invested much in Timor-Leste and
must remain at the forefront of international efforts to
support the new nation. This involvement should be
reflected in an extension of a strong mandate for the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
focused strategically on areas of key concern.
In particular, it will be important for the United
Nations to continue to play the primary security role in
Timor-Leste, until local security forces are able to
manage independently, especially through a strong and
effective police presence. Security sector reform will
be crucial if the people of Timor-Leste are to take full
responsibility for their own future.
With the support of the Timor-Leste Government,
Australia intends to continue to provide military
support to the United Nations Police for as long as the
security situation warrants. In passing, I want to record
our appreciation also for the ongoing New Zealand
military support to the ISF. Australia is also looking to
provide enhanced bilateral assistance in support of
police and defense force development.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Australia’s strong
commitment to supporting Timor-Leste and emphasize
that we look forward to continuing to work closely
with the United Nations to this end.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
members of the Council.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Ambassador Sangqu for his oral report on last
month’s mission to Timor-Leste, which was led by
Ambassador Kumalo. We would like to thank the
Secretariat for the detailed written report on that
mission (S/2007/711). We also pay tribute here to
Ambassador Kumalo’s leadership and to his
commitment to the work that the international
community is doing in Timor-Leste.

10

We strongly endorse the observation that the fact
that mission happened should be seen as reaffirmation
of United Nations support for Timor-Leste. We have
listened with interest to the input of the other United
Nations Member States who spoke this morning. Their
part in the international effort in Timor-Leste is, of
course, a vital part of us all working together for
success.
I would like to align myself with the statement
made by the representative of Portugal on behalf of
the European Union.
Three themes recur throughout these reports. I
believe the first theme is that United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the International
Stabilisation Force are doing an excellent job working
alongside the Timorese people and institutions. The
United Kingdom joins other speakers in commending
Special Representative Khare’s efforts. While there
may be room for review and further improvement, I
think the overall impression that comes through
strongly is of a very confident, integrated mission
performing to high standards and in close partnership
with the International Force. That being said, we
endorse the mission’s recognition of the need to send
an expert mission from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to review the role and
responsibility of UNMIT police and their relationship
with the National Police Force of Timor-Leste and the
Ministry of the Interior.
The second theme concerns the fact that, while
Timor-Leste post-conflict transition continues on track,
it is the case that the situation remains fragile, volatile
and prone to setback if specific challenges are left
untackled. First, there are the immediate challenges:
resolution of the issue of the petitioners, ensuring
accountability and justice — and that includes bringing
Major Reinado to justice — and alleviating and
resolving the situation faced by some 100,000
internally displaced persons.
Without wishing to diminish the importance of
those immediate challenges, they can each be
addressed, we believe, through treatment of some
fundamental challenges and concerns. The Timorese
political leadership, while maintaining healthy
differences of view over policy, should unite around a
shared vision of an independent, prosperous and united
country. Timorese institutions, in particular in the
security and judicial sectors, still lack capacity and

07-64195

S/PV.5801

sufficient numbers of qualified personnel. A sustained
process of security sector reform, in our view, needs to
continue, and robust budget execution is needed in the
service of socio-economic development. In short, the
Timorese economy needs to grow and create jobs. And
the Timorese Government needs to use the Petroleum
Fund to help it do so.
The third theme that comes through the report is
that only the Timorese people can ensure that TimorLeste succeeds. I think this was one theme that was
stressed by the mission when it visited the country. The
United Nations and other international partners can
help achieve success, but they cannot resolve the
underlying challenges. The lessons of 2006 have been
learned: the international community will not reduce its
commitment precipitately, without assurance that
Timor-Leste can stand alone.
But nor will the international community want to
foster a relationship which encourages dependence and
discourages Timorese self-reliance. The United
Kingdom therefore supports the extension of UNMIT’s
mandate in February, but we also support the mission’s
request that the Secretary-General continue to report in
such a way that an assessment can be made as to how
much United Nations support will be needed in the
future.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me first express my
delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the
initiative of holding this timely debate on the report of
the Security Council mission to Timor-Leste
(S/2007/711).
We wish to commend the Security Council
delegation, under the leadership of Ambassador
Dumisani Kumalo of South Africa, for having
successfully discharged its mandate in accordance with
its terms of reference. We are pleased, in particular,
that the visit to the country was overwhelmingly
perceived as reaffirmation of the continued support for
and assistance to Timor-Leste by the United Nations
and the international community.
We highly value the timing of the visit of the
Security Council mission to the country. As rightly
stated in the report, the mission took place as the
country was confronting enormous challenges in trying
to recover from the crisis of 2006 and following the
first presidential and parliamentary elections, held in
April, May and June 2007. The mission also took place
well ahead of the Council’s discussion on the renewal

07-64195

of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which will expire
on 26 February 2008.
The elections were clearly a step forward for
Timor-Leste in the consolidation of democracy, for
which the people and the leaders of Timor-Leste
deserve our deep appreciation. We share the mission’s
observation that while progress has been made in
democratization, the root causes of last year’s crisis
and its consequences are yet to be fully addressed.
A number of underlying political tensions from
the time of the crisis and the recent elections remain in
many sections of society. Central to the crisis were
issues of divisions in the leadership, weak institutions,
especially the security forces, and lack of solid
structures of Government. The problems stemming
from the crisis, such as the case of fugitive Major
Reinado, the petitioners and internally displaced
persons (IDPs), continue to pose serious challenges to
the peace and stability of the country.
On another note, we share the mission’s
observation that poverty continues to be a major cause
of instability in Timor-Leste, where about 40 per cent
of the population still lives under the national poverty
line. We note with interest that youth employment has
been identified as a priority area by the Government in
the international compact for Timor-Leste. It is our
belief that there is a compelling need to integrate
development-related aspects with responses to the
security situation.
We have taken note that the Security Council
delegation held productive discussions and exchanges
of view with various interlocutors of Timor-Leste. The
delegation made effective use of these meetings to
explore ways and means to assist the country in
developing its capacities, in particular in the fields of
democratic governance and security, built on the gains
achieved thus far.
In this regard, we commend the determination of
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste, under
the leadership of President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmão, to restore stability and normalcy in
the country, while reaffirming their commitment to
democracy.
In the light of the enormous challenges faced by
the country, there is no doubt that continued support
and assistance from the international community to this

11

S/PV.5801

young country is needed. Strengthening State
institutions, security sector reform and economic
development should remain at the core of the
assistance.

ardent aspirations of the people of Timor-Leste to
peace, stability and development, as well as the resolve
of the Government of the country to lead it to
continued successes.

It is our view that UNMIT should continue to
exercise its good offices role to contribute in resolving
the divergences among the political leadership which
continue to exist. This role is especially pertinent at a
time when national consensus is required to address the
serious challenges confronting the country, such as the
urgent need for national reconciliation, security sector
reform, restoring stability, addressing IDP issues,
strengthening democratic institutions and improving
governance.

Although Timor-Leste has achieved some
economic
development,
reconstruction
and
democratization, as a young country it continues to
face great challenges. In that respect, I wish to raise
several issues.

It is also our view that UNMIT should encourage
the Government and the people of Timor-Leste to take
ownership and leadership of the country’s
development, including in the implementation of
assistance programmes provided by the United Nations
and other partners.
Finally, it is important for the Council to reaffirm
its commitment to Timor-Leste in the promotion of
long-term stability in the country and in the attainment
of self-reliance.
The report of the Security Council mission to the
country and the report of the Secretary-General on the
progress made in the implementation of UNMIT’s
mandate will allow the Council to assess the extent of
the United Nations support needed for Timor-Leste in
the future.
Indonesia, on its part, remains committed to
supporting Timor-Leste, in particular on a bilateral
basis, so that the country can achieve sustainable peace
and prosperity. Indonesia and Timor-Leste continue to
enjoy excellent relations on the basis of forwardlooking and reconciliatory principles as we continue to
deepen and expand bilateral cooperation in various
fields.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the South
African mission for its briefing.
China supports the report of the Security Council
mission. In my capacity as representative of China, I
participated in the mission myself and personally
observed the situation in Timor-Leste after it had
experienced numerous setbacks and everything still
remained to be accomplished. I deeply sensed the

12

First, the leaders of all the parties of Timor-Leste
should achieve reconciliation through dialogue and
address the security issue together. This year, TimorLeste successfully held elections, but the political and
reconciliation process has not been completed.
Meanwhile, the issues lingering after last year’s unrest
remain to be resolved and continue to affect peace and
stability. The issues of internally displaced persons, the
petitioners and Major Reinado are interconnected. In
particular, the issues surrounding the petitioners and
Major Reinado are breeding a sense of insecurity
among the people, who have no choice but to remain
internally displaced for an extended period of time.
That in turn has exacerbated the instability in the
security situation.
If those three issues are to be addressed
effectively, the political forces of Timor-Leste —
particularly the Government and the main opposition
party FRETILIN — should reach a consensus and
cooperate fully with one another. The discord between
the Government and FRETILIN is the single issue that
poses the greatest potential threat to the security of
Timor-Leste. China calls on all the parties of TimorLeste to keep the interests of the people and the
stability of the country in mind and to seize this good
opportunity to restore peace and to achieve
development. They should resolve their disagreements
by communicating with one another, strive to resolve
the aforementioned issues affecting the security
situation in Timor-Leste, and lead the people in a
focused manner to promote the development of the
country.
Secondly, while pursuing its peacekeeping
mission in Timor-Leste, the United Nations should
increase its assistance so as to improve the country’s
ability to govern itself. The history of the independence
and development of Timor-Leste has been closely
linked to the United Nations from the very beginning.
It is the unshirkable responsibility of the Organization

07-64195

S/PV.5801

to ensure that Timor-Leste embarks on a path towards
success. At the same time, the country’s future and
destiny are in the hands of its own people.
On our mission, we noted that the functioning of
certain institutions in Timor-Leste still depends on the
assistance and support of the United Nations and other
international agencies. In particular, the larger part of
the Timorese police force remains in the phase of
identification, verification and reappointment and in
some regions United Nations peacekeeping personnel
continue to participate in front-line law enforcement.
The United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
and other international agencies should devote greater
efforts in the next phase to helping the country to
improve its self-governing capacities. The United
Nations police should shift the focus of its work to
training and to transferring experience and skills to the
Timorese police force. With respect to political
reconciliation, the United Nations can continue to offer
constructive recommendations, but should avoid
bypassing the Timorese authorities and undertaking
activities on their behalf.
Thirdly, the achievement of sustainable peace and
security in Timor-Leste will depend fundamentally on
the development of the economy and on improving
people’s lives. The fact that 40 per cent of the
population is living in poverty and that the rate of
unemployment has reached 40 per cent are the main
causes of the instability in the country. The
Government of Timor-Leste should identify a targeted
development plan as soon as possible and effectively
develop and exploit its rich gas, petroleum and tourist
resources. At the same time, efforts should be made to
utilize the benefits of development to improve people’s
lives, with an accent on education and human resources
development, in order to continuously raise the level of
employment, especially among young people, so as to
restore their confidence in the Government and in their
own future and to undermine the factors of instability.
The international community should, of course,
continue to provide all manner of assistance to
expedite that process. China hopes that Asian countries
can extend a helping hand so as to achieve the common
prosperity of the region.
As a member of the Asia-Pacific family, China
has paid great attention to the development of the
situation in Timor-Leste, and sincerely hopes that the
country can achieve State development, social harmony
and the well-being of the people as soon as possible.

07-64195

Within the limits of its abilities, China will continue to
provide support to Timor-Leste.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
should like to start by thanking our South African
colleague for his briefings of last Thursday and today
on the mission to Timor-Leste. I commend him on the
professionalism he demonstrated in his leadership of
the visit.
I also wish to affirm that my delegation fully
supports the statement made by our Portuguese
colleague on behalf of the European Union. My
statement will focus on certain additional aspects.
One of the main conclusions drawn by the
Security Council mission to Timor-Leste is the fact
that, despite the important work done by the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the authorities of the country over the past
18 months, both the causes and the consequences of the
2006 crisis persist. It is precisely on the causes and
consequences of that crisis that I wish to dwell further.
The division within the leadership was one of the
major causes of the 2006 crisis. Now that legislative
and presidential elections are over, a new chapter is
opening for the country. The main opposition party,
FRETILIN, informed the Security Council mission of
its determination not to use violence and is
participating in parliamentary meetings. That positive
attitude should be welcomed, but national unity needs
to be bolstered. The country continues to face an
identity crisis. As the report before us quite correctly
points out, national consensus is required to resolve the
serious problems confronting the country.
The Council’s mission also noted that another of
the causes of last year’s crisis continues to prevail,
namely, the weakness of institutions, the security
forces in particular. Strengthening those forces is
precisely one of the major components of UNMIT’s
mandate. The Council’s mission also took note of the
tensions between UNMIT and the national police. The
national police should understand that it is in its
interest to be recognized by the population and that the
process under way, far from calling it into question, is
precisely designed to strengthen it and its democratic
legitimacy.
Allow me now to move from the causes to the
consequences of this crisis. Whether as regards Major
Reinado and his sympathizers, displaced persons or the

13

S/PV.5801

petitioners, it is crucial to prevent the aftermath of the
2006 crisis from leaving a permanent mark on
Timorese society. As the visit revealed, those three
issues are intrinsically linked and continue to be
unresolved 18 months following the crisis. Although it
was certainly difficult to resolve them during the
electoral campaigns, it is now up to the new team to
resolutely address those sensitive problems.
It is good to note that there is a move towards an
acceptable solution to the issue of petitioners by all
concerned. It is also commendable that the
Government is seeking a negotiated solution to the
matter of Major Reinado. However, as the report states,
the process of reconciliation cannot take place to the
detriment of the need for justice, as both go hand-inhand.
My delegation is especially concerned about the
issue of displaced persons, which, as we know, affects
about 10 per cent of the population. Everything should
therefore be done to enable their return. That of course
entails many material aspects, but it also depends upon
people feeling safe in their places of origin and upon
the feeling of justice being done vis-à-vis the 2006
crisis.
The challenges facing the new Government are
certainly numerous, but it has a major asset, namely,
the existence of significant natural resources. Gas and
oil income provide the Government of Timor-Leste the
keys for fruitful investment in the country’s
development and the future of its people, including in
the socio-economic conditions of the country. My
delegation intends to look to the future resolutely. In
that connection, the mission’s report contains some
proposals that have garnered our full attention. The
Council’s support continues to be more necessary than
ever. It is in that spirit that my delegation will approach
the negotiations on the renewal of UNMIT’s mandate
in February 2008.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome the Timor-Leste
delegation to today’s meeting. We have carefully read
its assessment and listened to the ideas put forth by
several interested delegations.
The Russian delegation participated actively in
the work of the Security Council mission to TimorLeste that took place from 24 to 30 November. We
would like to express our particular gratitude to
Ambassador Kumalo, Permanent Representative of

14

South Africa, and the representatives of the Secretariat
for the successful organization and conduct of the trip
and the preparation of the report (S/2007/711). We are
of course grateful to the entire delegation of South
Africa for all their work to prepare and carry out the
mission. We are pleased to note that the tasks entrusted
to the mission were carried out effectively.
The visit to Timor-Leste by members of the
Security Council bore witness to the support of the
United Nations and the international community for the
first steps of that young country in strengthening its
sovereignty and independence and developing
democratic institutions. The leaders and people of
Timor-Leste are working to lay down the foundations
of Statehood and a modern civil society. The country
has just held open and fair parliamentary and
presidential elections. In meetings with representatives
of political parties and civil society, we were able to
assure ourselves of their determination to move ahead
to effective State-building.
However, as a State that became independent just
five years ago, Timor-Leste continues to confront
serious challenges, including the dire socio-economic
situation, the weakness of its national and security
institutions, the lack of professional workers and the
problem of petitioners and internally displaced persons.
It is clear that a solution to those problems will be
impossible without political consensus and national
dialogue and reconciliation.
It is of course important that we continue to
provide Timor-Leste with the necessary international
support, including through the United Nations. We note
with satisfaction, as we saw for ourselves in
Timor-Leste during the Security Council’s mission,
that the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste is effectively carrying out the tasks
entrusted to it and enjoys widespread support and
authority among both the country’s leaders and its
people. I would like to note in particular the great role
played by the Mission to support the rule of law and
provide good offices in the process of national
reconciliation and dialogue. In addition, the
International Stabilisation Force is making a useful
contribution to the stability of Timor-Leste.
Through Russia’s participation in the Security
Council’s mission, we were once again able to see for
ourselves the need for extending the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,

07-64195

S/PV.5801

given the specific desire expressed by the leaders of
the country. Strengthening the independence and selfsufficiency of Timor-Leste will depend directly upon
the willingness of national security bodies to maintain
law and order. Accordingly, we place great hopes on
the speedy training of Timor-Leste’s police by the
United Nations police component.
Looking ahead, the main thrust of the activities of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste should be to
encourage that young country to resolve the problems
it faces itself. The primary responsibility for the
country’s future lies with the people of Timor-Leste
themselves.
Ms. Wolcott (United States of America): We
welcome this opportunity to comment on the report
(S/2007/711) on the Security Council’s recent visit to
Timor-Leste. I was pleased to be part of that mission.
The timing of the visit was optimal, as it will assist the
Council as it reviews the mandate of United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which
expires in February 2008. Based on the delegation’s
findings and our own experience in Timor-Leste, the
future mandate of UNMIT should include the
following priorities.
First, there should be continued emphasis on
security-sector reform, in particular on the training and
institutional development of the Timorese police force.
In that regard, the United States Government supports
a review of the role and responsibility of UNMIT
police in relation to the National Police Force of
Timor-Leste (PNTL), as requested by the Special
Representative in the country. Such a review could
point to key improvements in UNMIT’s training and
professional development programme for the PNTL.
Secondly, the mandate should include support for
reconciliation and the resolution of differences among
the Timorese leadership, so that the Timorese
Government and opposition cooperate to reintegrate
internally displaced persons and resolve other pressing
issues, including those raised by the petitioners and
military dissident Major Alfredo Reinado, as well as by
other unresolved cases such as those identified by the
2006 committee of inquiry. As noted in the mission’s
report, reconciliation should be without prejudice to
justice and accountability, to the Government’s right to
govern in accordance with the Constitution and laws,
and to the opposition’s right to oppose Government

07-64195

policies using exclusively peaceful and non-violent
means.
Thirdly, it should include assistance to the
Government in support of key policy objectives, such
as improving the business investment climate,
promoting
economic
development,
improving
governance and strengthening the rule of law. A
particular priority should be a justice system that is
independent, impartial, transparent, accessible and
efficient and that enjoys the confidence of the
community.
I wish to thank the Government of Timor-Leste
for hosting our visit and the United Nations for making
all the arrangements for it.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, Ambassador Kumalo,
for his comprehensive report on the mission that he led
to Timor-Leste towards the end of November. We
appreciate the additional light that has been shed on the
challenges facing the country and the crucial support of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) towards their resolution.
Allow me to also take this opportunity to
commend the mission for engaging with a broad
spectrum of stakeholders in relation to the future of the
country. The fulfilment of its terms of reference called
for nothing short of such extensive engagement by the
mission, and my delegation is hopeful that the visit will
serve to re-energize the process of national
reconciliation and democratization in Timor-Leste.
We welcome in that regard the assurances given
by the leadership of the country, especially President
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmão, and the
opposition leader, former Prime Minister Alkatiri, that
they were fully committed to those goals.
We also support an enhanced role for civil society
in all aspects of national development, especially in
fostering social cohesion and a strong sense of
solidarity among the people of Timor-Leste. We trust
that the appropriate mechanisms would, in due course,
be put in place to enable civil society to play its role
effectively.
My delegation remains concerned about the
fragile security situation, the plight of the internally
displaced persons and the lack of employment
opportunities for an estimated 40 per cent of the youth.

15

S/PV.5801

We believe that the ongoing efforts to address the
institutional problems of the security sector and the
administration of justice ought to be accompanied by
meaningful programmes that aim at addressing the
underlying socio-economic problems that threaten the
stability of Timor-Leste. The Government and
opposition must work closely together to meet the
needs of their people.
The capacity-building requirements in policing,
public service and the judiciary deserve sustained
attention, as that would affect the pace at which the
Government of Timor-Leste would eventually take
over the functions that are currently being performed
by the international partners or with their assistance.
Therefore, it is important that the Government and
UNMIT follow through with initiatives such as the
Supplemental Arrangement on Policing and the
security sector reform process within the framework of
the proposed national security policy.
Finally, we remain concerned about the failure of
the authorities to apprehend and bring to trial the
fugitive Armed Forces of Timor-Leste military police
commander, Major Alfredo Reinado, who managed to
escape from prison in August 2006. Apart from its
negative implications for the justice and accountability
process initiated by the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry into crimes committed during
the 2006 crisis, Major Reinado’s continuing evasion of
justice will inevitably add fuel to the perception of
bias, especially among those who have been held
accountable for their actions in last year’s crisis. We
trust that the Government will use all available means
to resolve that issue.
Once again, we believe that the mission led by
Ambassador Kumalo was most timely and worthwhile,
and the recommendations contained in the report
deserve serious attention by all concerned.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you again for convening this debate this morning, Mr.
President, and allow me to thank Ambassador Baso
Sangqu, Deputy Permanent Representative of South
Africa, for his briefing on behalf of Ambassador
Kumalo, head of the Security Council field mission to
Timor-Leste. I would also like to commend my
colleagues who participated in that mission for their
fine efforts.
The Security Council mission had a significant
impact in reaffirming the commitment of the

16

international community, and especially of the United
Nations, to promoting stability in Timor-Leste and
providing assistance to the Timorese people in order to
consolidate peace, democracy and the rule of law. The
mission was successful in carrying out its mandate in
accordance with its terms of reference, as reflected in
the positive reactions in Timor-Leste at the
governmental and popular levels. Furthermore, in the
context of the reaffirmation of international support for
Timor-Leste, the Secretary-General is scheduled to pay
a visit to Dili tomorrow to complement the Security
Council mission.
The achievement of national reconciliation and
the resolution of differences among the political
leaders must be on the list of priorities in Timor-Leste,
so as to maintain national unity and political stability.
Promoting security and enhancing the effectiveness
and professionalism of the security sector should also
be among the priorities in Timor-Leste, especially as
tensions and incidents threatening security continue to
take place from time to time, and since improving the
security environment would contribute significantly to
resolving the problem of internally displaced persons,
who still make up a large proportion of the country’s
population.
Cooperation between the national police and the
police of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) must be enhanced. In order to
establish an atmosphere of security and reconciliation,
accountability is necessary, particularly in connection
with the events of 1999 and 2006, while maintaining a
balance between the requirements of national
reconciliation and fair accountability. Consequently,
national reconciliation and security improvement will
have a great impact on ending ambiguity as well as on
enhancing people’s trust in the country’s institutions.
In addition to political and security concerns,
Timor-Leste continues to face major issues that should
be addressed, including development and combating
poverty, both of which contribute to instability. The
country also needs to strengthen the judicial sector as a
key element in achieving the rule of law.
According to the recent report of UNMIT on
human rights, the Timorese people enjoy a wide range
of human rights and are firmly committed to peace,
democracy and free elections. That is encouraging and
a cause for optimism in spite of the challenges faced by
the country, both in terms of the security situation and

07-64195

S/PV.5801

of upholding justice and accountability. In order to
maintain trust and confidence in the field of human
rights, it will be necessary to enhance transparency to
address the issue of impunity and to improve
transparency and accountability.
We look forward to the new Government, headed
by Mr. Gusmão, striving actively to lay the foundations
of democracy in the country and implementing priority
programmes aimed at enhancing security and
improving the living conditions of the people.
However, as the Security Council mission notes in its
report, the Government will need the support of
bilateral and multilateral partners to achieve its goals.
Continued support to that country by the international
community and international donors remains
indispensable at this stage, in order to assist the
Timorese people to proceed on the path of
strengthening the foundations of democracy, the
consolidation of peace, reconstruction, recovery and
prosperity in their country and to take their deserved
place among the family of nations. They must be
assisted to achieve self-reliance.
UNMIT has played a major role in providing
assistance to meet the challenges still facing that young
country. For that reason, we agree with the Council
mission that the role of UNMIT continues to be
indispensable and that the Council should renew the
mission’s mandate next February.

the crisis of 2006, can only be resolved, in our view,
through political dialogue and the common efforts of
all political parties and leaders.
We urge Timor-Leste’s leaders to redouble their
efforts to address their political differences and to build
the trust needed between them and the people in order
to confront the economic and social challenges facing
the country. A meaningful role for the opposition in
this process is crucial. At the same time, those in the
opposition must respect the results of the elections and
the parliamentary majority of the current coalition. We
believe the calls for early elections that the mission
heard from former Prime Minister Alkatiri are
counterproductive, divisive and dangerous.
We noted that the overall security situation has
improved, but it is still fragile and highly dependent on
the presence of international forces to ensure security
in the country. In that context, it is essential, in our
view, to strengthen the review and reform process of
the security sector in Timor-Leste. As the mission
observed, there is a series of challenges facing the
security sector, including the need to improve relations
between the police and the military, to strengthen the
legal framework of security institutions and increase
their capacities and the need to enhance civil oversight
of the security sector in order to insure its
accountability.

Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I too wish to thank
Ambassador Kumalo and the Secretariat for preparing
a comprehensive report on the recent Security Council
mission to Timor-Leste (S/2007/711). The report very
precisely reflects the observations of the mission, and
we fully share its findings and conclusions. That is
why I will limit my statement to only a few comments.
Before doing so, I wish to stress that we fully align
ourselves with the statement that was delivered earlier
by the Permanent Representative of Portugal on behalf
of the European Union.

Last but not least, we hope that the process of
certification of the police force will be completed as
soon as possible and that the Timorese police will start
assuming more responsibility for the security in
Timor-Leste. We also hope that the role of the UNMIT
police will be reviewed, with more focus on the
training of the national police to ensure maximum
results in that respect. We also wish to underline that
we would welcome sending a team of experts from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to assist in the
situation and to define ways to cope with outstanding
issues in that area, as soon as possible.

We welcome the progress in the process of peace
consolidation in Timor-Leste following the conflict in
2006. At the same time, the situation in the country is
still fragile and there are many challenges that should
be addressed in order to make the path towards
stability and prosperity in the country irreversible and
sustainable. Outstanding problems, including the issues
of internally displaced persons, petitioners and the case
of Mr. Alfredo Reinado, as well as the root causes of

Finally, a functioning security sector is an
important prerequisite for the efficient functioning of
the justice system and institutions. Strengthening the
justice system, in particular, is a major aspect of
building a culture for the peaceful settlement of
conflicts in Timor-Leste. We note with satisfaction that
a justice system programme is in place in Timor-Leste,
which aims to improve the capacity of the courts,
prosecution and justice administration in the areas of

07-64195

17

S/PV.5801

professional ethics, individual skills and systems and
processes. Strengthening justice is also crucial in
building respect for the rule of law, which has been
undermined by a widespread perception of a lack of
accountability. In this context we believe it is essential
to implement the recommendations of the United
Nations Independent Special Commission of Inquiry.
This is a crucial moment for Timor-Leste, and it
should seize the opportunity to build on what has
already been achieved in the areas of security and
democracy. The continued support of the United
Nations and the international community remains
critical for the further stability of the country and for
strengthening peace and democracy. In that regard, we
support the extension of the UNMIT mandate, with
possible adjustments properly reflecting current needs
and tasks which the country is facing.
Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Panama would like to congratulate and
thank the members of the Security Council and the
Secretariat who took part in the mission to Timor-Leste
for their management of that mission. We wish to thank
the South African delegation in particular, for the
detailed report the mission has given us today on the
results of its visit to Timor-Leste, on the achievements
thus far and the continuing challenges (S/2007/711).
The visit of the Security Council was timely, as it
took place before the expiration of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) in February 2008. The mission made it
possible for Council members to gain first-hand
knowledge of events since the approval of the previous
mandate of UNMIT, knowledge which will certainly
have an impact on the framework of UNMIT’s new
mandate.
I wish to reiterate Panama’s willingness to
Panama to work with other Council members in
renewing UNMIT’s mandate, bearing in mind the
achievements thus far and the priorities — some of
which have been highlighted here by the representative
of Timor-Leste — that still require the support of the
United Nations, of UNMIT and of the international
partners.
With respect to the progress that has been made,
we congratulate the Government and people of TimorLeste for the conclusion of the presidential and
parliamentary elections and for beginning the process
of security sector reform and promoting the rule of law.

18

Timor-Leste is still facing challenges such as the
continuation of serious internal divisions, despite the
information of a democratic Government. The people
of Timor-Leste, first and foremost, are responsible for
resolving those problems, and we recognize in that
respect the importance of the process of dialogue and
national reconciliation begun by the Government of
Timor-Leste.
The success of this process will be the best
vehicle for restoring the confidence of the people in
government institutions. The Security Council should
continue to support that process. In view of this, the
new mandate for the Mission should promote dialogue
and national reconciliation among the main political
actors and other members of society, in order to
eliminate the causes of the crisis of 2006.
With respect to the fragile security situation, we
believe that it has improved, but review of that sector
should continue. UNMIT should continue to provide
support for the definition of the legal framework that
defines the role of the police and the armed forces.
On the need to strengthen justice, we have seen
advances in the drafting of laws and trials for the
events related to the 2006 crisis. The recommendations
of the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry
must be complied with and the investigations begun by
the Office of the Prosecutor-General of Timor-Leste of
human rights violations must be completed. UNMIT
should continue its work in the area of technical
cooperation in order to strengthen the judicial system.
Lastly, we praise the efforts of UNMIT and of the
international partners for the support that they provide
to the people of Timor-Leste in crucial areas, including
economic and social development. The work of this
Council now will be to provide UNMIT and
Timor-Leste with ideal tools to consolidate the
achievements that have been made and to ensure
lasting peace and stability and democracy.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to welcome the results of the
mission led by Ambassador Kumalo. That visit has
made it possible to reaffirm the international
community’s commitment alongside the people of
Timor-Leste at an important time in the consolidation
of peace, stability and democracy in that country.
I would also like to express our satisfaction with
the commitment expressed by both the Government

07-64195

S/PV.5801

and the opposition to resolve the political differences
through peaceful and diplomatic means and with the
commitment shown by all Timorese to democratic
principles. It is normal and healthy that different views
be expressed, as in any democracy. However, it is
important that the political actors make sure that they
do not weaken institutions.
The report of the Security Council mission
(S/2007/711) rightly insists on the importance of
strengthening State institutions, particularly the
security forces and the judicial system. Those are keys
to a lasting stabilization of Timor-Leste. Allow me to
stress in particular the crucial character of
strengthening the rule of law and promoting human
rights. I would like to recall in that regard the
importance that France places on the work done by the
UNMIT Independent Special Commission of Inquiry
on serious crimes.
Progress made in the stabilization of Timor-Leste
in the last 18 months has been significant, and we
welcome the efforts of the authorities and the people of
Timor-Leste to put the country back on its feet. As the
representative of Timor-Leste has just recalled,
however, those strides are fragile. We therefore feel
that the international community should remain
actively involved in supporting the country. We are
ready to review favourably the renewal of the UNMIT
mandate in February 2008.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Ambassador Kumalo of South
Africa for his efficient management of the Security
Council’s mission in Timor-Leste in the last week of
November, and we would like to thank the delegation
of South Africa for presenting the report (S/2007/711).
Peru would like to reiterate its firm support for
the people and Government of Timor-Leste in the
search for a State that is peaceful and sustainable in the
long term. We believe that it is important for the
Government and all the parties to continue to work
together, on the basis of dialogue and reconciliation, in
order to strengthen the progress that has been achieved
and to overcome the current situation of fragility and
instability in the security, political and humanitarian
aspects.
We agree with and share the observations
presented in the mission’s report, in particular where
its says that in the light of the enormous challenges
faced by the country, Timor-Leste will continue to

07-64195

require assistance from the United Nations in different
areas for the foreseeable future. From our point of
view, it is crucial that the Security Council continue to
be committed to assisting Timor-Leste, since we all
know that reconciliation and development are complex
processes that require time.
In that context, we believe that the Security
Council must renew the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) when its
mandate expires in February 2008, with a view to
supporting the people and the leaders in taking on the
great challenges that remain to be resolved, especially
in the aspects of strengthening democratic institutions,
building the rule of law and developing the country.
The future of Timor-Leste is in its own hands. Its
leaders and the population in general must assume that
responsibility and continue to promote economic
development and to ensure that the distribution of
income reaches those who are most in need.
In support of those efforts, UNMIT must continue
to cooperate and coordinate with the United Nations
system and the international community in order to
support the Government with the implementation of the
national development plan, as well as attention to other
outstanding matters. Some of those are security sector
reform, strengthening the justice sector and promoting
democracy, human rights and humanitarian assistance,
in particular the resolution of the problem of the
internally displaced persons. We do agree with the
proposal of the Special Representative, Mr. Atul Khare,
that the Secretary-General should deploy a mission of
experts to examine the relationship between UNMIT
police and the armed forces and the Ministry of the
Interior, in accordance with the supplementary
agreement on the functions of the police.
Lastly, I would like to draw the attention of the
international community of donors and entities of the
United Nations to the need to continue to cooperate
and to invest in Timor-Leste.
Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
my delegation is grateful to you for once again giving us
an opportunity to take up the situation of Timor-Leste,
a country friendly to Congo. We would like to thank
Ambassador Kumalo and his team for the very
complete report (S/2007/711) that he has given us.
My delegation would like to say how pleased it is
at the work done by the Security Council delegation in

19

S/PV.5801

such a short period of time. The contacts established
with the entire political class, civil society and other
actors attest to the determination of the Security
Council to get a feel for the realities, which are not
always easy to grasp from New York, despite the
impeccable quality of the briefings given by the
Secretariat. That also allows participation in the
rebuilding of the social fabric, which has been
seriously impaired by recent events in that country.
My delegation would like to say that it is in
favour of continuing such Security Council missions,
carried out by light and representative teams. We regret
that we were not able to participate in the recent
mission because of some national imperatives.
Taking into account what has already been said
by other delegations, Congo would like to make the
following comments.
We take note of the determination of the
Timorese Government to do everything it can to
strengthen peace and stability in order to release the
people from poverty, but also to relieve the United
Nations of its current responsibilities vis-à-vis
Timor-Leste. My delegation also takes into account and
welcomes the fact that the Government of Timor-Leste
rejects a culture of dependence, stating clearly that
letting things slide would not be appropriate, nor would
a premature celebration, as there are enormous
challenges still facing the country. Those political
commitments are signs of the Government’s maturity,
in a young nation resolved to quickly take in hand the
control of its own destiny as an independent and
sovereign nation.
More than ever before, therefore, the
international community has a duty to complete its
work there and to live up to the legitimate expectations
of the Timorese. Here, the activities of the United
Nations have to be ongoing, through its main
multilateral mechanisms. This will be crucial for
peacebuilding, promoting the rule of law and
strengthening democracy and national institutions.
The capacity of the Timorese political class has to
be reflected in greater ability to work together in the
higher interest of the nation, both in the parliament and
in other national structures, in order to enable this
young nation to meet the challenges strewn along its
path to the future. Members of this political class must
resolutely commit themselves to dialogue and national
reconciliation and put an end to the ongoing

20

differences which make them lose sight of their
development goals, which squander their energies and
which endanger the restoration of security and stability.
Social and economic questions relating to poverty
and widespread unemployment, as well all the
consequences of the 2006 crisis, demand that priority
be given today to resolving a number of serious
problems. The first is the case of Major Alfredo
Reinado and the situation of the petitioners — that is,
the former members of the military who were asked to
leave the army or who deserted. The second is the
reintegration of the 100,000 displaced persons who are
now living in about 53 camps and the improvement of
their living conditions. This situation adds the threat of
a humanitarian catastrophe to the many challenges that
Timor-Leste must confront. The third is continued
capacity-building in State institutions in general, and
particularly in the justice sector, and the formulation of
a Government strategy for reform in the sensitive
security sector, which is seen as the Achilles heel of the
Timorese institutions.
Because of its mandate, and in light of the results
it obtained, the recent Security Council mission once
again showed that the Council and the broader United
Nations are committed to Timor-Leste. My delegation
is convinced that, as in the past, the Council must be
very attentive to needs expressed and act for the best,
through the United Nations presence in Timor-Leste,
with regard to the readjustment of the role of the
United Nations Police in Timor-Leste and other vital
questions, such as the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
The Congo supports the conclusions contained in
the report of the Security Council mission, and we
support the renewal of the UNMIT mandate so that the
young Timorese nation will be able to continue to rely
on the United Nations system until it attains selfreliance.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Italy.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union. My brief remarks are
meant to complement those of the European Union
presidency.
At the outset, I join other delegations in thanking
Ambassador Kumalo and his team for their leadership

07-64195

S/PV.5801

on the mission, as well as for coordinating the
preparation of the report (S/2007/711). The attention
devoted to this mission by the Timorese people and
authorities, and the richness of the report, validate by
themselves the strong impact that the mission has had.
The Security Council sent clear messages to the
country at a crucial juncture, and we have now
available a considerable wealth of information and
ideas that will allow the Council to have a more
informed discussion on the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
early next year. In this regard, the mission has
confirmed that UNMIT is fulfilling its mandate in an
effective manner and that all parties in Timor-Leste
count on its continued presence, as we have also heard
today from the representative of Timor-Leste.
Indeed, the persistent complexity of the
stabilization efforts in Timor-Leste requires sustained
attention and assistance from the United Nations in all
the key areas, from security to political dialogue, from
human rights to development. The events of the past
two years have proven that we need to be patient. If we
do not continue to make progress, we risk rolling
backwards.

time, the report clearly indicates that, unfortunately,
the challenges lying ahead still coincide broadly with
those which caused the 2006 crisis. Reconciliation and
institution-building remain the most daunting of these
challenges, along with the lack of visible progress in
people’s livelihoods.
The EU presidency has already elaborated on the
aforementioned challenges, as well as on the efforts
that the European Union is undertaking to help address
them. From our side, I would just emphasize the
importance of the active participation of Timor-Leste
in regional cooperation and integration initiatives, by
which the country is raising its international profile
and engaging its neighbours in the stabilization
process.
Finally, I wish to recall that Italy, along with its
EU partners, has constantly supported the young
Timorese democracy at all stages of its genesis and
development, the latest initiative being the
participation of Timorese officials in human rights
training courses at the San Remo International Institute
of Humanitarian Law. We remain committed to
supporting Timor-Leste in its quest to consolidate
peace, democracy and development.

In this context, as many have stated, the
importance of Timorese ownership cannot be
overestimated. It is up to the people and the leadership
of Timor-Leste to find solutions to the remaining
challenges. I was glad, in this regard, to hear in this
Chamber from the Timorese representative last week,
and again today, that Timor-Leste sees its relationship
with the United Nations and the international
community at large as one of interdependence rather
than of dependence. That is the approach that should
inspire our common action.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. On behalf of the Council, I should like to express
gratitude and appreciation to all the members of the
Security Council mission, which was very ably led by
Ambassador Kumalo, for the manner in which they
discharged their important responsibility.

The successful organization of the electoral cycle
has once again demonstrated the commitment of the
Timorese people to peace and democracy. At the same

The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

07-64195

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

21
