United Nations

S/PV.6367

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6367th meeting
Tuesday, 3 August 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Sumi
Ms. Tawk
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Kafeero
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2010/401)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-47134 (E)

*1047134*

S/PV.6367

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in Russian): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
August, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency
Mrs. Joy Ogwu, Permanent Representative of Nigeria
to the United Nations, for her service as President of
the Security Council for the month of July 2010. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Ogwu for
the great diplomatic skill with which she conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2010/401)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia, in which he requests that
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jeremić
(Serbia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the

2

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Skender Hyseni.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/401, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Zannier: The report before the Council
today (S/2010/401) covers the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 March 2010 to 15 July 2010.
Overall, since the last Council meeting on UNMIK in
mid-May (see S/PV.6314), the situation in Kosovo has
been relatively stable, although, as we saw most
recently in early July, the potential for instability,
especially in northern Kosovo, remains. Insufficient
progress
towards
reconciliation
between
the
communities and the unresolved issues that hamper
such reconciliation, coupled with slow economic
development, continue to present the risk of social
unrest. For its part, UNMIK continues to implement its
mandate in a status-neutral manner, assisting Kosovo’s
communities, interacting with the institutions in
Pristina and the other key stakeholders in Kosovo, with
the Government in Belgrade and with other regional
and international actors.
An important development since I last addressed
the Council was the issuance of the much-awaited

10-47134

S/PV.6367

International Court of Justice advisory opinion on
22 July. Until then, the anticipation surrounding the
imminent delivery of the opinion hindered efforts to
properly resolve the issues between Belgrade and
Pristine which, if resolved, would have a positive
impact in Kosovo and on the region. The issuance of
the Court’s opinion should therefore now open a new
phase and allow Belgrade and Pristina to engage in a
constructive dialogue with a view to the resolution of
these issues. Reactions to the opinion on the ground,
both in Belgrade and Pristina, as well as among
Kosovo’s communities, were predominantly measured.
This dialogue is very important for the stability
and development of the region. The Secretary-General
and the European Union (EU) High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy have exchanged
letters noting the vital role of the EU in promoting the
dialogue against the background of the European
perspective for the region, and have agreed to
coordinate efforts in this regard. The United Nations
preliminary legal assessment is that the opinion does
not affect the status of UNMIK or a status-neutral
policy. Indeed, the judgment confirms the applicability
of resolution 1244 (1999).
On the internal political front, the new Kosovo
Serb majority municipalities established following the
Pristina-sponsored elections of November 2009 are
consolidating their administrative structures and have
begun engaging with their parent municipality for the
transfer of municipal records. Time will show how
effective the new municipalities are in addressing the
needs of the populations they serve.
The reporting period also saw municipal elections
in Kosovo organized by the Kosovo authorities in the
new
predominantly
Kosovo
Serb-inhabited
municipality of Partesh/Parteš, and by Belgrade in
Novobërdë/Novo Brdo in northern Mitrovica. The
voting proceeded without incident at all three locations
despite Serbian opposition to the Pristina-organized
election, which, however, did not discourage a large
turnout by Serbian voters in Partesh/Parteš, and
Pristina’s objections to those organized by Belgrade.
Nevertheless, on the day of the elections in northern
Mitrovica, a large crowd of Kosovo Albanians gathered
to protest the election and faced off across the Ibër/Ibar
river with a significant crowd of Kosovo Serbs. While
a confrontation was averted by prompt reaction by
Kosovo police, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force

10-47134

(KFOR), the incident demonstrated how quickly a
critical situation can develop in and around northern
Kosovo.
In fact, as discussions in the Council on 6 July
demonstrated (see S/PV.6353), the situation in the
North remains of major concern, and steps are
constantly required, through consultations and
dialogue, to ensure security and stability. A number of
explosions causing property damage in April and May
and clashes between Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo
Serb teenagers in June were followed by violence in
northern Mitrovica prompted by the opening of a civil
service centre by the Ministry of Interior of Kosovo in
July.
In his report to the Council of 6 April
(S/2010/169), the Secretary-General stated his concern
over the risk of tensions should the implementation of
policies and strategies for northern Kosovo not take
place in conditions of transparency and dialogue with
local communities and all relative stakeholders. Recent
violence in northern Mitrovica reminds us of the need
for all sides to commit to dialogue as a necessary
precondition for addressing the challenges faced in
northern Kosovo. Kosovo’s communities are going to
have to work together to rebuild the trust that has been
destroyed. I therefore wish to reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call on all parties to exercise restraint and to
adopt a constructive, cooperative and consultative
approach to the resolution of issues in northern
Kosovo.
Where we have a process of consultations, there
is a chance for positive developments. I hope that
continuing dialogue will finally result in progress in reestablishing multi-ethnic courts and fully fledged
customs controls in northern Kosovo. Unfortunately,
discussions of these issues have quickly become mired
in sovereignty issues and political considerations,
which have impeded progress.
Dialogue appears to be bearing fruit in the
northern Mitrovica suburb of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani,
where last summer the Kosovo Serb and Kosovo
Albanian communities were coming into regular
conflict over returns and reconstruction. This year, the
building season has so far been without incident. As of
15 July, Kosovo Albanians had completed 20 houses in
this area and 20 families had returned to their homes.
At the same time, the construction of five new
buildings by Kosovo Serbs is reaching completion.

3

S/PV.6367

UNMIK has been facilitating meetings at which
representatives of the two communities have discussed
practical issues of common interest, such as electricity,
water and the like.
I am also pleased to report that there has been
progress in the long-delayed process of relocation of
the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian community of
internally displaced persons living in Česmin Lug and
Osterode camps in northern Mitrovica. The
construction of 50 houses for the most endangered
families from the camps, funded by the United States
Agency for International Development, is all but
complete, and the families are scheduled to move in
from 15 August.
However, overall progress on returns is still too
slow, as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report,
and there is a need for greater focus on reconciliation
between the communities, as demonstrated most
recently by the incidents following the spontaneous
return of 23 Kosovo Serb families to the village of
Zallq/Žac, in north-western Kosovo, where five people
are still considered missing from the conflict.
In April, I reported on the disturbing display of
active local resistance to these returns, including
through repeated physical attacks against the returnees,
which have been condemned by the Kosovo authorities
and all key stakeholders in Kosovo, including KFOR
Commander Lieutenant General Bentler, European
Union Special Representative Feith and myself. As the
reconstruction of houses for the returnees started on
9 July with funds provided by the Kosovo authorities,
it is to be hoped that the welcoming messages from the
Kosovo authorities will help quell the lingering
hostility among some members of the receiving
community. On another occasion, during the 28 June
Vidovdan celebrations at Gazimestan, the call for peace
and justice sounded by Metropolitan Amfilohije of the
Serbian Orthodox Church was marred by participants
singing anti-Albanian songs containing hate speech.
In my last address to the Council (see
S/PV.6314), I raised the issue of the disconnection of
telecommunication service providers using Serbian
dialing codes and operating in Kosovo without a
license, which led to serious disruptions in the
communication infrastructure in minority areas and
provoked
retaliatory
action
against
licensed
transmitters in northern Kosovo. Since then, the
Kosovo authorities have taken steps to lessen the

4

impact of the disconnections on minority communities
and Belgrade has partially restored the Serbian cellular
network in Kosovo. While efforts to resolve the issue
through dialogue have not yet met with success, the
Kosovo Telecommunications Regulatory Authority’s
decision not to effect further disconnections during this
time helped decrease tensions and deserves
appreciation.
Another unresolved issue relates to the Kosovo
Ministry of Justice’s decision last year to deal with
mutual legal assistance requests from non-recognizing
States directly, rather than through UNMIK. In
consequence, during this reporting period the Serbian
Ministry of Justice returned some 1,500 such requests
to EULEX, all of them unprocessed. This is another
example of political considerations negatively affecting
the right of citizens to Government services. It is in
order to address such needs that UNMIK continues to
provide document certification services for Kosovo
residents relating to civil status, pension and education,
and to facilitate the provision of international legal
assistance when requested.
Similarly, UNMIK continues to provide its
facilitation in the vitally important area of regional
cooperation and, despite setbacks and difficulties due
to status-related considerations, has in most cases been
able to assist in facilitating the participation of the
Kosovo institutions in regional and international
forums and mechanisms. However, such facilitation
continues to be ad hoc and subject to the prevailing
political climate, and the Kosovo authorities have
become more emphatic in their view that UNMIK
facilitation may undermine their declared sovereign
status. Facilitating the participation of the Kosovo
authorities in one of the key mechanisms for regional
economic development, the Central European Free
Trade Agreement, has been particularly challenging.
Nevertheless, I have continued to engage with both
Belgrade and Pristina, as well as with regional leaders
and with the European Commission, which sponsors
many of the regional initiatives, in order to try to craft
solutions that allow for maximal cooperation under
current circumstances.
UNMIK has also continued to provide its good
offices in order to learn the fate of the 1,862
individuals whom the International Committee of the
Red Cross estimates remain missing from the conflict
and its aftermath. While there has been encouraging
cooperation between Serbia’s war crimes prosecutor’s

10-47134

S/PV.6367

office, EULEX, and the Pristina-Belgrade Working
Group on Missing Persons in the identification of
possible mass grave sites in southern Serbia, again
little progress has resulted from this. Finding and
identifying the missing is a crucial part of the
reconciliation process, as families feel unable to
resume normal life until they know the fate of their
loved ones.
Under the direction of the Reconstruction
Implementation Commission, work was completed on
two of the Serbian Orthodox religious sites damaged or
destroyed during the March 2004 violence, and
cooperation within the Commission between Belgrade
and
Pristina
has
continued.
However,
the
Commission’s funding will run out at the end of this
year, and there remains work to be done. I would
therefore appeal to all interested parties to find the
means that would allow the Commission to continue its
important work.
Finally, I would like to inform the Council that,
with the United Nations Kosovo team, we have
completed our draft United Nations strategic
framework for Kosovo as a plan for marshaling the
resources of the United Nations family in Kosovo to
meet our common goal of peace consolidation, which
we are now submitting to Headquarters. We intend to
focus through joint efforts on the protection of human
rights, the fostering of good governance, encouraging
returns, and addressing various aspects of the situation
in the North.
In closing, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish
to thank the Council for its support. We are strongly
committed to ensuring continued peace and stability in
Kosovo and in the region, and we will remain engaged
with all sides in order to encourage dialogue, help
defuse tensions and maintain peace and stability on the
ground, in close coordination with EULEX and KFOR.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Zannier for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister
for Foreign Affairs for Serbia.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this regular meeting of the Security Council
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999).

10-47134

I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier. The United Nations continues to be
an indispensable actor in the province. We believe it
critical for the Security Council to keep supporting
UNMIK as a strong pillar of peace and stability.
The United Nations status neutrality, and that of
all organizations that operate under its overall
authority, such as the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, remains the
framework within which all of us can work together to
improve the lives of ordinary people in Kosovo,
irrespective of their ethnicity. Disagreements on
broader
issues
notwithstanding,
responsible
stakeholders should rededicate themselves to acting in
concert and in a status-neutral manner on practical
issues, including those that fall under the SecretaryGeneral’s six-point plan welcomed by this Council.
Serbia highly appreciates the United Nations firm
commitment to maintaining the external representation
function of UNMIK. As the report under consideration
today makes clear, “as long as resolution 1244 (1999)
is in force, UNMIK will continue its facilitation”
(S/2010/401, para. 48) in multilateral forums. We
value UNMIK’s role in enabling Pristina’s dealings
with
INTERPOL
and
the
Reconstruction
Implementation Commission, for example. We also
support UNMIK’s continued engagement with the
Council of Europe regarding various human rights
monitoring mechanisms and conventions as they apply
to Kosovo under resolution 1244 (1999), as well as its
work in the important area of missing persons.
The report highlights the fact that the “overall
numbers of returns [of internally displaced persons]
remain disappointingly low” (para. 51): 268 Kosovo
Serbs in four months, to be exact, out of a total of
205,835 expelled from the province since June 1999,
according to the official figures of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). The report also expresses the SecretaryGeneral’s deep concern about the continuing
harassment of Kosovo Serbs who chose to return to
their south Kosovo homes in enclaves such as Žac. We
are troubled that, to quote the report, “Kosovo
Albanians in the receiving community refused to
accept Kosovo Serb returnees” (para. 34), and that this
has resulted in “physical attacks and protests” (Ibid.) as
well as the “firing of automatic weapons” (para. 35),

5

S/PV.6367

despite the deterring presence of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR).

other approach risks increasing instability
furthering the divide between communities”.

The precarious state of holy sites belonging to the
Serbian Orthodox Church continues to be a part of the
reality on the ground in south Kosovo. In addition to
long-standing, unresolved issues, such as the
restoration of the Dečani monastery’s cadastral record
and the paving over with concrete of the remains of the
twice-destroyed Serbian church in the centre of
Djakovica, new ones have unfortunately arisen. As the
report points out, “During the reporting period, several
Serbian cultural and religious sites were vandalized”
(para. 40).

The Secretary-General has called on all sides to
commit to dialogue and transparency before any
strategies or policies are announced or implemented in
north Kosovo. The Republic of Serbia will continue to
strongly oppose any unilateralism. We will remain
committed to the inclusive approach suggested by the
report, in order to address the outstanding challenges
related to Kosovo. We expect all other stakeholders to
do the same.

KFOR’s unique ability to maintain peace and
stability in the province remains acknowledged by all.
The report mentions the North Atlantic Council’s
18 March decision to confer responsibility for static
security at the Gazimestan memorial to local police
units, despite strong opposition from my Government
and the Kosovo Serb community. Its more recent
decision to unfix its presence around four additional
Serbian holy sites—including the early fourteenthcentury Gračanica monastery, a UNESCO World
Heritage in Danger site, against the will of the
Government of Serbia and the Serbian Orthodox
Church, is deeply troubling. We hope that the
implementation timetable of these potentially
destabilizing developments will be revised in the light
of the increasingly tenuous conditions on the ground.
The report draws attention to the fact that the
situation in north Kosovo remains politically delicate.
Tensions rapidly increased as a result of a unilateral
attempt by Pristina to “establish their institutions”
(para. 16), as the report puts it, in the Serbian town of
north Mitrovica, by opening a so-called Kosovo
government office without the consent of the local
community, UNMIK or EULEX.
An emergency meeting of the Security Council
was convened on 6 July to address the tragedy that
took place there (see S/PV.6353). Our position on this
issue was clearly stated by our President during that
meeting and remains unaltered. Serbia welcomes
paragraph 50 of the Secretary-General’s latest report,
which underlines the necessity of peaceful engagement
and “continuing consultation and coordination between
all relevant actors ... in order to avoid further
escalations in northern Kosovo”. Serbia concurs with
the report’s conclusion in the same paragraph that “any

6

and

On 17 February 2008, the ethnic Albanian
authorities of Serbia’s breakaway province of Kosovo
and Metohija unilaterally declared independence,
against the will of the Security Council and in
contravention of my country’s Constitution. More than
two years later, an agreement between the parties on
the effects of the unilateral declaration of independence
(UDI) has not been reached. From the very onset of
this grave crisis, the Republic of Serbia responded to
the UDI in a non-confrontational manner. We will
continue to use all diplomatic resources at the disposal
of a sovereign State to oppose this attempt to forcibly
change our borders in peacetime. No peaceful and
proud nation facing such a threat — be it African,
European, Asian or American; be it small or large, rich
or poor — would act differently.
Serbia will under no circumstances implicitly or
explicitly recognize Kosovo’s UDI. That is our
constitutional imperative, as well as a political and
moral duty conferred on us by the overwhelming
democratic will of our citizens. A substantial majority
of United Nations Member States — and of States
seated on this Council — have continued to respect
Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. On behalf
of my nation, I would like to reiterate our deep
gratitude for their support and solidarity and urge them
to maintain their principled position not to recognize
Kosovo.
In October 2008, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 63/3, seeking the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the lawfulness of
Pristina’s UDI. The Court has now delivered its
findings. The Court clearly reaffirmed that Kosovo
remains subject to the interim administration of the
United Nations, and that resolution 1244 (1999) and
UNMIK’s Constitutional Framework for Provisional
Self-Government in Kosovo remain in force and

10-47134

S/PV.6367

continue to apply. It is therefore evident that the
province is still a territory subject to an international
regime mandated by the Security Council. Moreover,
the Court endorsed neither the view that Kosovo’s UDI
was a unique case nor Pristina’s claim that Kosovo is a
State. Lastly, the Court failed to approve the province’s
avowed right of secession from Serbia or any purported
right to self-determination for Kosovo’s ethnic
Albanians. Nothing contained in the advisory opinion
changes the fundamental parameters set forth in
resolution 1244 (1999) by the Security Council, whose
centrality and leading role in a final settlement of the
Kosovo issue remains paramount in accordance with its
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security, as set forth in the United Nations Charter.
The Court opted to narrowly examine the
language of the unilateral declaration of independence.
Such a strictly technical approach enabled a conclusion
that the declaration itself did not violate international
law. This has unfortunately left room for a dangerous
misinterpretation of the Court’s view as having
legalized the ethnic Albanians’ attempt at unilateral
secession.
This could produce extensive and deeply
problematic consequences for the international
community. It could become the decisive step in
legitimizing unilateralism on the global stage, which
this Council, and the entire United Nations system for
that matter, were created to oppose. The safeguards
written into the 1945 Charter against the arbitrary use
of force would be downgraded in practice, producing a
heightened sense of insecurity throughout the world.
Nations would have fewer incentives to come together
in setting and implementing a common agenda.
Collective efforts to strengthen a rules-based,
multilateral approach to the maintenance of peace and
security would be significantly undermined, adversely
affecting developing countries most of all.
Additionally, a misinterpretation of the Court’s
views could easily provide some ethnic minorities
around the globe with an opportunity to write their own
declarations of independence according to Kosovo’s
textual template. That would put them in a position to
plausibly claim that such texts sufficiently legitimize
their respective acts of secession for their proclaimed
independence to be taken as not violating international
law.

10-47134

I believe we all share a duty to prevent the
inherent dangers of such scenarios from becoming a
reality. Otherwise, the borders of every multiethnic
country would be permanently threatened by
secessionism, producing lasting instability throughout
the world. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has
stated in his report, the General Assembly “will
determine how to proceed on this matter” (para. 55).
To that end, Serbia has submitted a draft
resolution. The forthcoming debate will inevitably
focus on the consequences and implications of
Kosovo’s UDI in the light of the Court’s findings.
Member States will have an opportunity to come
together and make a critical contribution to global
governance by uniting around a clear and resolute
message. Otherwise, the stage would be set for the
establishment of a universally applicable precedent that
provides a ready-made model for unilateral secession.
The Republic of Serbia is committed to working
with Pristina and the international community on
finding a mutually acceptable solution to all
outstanding issues through peaceful dialogue. I believe
that we should engage as soon as possible. The sooner
we do, the less there is a likelihood of producing an
outcome that is surely not in anyone’s interest, least of
all Serbia’s — the long-term freezing of Kosovo’s
limbo.
We do not seek a confrontation with anybody, but
equally, there must be no doubt that we shall not give
in and simply walk away. This is not about
stubbornness, acrimony, revisionism or wanting to be a
nuisance. It is about the fact that we have no choice but
to persevere in a peaceful and dignified manner, for
Kosovo directly relates to the very essence of our
identity.
Moreover, it is also about the fact that zero-sum
outcomes — where one side gets everything, while the
other gets nothing — are intrinsically unstable.
Attempts to impose unilateral solutions have never
contributed to the stability of the Balkans or that of the
rest of Europe. The historical record is unambiguous. A
durable settlement has never been the product of
compulsion; it has always necessitated consent.
It is therefore inconceivable that a UDI could
become the basis for the normalization of relations
between Serbs and Albanians. Lasting prosperity will
be achieved only after everyone finally comes to

7

S/PV.6367

appreciate that the defeat of one is in truth a loss for
all.
There is no perfect solution, but there must be an
equitable one to which we can all agree — one that
will enable us to move forward and ensure the
consolidation of the gains the region has made in the
past decade. We shall keep working incessantly until a
compromise on Kosovo is found.
Time and again, this Government of Serbia has
demonstrated its capacity to engage with our partners
in overcoming lingering prejudices and points of
disagreement. Even on the most challenging issues, we
have found ways to work together. Our sustained
efforts have made the Western Balkans more stable and
secure, with key bilateral relationships in our part of
the world showing visible signs of improvement. These
achievements have taken place in the midst of a
renewed impetus to complete the process of full
reconciliation. Serbia’s compelling track record of
good will has helped to advance common strategic
priorities and to building up the regional level of trust
to an all-time high.
We remain deeply committed to European Union
membership. This will continue to be our central
strategic priority. Serbia believes that its achievement
is the surest way to complete the democratic
transformation of the Balkans. Undoubtedly, this will
require leadership and imagination, as well as the
courage to reach beyond the present divisions. There
are those who still mistakenly insist that we be defined
by our differences. Serbia is adamant in maintaining
that we be defined by the shared destiny of all
European nations and by the values we should all
embrace.

Kosovo is removed from the list of world’s problems
once and for all. If we succeed, we will have made a
historic contribution to a stable Balkans, a united
continent and a safer world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Vuk Jeremić for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skender Hyseni.
Mr. Hyseni: Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Council for this
opportunity to share our views on the current situation
in the Republic of Kosovo.
It is an honour to speak before the Council today,
less than two weeks after the International Court of
Justice rendered an advisory opinion on Kosovo’s
independence. In addition, I will speak about specific
developments in my country during the reporting
period.
I wish once again to extend Kosovo’s profound
appreciation to the United Nations and to the Security
Council for the vital role they have played at all stages
of Kosovo’s post-war development. The time has come
to replace resolution 1244 (1999) with a new resolution
reflecting the realities created by the independence of
Kosovo and the clear ruling of the International Court
of Justice in its favour. Our request for the replacement
of resolution 1244 (1999) is in line with Kosovo’s
ultimate objective of becoming a United Nations
Member. Membership of the United Nations is a goal
we eagerly look forward to achieving as soon as
possible and a natural step after the Court’s ruling.

Amongst the most basic of these is the
renunciation of unilateralism as a means of resolving
conflicts in Europe. The project to bind in peace and
consent the States of the old continent has brought to
an end centuries of war and destruction. On the way
towards achieving this, many creative solutions have
been found for bridging seemingly unbridgeable
divides. What all those had in common was the fact
that they were built on the basis of the consensus
principle. The challenge before us cannot be resolved
differently.

I am very proud of the progress my country and
my Government have made since the declaration of
independence on 17 February 2008. In two and a half
busy years, we have successfully established a
democratic and multi-ethnic State at peace with all its
neighbours and firmly established on its path of
integration into the European Union and NATO. My
country has been formally recognized by 69 nations
around the world, and Kosovo has already entered into
diplomatic and consular relations with over 30
countries. We have signed numerous treaties and
agreements with many countries, and my country was
granted membership in the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank in June 2009.

We should therefore brace ourselves to undertake
a bold course of action, and so bear ourselves that, by
working together in good faith, we make sure that

Our Constitution, which is based on the
recommendations of the Nobel Peace Prize laureate
and former Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for

8

10-47134

S/PV.6367

Kosovo Martti Ahtisaari, has helped us build up state
institutions in a relatively short period of time. These
are now up and running and fully functional. Being an
excellent example of a modern constitution, it provides
far-reaching protections for ethnic minorities.
Our Government has been working around the
clock to implement both the ideals and the objectives
enshrined in our Constitution and in the Ahtisaari
comprehensive settlement plan. The municipalities of
Kosovo have been afforded a large degree of local
governance under Kosovo’s new legal framework.
Both the existing and the newly created Serb-majority
municipalities have been afforded an even larger
degree of local governance. As part of the ongoing
process of decentralization, local municipal elections
have
been
organized
in
all
Serb-majority
municipalities. I am very pleased to inform the Council
of the heavy turnout at polling stations by members of
the Kosovo Serb community.
The setting up Serb-majority municipality
administrative structures has been successfully
accomplished. The handover of various records to the
decentralized municipalities is well under way.
Members of Kosovo’s ethnic minorities, including the
Serb community, regularly participate in the work of
the Parliament, the Government and all the institutions
of the Republic of Kosovo.
We note that the international community has
continued to underscore the illegitimacy of parallel
municipal structures and self-declared municipal
officeholders. I emphasize that we strongly condemn
the actions of the criminal Serb parallel structures in
the North of my country, and the threatening and
intimidation of members of the vast majority of the
Serb community, which is willing to integrate and
work with its Albanian and other neighbours to build a
better future for all of Kosovo.
While the institutions of Kosovo seek to protect
the rights and improve the lives of the members of the
Serb community, the Government of Serbia has been
exploiting and confusing them with calls to reject
integration and cooperation with Kosovo’s institutions.
Obviously, Belgrade has been very successful in its
support for the Serb criminal parallel structures in the
North, but Belgrade has failed to offer any assistance
or solution to the problems and concerns of the Serb
community in Kosovo.

10-47134

Little less than two years ago, upon a request of
the Republic of Serbia, the General Assembly tasked
the International Court of Justice with rendering an
advisory opinion on the independence of Kosovo. At
that time, I said that “it is regrettable that such a
request was made”. I said so not because I had any
doubts about the lawfulness and rightfulness of
Kosovo’s independence. My concern was that the
Court’s proceedings would inevitably have a delaying
impact on many processes related to Kosovo, as well as
to Serbia. Ultimately, it would delay the start of
normalization and reconciliation between our two
countries. The Council will also recall my further
statement on the proceedings of the International Court
of Justice, which I wish to repeat:
“I wish to emphasize our commitment to justice
and our trust in justice, and with that, our trust in
ICJ justice. We are therefore confident that the
ICJ’s deliberations and ruling will be fair and
impartial.” (S/PV.6144, p.9)
On 22 July, the International Court of Justice
issued its advisory opinion. We welcome the opinion.
The Court found by a large majority that “the
declaration of independence of 17 February 2008 did
not violate international law”. The opinion is explicit
and clear and leaves no room for doubt. The
International Court found in Kosovo’s favour on all
points. We now look forward to further recognition of
Kosovo. I call upon States that have delayed
recognizing the Republic of Kosovo pending the
opinion of the Court to now move forward to
recognition. Nothing in the opinion issued by the Court
casts any doubt on the statehood of the Republic of
Kosovo, which is an established fact.
It is clear the Kosovo’s independence has not set
any precedent. Kosovo is and has always been a special
and sui generic case. Kosovo’s independence is in the
interests of the whole of the Western Balkans. The
future of both Kosovo and Serbia lies within the
European Union and NATO. For that, there must be
good-neighbourly relations. That is what we seek. It is
now for Serbia to live up to its responsibilities.
The time has come for Kosovo and Serbia to start
a new chapter of cooperation on a State-to-State basis.
Cooperation between our countries on any issues we
may identify as ones of mutual concern and interest for
our countries is vital to our common European future. I
wish once again to clearly reaffirm the Republic of

9

S/PV.6367

Kosovo’s willingness to cooperate with the Republic of
Serbia. Cooperation with Serbia, on whatever fronts,
must take place on an equal footing and must be
conducted on a State-to-State basis only.
We have a call to make today. We once again call
on Serbia to let us work and cooperate as neighbouring
countries for the benefit of both our countries. This is
the only path to pursue. Serbia should stop throwing up
more diplomatic roadblocks along that path. This is
what the world is seeking. This is what are common
friends are asking of us. Let us live up to our
responsibilities.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Hyseni for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Kafeero (Uganda): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) Lamberto Zannier for his briefing. I
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
to this debate and thank him for his statement. I also
thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement.
At the outset, Uganda would like to commend
UNMIK for its continued efforts in promoting security
and stability in Kosovo and in the region. We are
encouraged that the overall security situation in
Kosovo during the reporting period remained relatively
calm. We are concerned, however, by the recent
incidents of violence in northern Mitrovica, which
increase instability and division between the
communities. We urge all sides to exercise restraint in
order to avoid a further escalation of tensions.
We commend UNMIK for its proactive
engagement with all communities, as well as the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade and international
actors for furthering peace and stability in Kosovo. We
are convinced that UNMIK’s work in supporting
minority communities, encouraging reconciliation and
facilitating dialogue and regional cooperation is
critical.
My delegation welcomes the cooperation and
coordination among UNMIK, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force on
issues of mutual concern. That cooperation is vital and
should be strengthened within the framework of

10

resolution 1244 (1999). We commend UNMIK for
facilitating the activities of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as
well as for facilitating intercommunal meetings to
resolve issues regarding power, the water supply, the
construction of roads and other social services. Those
activities are important because they build confidence
and create better understanding among communities.
We therefore urge UNMIK to continue its efforts to
address critical social service needs in coordination
and cooperation with local and relevant international
actors.
We commend UNMIK’s efforts in facilitating the
work
of
the
Reconstruction
Implementation
Commission regarding construction of Serbian
patrimonial, cultural and religious heritage sites
damaged during the 2004 violence. It is important for
the Commission to be provided with the financial and
logistical support necessary to complete its work and
ensure the protection of Serbian cultural heritage.
We welcome the progress made so far regarding
the returns process and the complementary role played
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In the spirit of
peaceful reconciliation, we call on recent communities
to desist from hate rhetoric and attacks against
returnees so as to facilitate intercommunity
reintegration. It is also important for both sides to
devote more resources to the location of missing
persons so as to promote the process of reconciliation.
Regional cooperation plays an important role in
enhancing development. We therefore encourage the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to work together in
pursuit of this goal. We are convinced that UNMIK
continues to play an important role in facilitating
Kosovo’s engagement in international and regional
forums. We call on the international community to
continue to support UNMIK’s important work,
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999).
With regard to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report, my delegation would like
to say that long before the opinion was delivered, as far
back as October 2008, Uganda was convinced that it
was necessary for the people of Kosovo and Serbia,
who have lived side by side for a long, long time, to
resolve any outstanding issues through dialogue.
Uganda’s position remains the same. We encourage and

10-47134

S/PV.6367

support the parties to remain engaged in a dialogue
aimed at finding a solution which will promote
common understanding and better relations. We are
convinced that this approach will enhance durable
peace and stability in the region.
Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Lamberto Zannier, and the
staff of UNMIK for their important work in promoting
peace and security in the region.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of August.
I thank His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign
Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni for their
statements. I should also like to thank Mr. Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his update and for his efforts in promoting peace and
stability in Kosovo and the region.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/401) and note that the overall situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively stable, although the
potential for instability exists. We are encouraged by
the gradual return to tranquillity in Mitrovica following
last month’s incident. We urge all parties to continue to
guard against a relapse into violence.
We commend the efforts by United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to facilitate dialogue among all the parties as well as
activities in the areas of the rule of law and human
rights. We appreciate the collaboration between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in fostering cooperation and peace in Kosovo and the
region in general within the status-neutral framework
of the United Nations.
In spite of these positive developments, we share
the Secretary-General’s concern regarding the slow
progress in addressing outstanding challenges related
to Kosovo, in particular in advancing regional
cooperation and finding solutions to issues of common
concern to the communities and between the parties.
These problems, if not addressed adequately, have the
potential to exacerbate the security situation in the
territory. There is a need for all actors to sustain efforts
to build confidence among the communities.
We also urge that the same importance be
accorded to efforts to locate missing persons from the
conflict. In this regard, we call on UNMIK to continue

10-47134

to foster cordial relations among the communities and
the parties. The efforts to reconstruct Serbian Orthodox
sites damaged or destroyed during the violence in
March 2004 are an important step towards building
trust among the communities. We therefore urge
continued general support for these activities.
The relevant law enforcement authorities should
also ensure that all perpetrators of crime and violence
against minorities are brought to justice. This would go
a long way towards promoting safe returns, as well as
reconciliation and the long-term stability and
development of Kosovo. It is important to promote
voluntary returns and the viability of the conditions for
returns, such as access to public services, housing and
property rights and socio-economic activities.
Additional efforts and enhanced collaboration by law
enforcement authorities are needed to prevent
harassment and attacks against returnees.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for their
presence. We listened carefully to both of their
statements.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral stated in his briefing, the overall political and
security situation is stable and continues to improve
despite undoubtedly disturbing but isolated incidents.
In terms of political developments, democratic
institutions are gradually gaining strength, the
establishment of rule of law conforming to European
standards for the good of all Kosovars, regardless of
ethic origin, is continuing with the support of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), and
the trend of decreasing tensions, which has been
observed since the independence of the country, is
continuing.
The international community has played and will
continue to play an indispensable role in supporting
these positive trends. In this regard, I should like once
again to commend the efforts of the Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
leads the activities of UNMIK in Kosovo effectively
and pragmatically, in close coordination with the
European Union. Indeed, it is EULEX that, alongside
the Kosovo authorities, is currently making an essential
contribution to the stability of Kosovo, especially
through its activities in the areas of justice, police and

11

S/PV.6367

customs. We are gratified by the fact that the EULEX
head of mission, Yves de Kermabon, had the
opportunity to speak before the Council last month
(S/PV.6353).
His
statement
indicated
the
professionalism of the European mission, which acts in
support of the Kosovo authorities and aims to maintain
ongoing dialogue with all of the stakeholders on the
ground.
In response to a request by the General Assembly,
on 22 July the International Court of Justice issued its
advisory opinion on whether the declaration of
independence of Kosovo is in accordance with
international law. That opinion confirms that the
declaration did not violate international law or
resolution 1244 (1999). This is an important milestone,
as it brings the legal debate on this subject to a
definitive end, which will allow all of the parties to
devote themselves from here on to the other
outstanding issues. Now is no longer the time for
quibbling or speculation. The opinion issued by the
International Court of Justice has definitively closed
these futile debates. What is needed now is to work
together for the future of the peoples of the region.
Kosovo and Serbia must now engage in political
dialogue in order to overcome, in a pragmatic way,
these concrete problems in the interests of all — and,
first and foremost, of the Serb community of Kosovo.
This dialogue must be forward-looking and must aim at
establishing good-neighbourly relations, achieving
progress towards European integration and improving
the living conditions of the population. It will thus
contribute to the stability of the region.
In this new phase which is just starting, the
European Union has, through High Representative
Catherine Ashton, stated its readiness to build such a
dialogue. The two States, Serbia and Kosovo, have the
prospect of becoming members of the European Union,
which will require that they establish normal relations
between themselves as member States, which will
enable them to work together to build the European
system. This is what we most wanted to hear in the
statements of Mr. Jeremić and Mr. Hyseni: strong
common affirmation of their desire to enshrine their
countries’ futures in the European framework. We seek
an early launch of dialogue, which will create the
conditions for a shared future within the European
Union. They can count on French support when they
start along this path.

12

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2010/401) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We would also like to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his briefing and the
staff of UNMIK for their efforts. We welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Mr. Skender Hyseni.
We are pleased to note that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, operating
within the framework of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999), is successfully continuing its role of
maintaining peace, security, stability and respect for
human rights in Kosovo. Furthermore, we appreciate
and commend UNMIK’s efforts to encourage the
process of reconciliation and to facilitate constructive
dialogue and regional cooperation, as well as its focus
on mediation between the communities and its support
to minority communities.
The report of the Secretary-General indicates that
the security situation in Kosovo has remained
relatively calm, despite some incidents mainly in
northern Kosovo, where the situation has continued to
be sensitive and politically delicate. In particular, the
end of the reporting period was marked by two
incidents that increased tensions. In that regard, Bosnia
and Herzegovina condemns the tragic incident that
occurred on 2 July, in which one person was killed and
several others were injured.
We also regret the tragic death of a member of the
Assembly of Kosovo representing the Serb community —
Petar Miletić — who was shot by unknown
perpetrators in front of his house in northern Mitrovica.
Once again, we reiterate our call for an investigation
into these incidents and for those responsible to be
brought to justice.
We are of the view that efforts to improve intercommunity dialogue and confidence-building among
the parties are of particular importance for returns.
Although the number of voluntary minority returns
remains low, we are encouraged by the fact that there
has been an increase in comparison to previous years.
Furthermore, in stressing the importance of providing
conditions conducive to sustainable returns, we

10-47134

S/PV.6367

welcome UNMIK’s efforts to defuse tensions and draw
attention to common needs. We encourage the
continuation of the practice of “go-and-see” visits,
which give displaced persons the opportunity to visit
their properties and make first-hand assessments of the
conditions in the receiving community.
With regard to the rule of law, we welcome the
activities of UNMIK and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), operating within
the status-neutral framework of the United Nations. We
also support the existing practice of cooperation and
coordination
among
UNMIK,
EULEX,
the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and NATO — the latter present through the troops of
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) — and we hope that this
practice will continue.
The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
not considered the question of whether to recognize
Kosovo’s
independence.
While
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina has taken no position on this question, we
take note of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice rendered on 22 July, in which the
Court concluded that the declaration of independence
of Kosovo, adopted on 17 February 2008, did not
violate international law.
Finally, we would like to stress the importance of
the European Union-sponsored High-Level Meeting on
the Western Balkans held in Sarajevo on 2 June, which
reaffirmed the European Union’s commitment to the
European perspective of the Western Balkan countries
within the new framework of the Lisbon Treaty.
European Union membership for all of the Western
Balkans remains our shared objective.
Ms. Tawk (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing. I
also welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement.
It is encouraging that the number of security
incidents has decreased, compared to the period
covered by the previous report (S/2010/169).
Nevertheless, progress remains relative, particularly in
northern Kosovo, where security incidents continue to
create an atmosphere of tension. It is therefore
important for security forces to remain vigilant and for
the perpetrators of acts of violence to be prosecuted in
order to reassure all citizens, including minorities.

10-47134

We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to maintain security and stability, facilitate dialogue
and encourage reconciliation among the various
communities. We appreciate its role in encouraging
regional cooperation and facilitating Kosovo’s
participation in regional and international forums. We
also commend the coordination and regular exchanges
of information between UNMIK and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo within the
context of the status-neutral role called for in
resolution 1244 (1999).
We support the Secretary-General’s call in his
report (S/2010/401) on the European Union to join
efforts with the United Nations and to coordinate with
the Organization in facilitating dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina aimed at peacefully resolving the
outstanding issues.
We welcome the progress made on missing
persons, as well as the protection of the religious and
cultural heritage sites of the Serbian Orthodox church.
We hope that this cooperation between Belgrade and
Pristina will extend to all areas. There is no doubt that
it remains necessary to ensure international support for
the rapprochement between the two sides. However,
the primary responsibility for finding a way out of the
current impasse lies with the political leaders of both
sides. We call on them to extend the hand of dialogue
and to tackle controversial issues in a spirit of
openness and flexibility in order to address the
interests and achieve the aspirations of the peoples of
the region to a brighter future.
On the other hand, efforts must focus on
transparent
and
flexible
dialogue
towards
reconciliation among all communities in Kosovo,
pursuant to the calls made by this Council in the
meeting held following the 2 July incidents (see
S/PV.6353), at which most members stressed the need
for dialogue. This was also noted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, in which he expresses concern
about the potential for instability that could result from
a lack of concrete progress on reconciliation among the
various
communities,
combined
the
difficult
conditions.
In this context, it is imperative to ensure
complementarity between reconciliation efforts and the
promotion of economic and development activities for
various groups. This will have a positive impact not

13

S/PV.6367

only on security and stability, but also on the
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced
persons, which remains scant.
Finally, we take note of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice issued on 22 July. We
express the hope that the next stage will be propitious
for a peaceful settlement of this issue and will lead to a
climate of stability in the Western Balkans.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to welcome
Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Mr. Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kosovo, to the Council. We are pleased to see both of
them. I would also like to welcome Mr. Zannier and to
thank him for his briefing. We appreciate the work that
he and the whole team in the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) are doing
towards promoting stability and reconciliation.
We are pleased to see that the overall political
and security situation in Kosovo is generally calm and
that in this reporting period the number of security
incidents has decreased, which reflects a positive trend
over the past two reporting periods. We call on the
Kosovo authorities, in particular local-level institutions
and the Kosovo Police, to make sure that this becomes
the norm and to continue to take all necessary
measures to prevent violent incidents, with a special
emphasis on those affecting minority communities.

challenges encountered in the returns process in that
regard cannot be overlooked. Still, as the latest
cooperative effort on missing persons demonstrates,
the essential thing is to have the will to work towards
closure for the people, who have suffered enough,
without politicizing these issues. Then, the results
attained will help start the healing process.
At the same time, we regret that on some other
issues which require direct practical cooperation
between Pristina and Belgrade there has not been much
progress. It is our sincere hope that the coming months
will see an improvement in that respect.
Improving governance and the rule of law in
Kosovo is also essential, as is taking steps to fight
corruption and impunity. We commend the efforts by
the Government of Kosovo towards those ends. In
order to make further progress and consolidate the
gains made so far, it is important for the international
community to remain engaged in Kosovo and to assist
by sharing expertise and resources.
We also remain concerned by the volatile and
sensitive political and security situation in northern
Kosovo. The gradual integration of the north into the
rest of Kosovo is to the clear benefit of all the
communities in that region. The only viable way to
achieve this is through dialogue.

Kosovo continues to take further steps in
consolidating its democracy, strengthening its
institutional capacity and opening up its democratic
space through advances made in the decentralization
process. We are pleased to see that administrative
structures in the four new municipalities have been set
up and that elections have taken place in the
municipality of Partesh. This clearly indicates a
commitment by the Kosovo Government to improve
the lives of all communities, while the turnout rate for
the elections in Partesh demonstrates that the local
communities are gradually responding to these efforts.

Turkey was one of the first countries to recognize
Kosovo as an independent and sovereign State. In that
regard, we welcome the recent issuance of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice that
Kosovo’s declaration of independence is in accordance
with international law. It is our sincere hope that that
opinion will open a new phase in relations between
Pristina and Belgrade; both of them are our close
friends and partners. Consequently, we call on both
sides to see that opinion as providing a new window of
opportunity to engage constructively on practical
issues for the benefit of all their peoples and of
regional cooperation.

We continue to believe that full implementation
of the decentralization process will improve
governance, enable all communities to have their
voices heard, make the political process and
administrative structures fully representative and,
ultimately, contribute to overall integration and
reconciliation. We recognize that there are still
problems on the path towards full reconciliation. The
problem posed by the issue of missing persons and the

Lasting peace and stability in the Balkans
remains our ultimate and overriding goal. We are
convinced that the preservation of Kosovo’s territorial
integrity and its political and social structure built on
democratic values is essential in attaining that goal. As
an important player in the region, Serbia can do much
for the consolidation of peace, democracy and
prosperity in the Balkans and in the greater European
space. We welcome and support the developing

14

10-47134

S/PV.6367

relations between Serbia and the European Union. The
future of Kosovo also lies in its integration into the
European structures. Accordingly, we believe that this
common European perspective provides a sound basis
for cooperation and dialogue. We welcome the efforts
of the European Union to assist the two countries on
that path.
We agree with the Secretary-General that a
coherent and cooperative approach by the international
actors engaged in Kosovo is essential in exploring the
existing window of opportunity. Therefore, we also
look forward to the continuation of cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union
and welcome the agreement reached to that effect. And
while such efforts are under way — as the SecretaryGeneral also emphasizes in his report (S/2010/401) —
it is imperative that the parties avoid any steps that
could be seen as provocative and derail the dialogue.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2010/401). I also
thank Mr. Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. I welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I listened attentively to
the statement made by Mr. Hyseni.

contemporary system of international law and is the
basis of the international legal order. We respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
support the efforts that the Government and the people
of Serbia have made in that regard. We have always
considered that the best way to resolve the Kosovo
issue is for the two sides to engage in negotiations
within the framework of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and seek a mutually acceptable solution. In
no way does unilateral action contribute to a settlement
of the issue, but can only complicate the situation.
The advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice does not pose an obstacle to efforts by the two
sides to resolve this issue through negotiations. China
hopes that the relevant actors will continue to urge the
two sides to resume dialogue and consultation and seek
a mutually acceptable resolution.
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains
the legal foundation for the settlement of the Kosovo
issue. We appreciate the positive role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNMIK in maintaining stability in Kosovo and support
the Mission in its ongoing efforts to fulfil its mandates
pursuant to relevant Council resolutions and in
vigorously promoting constructive dialogue among the
parties concerned. We hope that the parties concerned
will continue to respect the mandate of UNMIK and
maintain their support for and cooperation with the
Mission in a joint effort to find a proper settlement to
the Kosovo issue.

The overall situation in Kosovo is calm at
present. But the security situation remains complicated
and fragile. In particular, there are many uncertainties
in the north. Once again we condemn the terrorist
violence in northern Mitrovica that took place in early
July. That incident shows yet again that an early and
appropriate settlement of the Kosovo issue would be
conducive to peace and stability in the Balkan region
and in Europe at large. We call upon all parties
concerned, the United Nations and the other countries
in the region to work together to ensure stability in
Kosovo, safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of
all ethnic groups in the region, in particular those of
Serbs and other ethnic minorities, and make a genuine
effort to facilitate the reintegration of ethnic minorities
and preserve religious and cultural heritage.

Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join my Security Council colleagues in welcoming the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier; the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić; and the Foreign Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Skander Hyseni. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on recent
developments in Kosovo (S/2010/401) and to
commend the important work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in promoting stability and reconciliation in Kosovo. I
would also like to thank Mr. Zannier for his continued
leadership and hard work.

We have noted the advisory opinion delivered by
the International Court of Justice regarding Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence. All along,
China has maintained that respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity is a fundamental principle of the

The United Kingdom’s support for Kosovo’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
remains as strong as ever. We welcome the recent
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
which, in response to the question put to it by the

10-47134

15

S/PV.6367

General Assembly,
confirmed
that
Kosovo’s
declaration of independence was in accordance with
international law. Our understanding of the opinion
differs from Serbia’s. In particular, the opinion does
not create a precedent. Kosovo is a unique case. Its
independence is contingent on its particular facts. It
does not provide a template for secession elsewhere.
The legal process before the International Court
of Justice has now come to an end, and that must also
mean an end to debate about Kosovo’s status. Kosovo
has now been functioning as an independent State for
over two and half years. It is increasingly recognized
as such. Sixty-nine United Nations Member States
have now recognized Kosovo. This progress is
irreversible. The world’s youngest country is a viable,
independent State with a clear future in the European
Union — a future recently reaffirmed by all 27 States
members of the European Union. We believe that the
opinion of the International Court of Justice will
encourage States that have not yet done so to recognize
Kosovo.
Looking ahead, it is critically important, as
Mr. Zannier noted, that we enter a new phase in
relations between Kosovo and Serbia. We welcome
Kosovo’s measured response to the Court’s opinion
calling for new dialogue with Serbia. The future of
both countries lies in the European Union, but it is a
future that can be achieved only through reconciliation
and practical cooperation. Together, the two countries
must forge a new path built on the values and standards
of the European Union: democracy, the rule of law and
the peaceful coexistence of States. There must be early
and constructive dialogue between the two States, a
process that the European Union, through Baroness
Ashton, has offered to facilitate. This dialogue would
promote cooperation, achieve progress on the path to
European integration, and improve the lives of the
people of both Kosovo and Serbia. The process of
dialogue in itself would be a factor for peace, security
and stability in the region.
But we must be equally clear about what is not
possible. There can be no return to negotiations on
either Kosovo’s status or its existing borders. Any
attempt to go down this path would lock Serbia into
confrontation with those that have recognized Kosovo.
Any attempt to encourage the partition of Kosovo or
status talks would be against the long-term interests of
the citizens of both Kosovo and Serbia. It could trigger
wider instability in the region. The United Kingdom

16

will strongly resist any such attempt. Kosovo, as an
independent State within the territory defined by its
existing borders, is a positive force for stability in the
Western Balkans.
We look to Serbia to take up the European
Union’s offer and proceed with a constructive period of
dialogue. We are, however, concerned by recent
Serbian statements and actions which imply that Serbia
is not considering engagement with the European
Union in this process. We very much regret that Serbia
did not allow more time for consultations with the
European Union before submitting its draft resolution
in the General Assembly. Serbia’s draft resolution is
unacceptable because it will not promote the
development of a constructive relationship between
Serbia and Kosovo.
The last three months have seen further progress
in Kosovo. The violence in Mitrovica in early July was
regrettable, but we welcome the prompt response from
the Kosovo Police and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). As the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/401) has highlighted, there
has been an overall decrease in the number of security
incidents. This reporting period has seen clear and
decisive action against organized crime and corruption
from EULEX in partnership with the Government of
Kosovo.
Serious challenges remain ahead for the rule of
law in Kosovo. Kosovo must remain committed to
driving through the necessary reforms, but steps such
as the recent inauguration of the anti-corruption task
force are encouraging. Both EULEX and the Kosovo
Force remain important for stability in Kosovo. We
continue to fully support the essential work that they
undertake. It is vital that both Serbia and Kosovo
cooperate closely with both missions. Stability,
security, the rule of law and governance are the
fundamental rights of all of Kosovo’s communities.
With due regard to recent events, it is nevertheless
crucial that an agreement be reached on the opening of
the Mitrovica courthouse and customs arrangements in
the North.
Kosovo’s and Serbia’s futures both lie in their
independent statehood within the European Union. The
United Kingdom remains committed to ensuring that
this European Union perspective is used as a factor for
stability, security and economic progress for the entire
region.

10-47134

S/PV.6367

Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank Special Representative Lamberto Zannier
for his briefing and Mr. Skender Hyseni for his
remarks.
As the tragic incident of 2 July in Mitrovica
clearly showed and as the Secretary-General recalls in
his report (S/2010/401), the security situation in
Kosovo is stable but fragile. The risk of further
violence caused by ethnic tensions is palpable and
continues to be a reason for concern, particularly in
northern Kosovo. It is mainly the responsibility of both
parties to ensure that Kosovo is a place where ethnic
tolerance and multiculturalism allow for peaceful
coexistence among communities. They must therefore
refrain from all acts of provocation and any action that
may further aggravate instability.
For its part, the international community must
remain fully engaged in Kosovo. The Security Council
and the Secretary-General, especially through his
Special Representative, as well as individual Member
States, must continue to follow the situation closely
and maintain their efforts to promote stability, dialogue
and reconciliation.
The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has a special role to play
in this regard under resolution 1244 (1999). The fact
that the Mission is accepted by all parties on the
ground makes it particularly well placed to spearhead
efforts to assist them in overcoming their differences
and to bring communities together on issues of mutual
interest.
In this context, we reiterate our call on both
Belgrade and Pristina to cooperate actively with
UNMIK and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, especially in order to
advance practical arrangements that may benefit the
ordinary citizen. We are concerned by the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that insufficient progress has
been made in this regard. Also worrisome is the
observation contained in his report that relations
between the Mission and the Kosovo authorities are at
arm’s length. It must be recalled that UNMIK is the
overall authority established by the Security Council in
the territory.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative
designed to seek ways to make the role of UNMIK as

10-47134

effective as possible and to further promote
cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina. One such
area of possible cooperation would be the
reconstruction of the Serbian Orthodox sites damaged
or destroyed during the violence of March 2004.
Providing the necessary funds for the Reconstruction
Implementation Commission to complete the
reconstruction of all the destroyed Serbian Orthodox
sites would certainly contribute to rebuilding
confidence between the communities, as the SecretaryGeneral rightfully suggests. Restoring such confidence
will be key to increasing the number of returnees,
which continues to be low, according to the report
before us. It is troubling to learn that harassment of
Serbian returnees has not ceased and that Serbian sites
of religious and cultural importance continue to be
vandalized.
Brazil takes note of the advisory opinion
delivered in The Hague by the International Court of
Justice on 22 July concerning the unilateral declaration
of independence by the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment of Kosovo. While the Brazilian
Government is still examining the opinion with the
diligence it deserves, we note that the Court has not
questioned the fact that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
in force. Brazil is therefore of the view that said
resolution continues to be the key parameter guiding
the presence of the United Nations in Kosovo and
those who operate there under overall United Nations
authority.
We also believe that resolution 1244 (1999)
continues to offer conditions conducive for the dispute
to be settled through negotiations with a view to
reaching a legitimate solution under the auspices of the
Security Council, consistent with its authority and
primary responsibility in matters pertaining to
international peace and security. We therefore reiterate
our call on the parties to resume negotiations on all
outstanding issues as soon as possible.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and
thank them for their statements. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his presentation of the
report before us (S/2010/401). Let me reiterate
Austria’s full support for the continued efforts of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in

17

S/PV.6367

Kosovo (UNMIK) to facilitate dialogue between all
parties.
Austria welcomes the fact that the security
situation in Kosovo was largely calm during the
reporting period. As set out in the Secretary-General’s
report, in total we have seen a decrease in security
incidents. We appreciate the fact that the security
forces — including the Kosovo Police, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) — have been working
effectively to prevent clashes in volatile situations. At
the same time, we clearly condemn isolated acts of
violence due to tensions between both sides. Austria
fully supports the important work of KFOR and
EULEX and will continue to keep up its commitment
to both missions.
We welcome the progress made by EULEX in
particular with regard to monitoring, mentoring and
advising, trials and the processing of cases, the
continued scanning of data on commercial traffic at
gates 1 and 31, and in its cooperation with both sides.
We welcome the European Union’s accelerated efforts
to enhance its visibility and presence in the North and
hope that cooperation with both sides will lead to
further progress, including in the establishment of
mixed panels in the Mitrovica district court and the
restoration of full customs control in northern Kosovo.
Austria would also like to highlight the valuable
contributions made by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe mission in Kosovo in
monitoring, protecting and promoting human rights,
including community rights. We also value its support
to democratic institutions, in particular independent
and higher education institutions that work to the
benefit of non-majority communities.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment that
the lack of progress in reconciliation between the
communities, coupled with the prevailing economic
difficulties, continues to present a challenge and to
foster the risk of unrest. Austria therefore believes that
we must not lose our focus on areas such as economic
development, good governance, the rule of law, and the
fight against corruption and organized crime, as well as
with regard to the situation in northern Kosovo. We see
a need for reports to the Council to cover all those
areas.
Austria welcomes the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice delivered on 22 July on

18

the question of whether the unilateral declaration of
independence in respect of Kosovo is accordance with
international law. We believe that the advisory opinion
provides an opportunity for a positive turning point in
the relations between Kosovo and Serbia, as well as
with regard to the European aspirations of both States.
This opportunity should not be missed.
The Court has made it absolutely clear that
Kosovo’s declaration of independence of February
2008 did not violate general international law,
resolution 1244 (1999) or the constitutional
framework. We hope that the opinion, which was
issued in response to a request of the General
Assembly and specifically addresses the situation of
Kosovo, will enable Kosovo and Serbia to ultimately
overcome their fundamental disagreement regarding
basic legal and territorial questions.
First and foremost, however, the advisory opinion
permits the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo to adopt a
pragmatic approach and to start a process of dialogue
on practical problems affecting the daily lives of
people of both ethnic backgrounds living in Kosovo.
Pragmatism must now also apply with regard to finding
arrangements for the participation of Kosovo in
regional and international forums, in consultation with
the respective organizations.
The European Union — in reaction to the
publication of the advisory opinion — has reached out
to both Serbia and Kosovo. In her declaration of
22 July, delivered on behalf of all 27 States members
of the European Union, High Representative Ashton
made it clear that the future of both Serbia and Kosovo
lies in the European Union. We therefore appeal to
Serbia and Kosovo to work with the European Union in
good faith and to redouble their efforts to turn
European values of dialogue and cooperation into
reality for the sake of the populations of Kosovo as
well as Serbia, irrespective of their ethnic
backgrounds. We fully support the approach of further
enhancing coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union in order to
promote dialogue aimed at addressing issues of
common concern between Belgrade and Pristina.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): I thank Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier for his comprehensive briefing. I
should also like to extend a warm welcome to Foreign
Minister Vuk Jeremić of Serbia and Foreign Minister
Skender Hyseni of Kosovo.

10-47134

S/PV.6367

Japan highly values the contributions of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, the Kosovo Force and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe on the ground to
ensure the stability of Kosovo and the West Balkan
region as a whole.

Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Jeremić and
Foreign Minister Hyseni back to the Council this
afternoon. I would also like to thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier for his thorough briefing in his service as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo.

We commend the International Court of Justice
for issuing the advisory opinion of 22 July after two
years of intensive work. Since our recognition of the
independence of Kosovo, Japan has supported the
newly formed country’s efforts to develop as a vibrant,
democratic and multi-ethnic State. Our hope is that
Kosovo will now continue to advance its own nationbuilding with the increasing support of the
international community. The advisory opinion is also
important to the reconciliation process between
Kosovo and Serbia.

Let me begin by addressing briefly the advisory
opinion of 22 July of the International Court of Justice.
It has been the hope of the United States that the
delivery of this opinion would be a springboard for
Kosovo and Serbia to move beyond the debates of the
past and pursue cooperation to support peace and
stability in the Balkans. The advisory opinion
decisively affirmed the view of the United States and
many other countries that Kosovo’s 2008 declaration of
independence was in accordance with international law
and did not violate resolution 1244 (1999). We believe
that the Court’s opinion will encourage those countries
that have not done so to now recognize Kosovo.

Japan encourages both sides constructively to
address challenges that affect the lives of the
population of all communities in Kosovo. In this
context, Japan shares the belief of the SecretaryGeneral that the reconstruction of the Serbian
Orthodox sites can rebuild trust between communities.
We expect that UNMIK and the European Union (EU)
will play a mediating role between Pristina and
Belgrade, and we support the Secretary-General’s
proposal to have joint United Nations/EU efforts to
facilitate dialogue.
We welcome the increase in the return and
settlement of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees. At the same time, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s concern about occasional incidents targeting
minorities, which continue to present both physical and
psychological obstacles to sustainable returns.
Japan, as a proponent of human security,
continues to support the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
facilitate IDP returns, promote peaceful multi-ethnic
coexistence and help the sustainable development of
Kosovo through bilateral and multilateral frameworks.
A human-centred approach is particularly relevant in
the northern provinces, with due attention to reducing
the level of vulnerability among the population. We
intend to cooperate with Kosovo, Serbia and other
regional and international actors towards the
achievement of a new stage of stability and prosperity
in the West Balkan region.

10-47134

Kosovo is a special case and is not a precedent
for other conflicts. The Court’s opinion recognized that
the declaration of independence of Kosovo had to be
considered within the factual context that led to its
adoption, including, as the opinion described, the
framework established by resolution 1244 (1999) to
resolve the humanitarian crisis in Kosovo and the
developments in the 2005-2007 final status process
brokered by the United Nations, which, despite
exhaustive efforts, was unable to yield a mutually
agreeable outcome on Kosovo’s status.
Kosovo is an independent, multi-ethnic
democracy. Its independence is irreversible and its
borders are inviolable. We call now on Kosovo and
Serbia to work together on practical issues that will
move both States forward on their respective paths to
Euro-Atlantic integration.
Turning to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/401), let me make three additional points
about the progress that Kosovo has made in recent
months. First, the Secretary-General’s report notes
several areas in which Kosovo is consolidating its
multi-ethnic democratic institutions, including by
implementing the decentralization of power from
central to municipal authorities that is envisioned in
Kosovo’s Constitution. The recent elections in the
newest Kosovo Serb majority municipality of
Partesh/Parteš demonstrate the progress Kosovo is

19

S/PV.6367

making toward ensuring the participation of all
communities in its institutions.
Secondly, the Secretary-General points out the
challenges posed by economic difficulties. Last month,
Kosovo signed a standby agreement with the
International Monetary Fund. In the run-up to the
signing, Kosovo’s institutions showed their maturity
and responsibility by passing four major financial
reforms into law in one month in order to meet the
agreement’s conditions.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General’s report notes that
the overall number of security incidents has decreased
during the reporting period. The Kosovo Police, with
the assistance of European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), has demonstrated its growing
capacity to protect all of Kosovo’s communities. In late
May, the Kosovo Police, along with EULEX and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), quickly responded to clashes
among large groups of Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo
Serbs over illegal, parallel elections and prevented the
incident from escalating. In late June, the Kosovo
Police provided security for a large demonstration in
connection with Vidovdan celebrations.
The Kosovo Police is increasingly filling crucial
roles once performed by the international community.
Without incident, it has taken responsibility for
security at a patrimonial site previously guarded by
KFOR and alongside EULEX. It is currently
investigating the July violence related to the opening of
the civil service centre in Mitrovica and the shooting of
a Kosovo Serb member of Parliament. In addition,
there has been progress in returns and the reintegration
of returnees supported by municipal authorities and the
central Government with the protection of the Kosovo
Police and KFOR.
But as the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
absence of reconciliation continues to threaten unrest.
For example, some returning ethnic Serb families have
experienced harassment and attacks. My Government
regrets the loss of life and injuries that accompanied
the opening of the civil service centre in northern
Mitrovica last month, and we urge that those
responsible for these criminal acts be held accountable.
The centre has remained open and it continues to
provide necessary services to those most in need in the
local community.
Efforts to promote stability have been hindered
by threats of violence against those who seek to

20

participate in legitimate institutions of Kosovo’s
Government. We strongly condemn the death threats
targeting judges appointed to the Mitrovica District
Court and intimidation directed at Kosovo Serbs who
work with Kosovo’s institutions. We call on all parties
to take firm steps to halt incitement to violence.
Let me reiterate our hope that Kosovo and Serbia
will use the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice as an opportunity to work together to resolve
technical issues that can improve the daily lives of
their citizens. Further, we welcome the European
Union’s efforts to assist both countries in realizing
their European perspective.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of August, and to thank
Ambassador Joy Ogwu and the Nigerian delegation for
their excellent work during the course of the last
month. I would also like to take this opportunity to
assure you of Gabon’s support throughout your term.
I would also like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, and thank him for his statement. Lastly, my
delegation thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/401) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
The Council is debating the matter of Kosovo
today, only weeks after the International Court of
Justice issued its advisory opinion on the legality of its
unilateral declaration of independence of 17 February
2008. This ruling has been commented upon
extensively in the statements made this afternoon.
Taking that into account and in light of the report of
the Secretary-General, I would like to base my brief
statement on two aspects of the matter before us,
namely, the general situation in Kosovo on the political
and security fronts and the important work of UNMIK,
on the one hand, and the question of the status of
Kosovo, on the other.
The development of the general situation in
Kosovo, particularly during the period covered by the
report, reveals numerous positive signs. Gabon is
pleased that, in accordance with its mandate, UNMIK
has been able to continue promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights while maintaining the

10-47134

S/PV.6367

ongoing involvement, certainly not without difficulties,
of all the communities in Kosovo.
My delegation also welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General and the European Union — whose
offer to facilitate the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina we support — have decided to cooperate more
effectively in seeking solutions to matters of mutual
interest to both parties. We endorse this consensusbased approach and believe that it should be supported
by the international community. However, we are
aware that the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) has encountered problems that must be
resolved.
Energetic action must therefore be taken to find a
solution to the matter of missing persons, particularly
as it poses a major challenge to the reconciliation
process between the various communities. Moreover,
attention should be drawn to the level of returns of
displaced persons and refugees, and an end must be put
to inter-community tensions and conflicts and the
recurrent acts of vandalism against religious and ethnic
symbols.
In addition, the political situation in northern
Kosovo remains fragile and no less cause for concern.
Indeed, the events of early July, which were
unanimously condemned by the members of the
Council, have shown that the security situation in that
part of Kosovo can deteriorate at any moment. We
reiterate our confidence in the ability of UNMIK and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo to
control the situation and prevent any violence that
might jeopardize further a resumption of dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina.
On the central matter of the status of Kosovo, the
position of Gabon remains unchanged. The
International Court of Justice, which itself has said that
it has not ruled on the merits, has offered an opinion
that recognizes, rather, the international legality of the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo.
We reiterate our appeal for respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia, which
must be upheld through international law. I recall that
our principled position prioritizes dialogue and
cooperation in the peaceful settlement of crises and
conflicts and rejects any unilateral declaration of
independence. In this specific case, we support a
settlement of the question of Kosovo on the basis of
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

10-47134

My delegation would therefore like to reiterate
the appeal recently made by the Secretary-General to
all parties to support the implementation of a
constructive dialogue and the settlement of all
outstanding issues.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of August, and by thanking Ambassador Joy
Ogwu and the Nigerian delegation for their work over
the past month. I thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for his briefing and Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, for his statement. We also thank
Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement and his presence
here today.
Mexico has closely followed the process of
adapting the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to the
situation on the ground, and we welcome the fact that
coordination with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has been strengthened, in
keeping with resolution 1244 (1999). That resolution
provides the international legal framework for
achieving a settlement of the situation in Kosovo and
contributing to stability in the Balkans.
The Mexican delegation reiterates that the
presence of UNMIK is of crucial importance in
supporting essential efforts to improve the situation in
terms of security, the promotion of stability, respect for
human rights, dialogue and reconciliation, and support
for humanitarian and development assistance.
In this regard, we commend the work of UNMIK
and emphasize the importance of its continued support
to minority communities in Kosovo and contribution to
reconciliation, dialogue and regional cooperation. We
welcome efforts to develop a strategic integrated
framework for the United Nations system for Kosovo
in order to identify priorities and contribute to
maximizing the impact of the work of the Organization
in the region, in particular in terms of development and
economic recovery.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/401)
notes that the general security situation remains calm,
but that incidents of an inter-ethnic nature that have
occurred in northern Kosovo, although isolated in
nature, do not generate an atmosphere of stability. On
the contrary, they encourage violence and inter-

21

S/PV.6367

community hatred. As mentioned during the debate of
6 July (see S/PV.6353), such incidents of violence are
to be condemned, and it is important therefore to
appeal once again to the parties to combat impunity
and take measures to bring the perpetrators of such acts
to justice.
My delegation believes it essential that, in
designing and implementing programmes for the
integration of minorities, the parties give priority to
protecting human rights and maintain open and
cooperative dialogue with UNMIK.
On the subject of displaced persons, we remain
concerned by the low number of voluntary returns —
523 — which is lower than the number of forced
returns — 756.
Measures to promote reconciliation, tolerance and
respect for human rights are also crucial to efforts to
reverse the trends towards discrimination against and
harassment of displaced persons and refugees upon
their return. In this regard, we encourage UNMIK to
strengthen its coordination with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, local
institutions and other humanitarian organizations
working on the ground.
In this context, we would like to reiterate that,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), particularly in
terms of international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and the rights of refugees, all parties
must establish an environment conducive to the safe,
voluntary and non-discriminatory return of all those
who wish to do so. It is also crucial to redouble efforts
to provide the basic health, housing, educational,
protection and employment services that will
contribute to development, security and the integration
of populations upon their return to their places of
origin.
The issue of missing persons is one of the major
challenges to the process of reconciliation between the
communities of Kosovo. The numbers are alarming.
For instance, the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) estimates that around 1,800 individuals
are still missing. We therefore appeal to the parties to
seek to clarify the whereabouts of the missing, with the
support of UNMIK, EULEX and the ICRC.
Regarding the rule of law and human rights, we
commend the cooperation between UNMIK and
EULEX aimed at strengthening the justice institutions

22

of Kosovo in order to ensure that the civilian
population, including the minority communities, have
full access to justice and that the victims receive
appropriate attention. We also recognize the
importance of promoting the rule of law to combat
impunity, ensure accountability, encourage the
reconciliation process between the communities, and
make amends for the human rights violations
committed in the past.
My delegation recognizes the essential role
played by UNMIK, alongside EULEX and the local
authorities, in protecting the cultural and religious
heritage of Kosovo. We also commend UNMIK’s
efforts to promote the reconstruction of Serb cultural
and
religious
heritage
sites,
including
the
supplementary memorandum signed by UNESCO.
These measures are positive steps towards restoring
confidence between the communities.
In conclusion, I refer to the recent advisory
opinion issued by the International Court of Justice
regarding the accordance with international law of the
unilateral declaration of independence in respect of
Kosovo. Like other delegations, we have learned with
interest of the results of the Court’s work. Mexico is
now analysing the implications of the advisory opinion
with the attention that such an important issue
deserves. Nevertheless, we believe it important to point
out that the advisory opinion limits itself strictly to the
formal aspects of the declaration of independence as an
act of promulgation, without taking up underlying
issues.
As we have noted today and reiterated on
previous occasions, resolution 1244 (1999) is the
international legal framework for resolving the
situation in Kosovo. We believe it critically important
for the parties involved to opt for peaceful means and
dialogue to reach a political settlement on Kosovo’s
definitive status and achieve a mutually acceptable
solution that promotes respect for the rights of all
communities and the maintenance of peace and
security in the Balkans.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.
I thank Mr. Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/401) on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in

10-47134

S/PV.6367

Kosovo (UNMIK), and for his efforts to implement
UNMIK’s very important mandate in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Security Council by Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. We share his
assessments.
We have listened to Mr. Hyseni’s statement.
At the outset, I should like to reaffirm the
Russian Federation’s unchanged position with regard to
our non-recognition of the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo. The Russian Federation
continues to champion the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia.
We are also convinced of the need for strict
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999), which
remains fully applicable and binding upon all as the
international legal basis for a Kosovo settlement and
maintaining the security of the province. In that
context, we fully support UNMIK’s activities. As in the
past, UNMIK continues to be the leading international
civilian presence in the province. No one has the power
to impede the powers entrusted to it, including with
respect to upholding the rights and security of national
minorities and fulfilling the international community’s
mandate of democratic standards in the province. The
same applies to UNMIK’s external representation
functions in Pristina and regional international
mechanisms. We note UNMIK’s irreplaceable role in
promoting inter-communal dialogue, first and foremost
in the North of the province.
As far as the security situation in Kosovo is
concerned, we continue to have serious concerns. The
tragic events in northern Mitrovica in early July serve
as direct confirmation of that. All of this speaks to the
need to preserve the lead role of the Security Council
in a Kosovo settlement; the Council should remain the
guarantor of respect for international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and its own decisions.
The situation of internally displaced persons and
returnees in Kosovo remains unsatisfactory. We share
the conclusions of the report of the Secretary-General
with regard to the fact that the total number of
returnees remains disappointingly low. There are many
reasons for that, including the heightened level of
inter-communal intolerance.

10-47134

Also alarming is the situation with regard to
preserving Serbian and Orthodox cultural heritage.
Frequent instances of desecration and defilement of
Serbian holy sites continue, while restoration efforts
face a shortage of financial resources. Given this
situation, the Government of the Russian Federation
has decided to make a $2-million contribution during
the 2010 to 2011 period to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization’s
voluntary trust fund in order to finance restoration
efforts.
On 22 July, pursuant to a request by the General
Assembly, the International Court of Justice issued an
advisory opinion on the legality of Kosovo’s unilateral
declaration of independence. In that regard, it is crucial
to note the following points.
The Court issued an opinion only with regard to
the declaration of Kosovo’s independence, specifically
noting that it did not consider the broader issue of
Kosovo’s right to unilaterally secede from Serbia. In its
conclusions, the Court also did not address the
consequences of the adoption of that document,
including the issues of whether or not Kosovo is a
State and whether its recognition by a number of
countries is lawful. With that in mind, we believe it
important for interested parties to begin a dialogue to
develop a lawful, fair and effective settlement for
Kosovo.
In conclusion, I must note that we fail to
understand a number of statements made today by
colleagues in the Security Council. In response to
Serbia’s request for dialogue, we heard something that
came close to being a threat of confrontation by
countries that recognize Kosovo. We do not know
whether one delegation was entrusted with speaking on
behalf of all those countries. We hope that the majority
of them will limit themselves to restrained approaches
and not impede Pristina from adopting the sole correct
solution — dialogue with Belgrade. Otherwise,
Kosovars will not be able to untangle a very complex
web of problems.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Jeremić has asked to make a further
statement, and I give him the floor.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I would just like very
briefly to make a clarification about the Court’s ruling.

23

S/PV.6367

A few members of the Council have said today
that the advisory opinion of the Court stated that the
unilateral declaration of independence was in
accordance with international law. That was not
actually the case. If one reads the Court’s findings,
they very clearly say that the declaration of
independence did not violate international law. In legal
terms, that is very different from being in accordance.
But with regard to remarks by some Member
States that Kosovo is a unique, sui generis case, I
would like to draw the attention of the Council to the
fact that the Court elaborated in its conclusions on the
position that Kosovo is a sui generic case, which was
put forth by some States in the oral proceedings before
the Court. In its conclusions, the Court did not find any
support for that. Kosovo is therefore not a unique case.
Of course, Serbia deeply respects the
International Court of Justice and embraces everything
that it says. The Court said that the text of the
declaration of independence itself did not violate
international law — which Serbia accepts — and so,
according to the Kosovo template, neither would
anybody else’s declaration of independence that may
be made in the future. The question is whether that gets
one recognition and statehood. That is a question that I
think needs to be addressed by Member States.
I would like to remind the Council that never in
the history of the United Nations has a territory
achieved statehood by seceding from a parent State that
did not give its consent at the end of the process. It is
up to us to decide whether the time has come for that to
happen for the first time in history. Serbia believes that
is not the case.
I want to underline once again that we are totally
committed to peace, dialogue and resolving all
outstanding issues — from small ones to big ones —
through peaceful dialogue. We believe in the European
future of the entire Western Balkans. We welcome the
appeal by European Union member States to the parties
to look to the future. Serbia is ready to look to the
future. Serbia wants to work with the international
community so that this issue is resolved through
peaceful dialogue. I just wanted to point out certain
facts with regard to the International Court of Justice
opinion.
The President (spoke in Russian): Mr. Hyseni
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
now give him the floor.

24

Mr. Hyseni: I should like to make a few points
on the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice and in reaction to some of the stipulations that
we have heard today. The question put to the Court was
drafted by the Republic of Serbia, the sole sponsor of
General Assembly resolution 63/3. And the Court was
very clear in its deliberations and its response.
We have heard much repetition here today of the
mantra that the independence of Kosovo is “a
universally applicable precedent that provides a readymade model for unilateral secession”. Nothing could be
farther from the truth; any reader of the Court’s
opinion can see that. The opinion is very clear and
speaks for itself.
Kosovo, the Court has said, is a unique and
special case. I should like very briefly to say why it is a
unique case. Kosovo is a former constituent unit of a
federation that, unfortunately, no longer exists. It
disintegrated and has ceased to exist, and that was not
because of Kosovo; it was because of the efforts of the
Republic of Serbia to bring all constituent units of the
former Yugoslavia under its rule and domination. That
federation fell apart in a non-consensual manner. If it
were up to Kosovo, that federation would still exist.
Secondly, the Court found very clearly that
Kosovo’s declaration of independence was effectively
in full compliance with international law. Furthermore,
the Court found that Kosovo’s declaration of
independence was in full compliance with resolution
1244 (1999). Furthermore, the Court found that the
declaration of Kosovo’s independence was in
compliance with the interim constitutional framework
of Kosovo adopted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
I should like to make a small correct
interpretation. The correct interpretation of the Court’s
opinion is the following. In part, the declaration of
Kosovo’s
independence
was
effectively
the
accomplishment — that is, the implementation — of
resolution 1244 (1999). This is the correct
interpretation of the Court’s opinion. I am afraid, and I
do agree, that misinterpretations of the Court’s opinion
are very dangerous for future relations between our
countries. That is why I appeal once again to the
Republic of Serbia to cease throwing up diplomatic
roadblocks on the path to reconciliation and a
European future and to working together with Kosovo
for a common European future.

10-47134

S/PV.6367

With regard to the much talked-of draft resolution
presented by the Republic of Serbia, yet again in full
contradiction of the Court’s findings, I must say that
the language used in that draft resolution is, in the best
case, I am afraid, disastrous. That is why it is high time
for Serbia to live up to its responsibilities, to respect
the Court, to respect an opinion that Serbia itself
requested, and to work with us for a better future for
all.

10-47134

The President (spoke in Russian): I believe that
it is wrong to offer a selective reading of history, just
as it is wrong to quote selectively from the opinion of
the International Court of Justice.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

25
