United Nations

A/RES/58/190

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 117 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/508/Add.2)]

58/190. Protection of migrants
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/218 of 18 December 2002,
Reaffirming that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 proclaims that
all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out therein, without distinction of any
kind, in particular as to race, colour or national origin,
Reaffirming also the provisions concerning migrants adopted by the World
Conference on Human Rights, 2 the International Conference on Population and
Development, 3 the World Summit for Social Development 4 and the Fourth World
Conference on Women, 5
Welcoming the provisions on the human rights of migrants contained in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on
8 September 2001, 6 and expressing its satisfaction at the important
recommendations made for the development of international and national strategies
for the protection of migrants and for the design of migration policies that fully
respect the human rights of migrants,
Recalling its resolution 40/144 of 13 December 1985, by which it approved the
Declaration on the Human Rights of Individuals Who are not Nationals of the
Country in which They Live,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
See Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September
1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
See Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
5
See Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
6
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
2

03 50598

A/RES/58/190

Recognizing the positive contributions that migrants frequently make,
including through their eventual integration into their host society,
Bearing in mind the situation of vulnerability in which migrants and their
families frequently find themselves, owing, inter alia, to their absence from their
States of origin and to the difficulties they encounter because of differences of
language, custom and culture, as well as the economic and social difficulties and
obstacles to the return to their States of origin of migrants who are non-documented
or in an irregular situation,
Bearing in mind also the need for a focused and consistent approach towards
migrants as a specific vulnerable group, in particular migrant women and children,
Deeply concerned about the manifestations of violence, racism, xenophobia
and other forms of discrimination and inhuman and degrading treatment against
migrants, especially women and children, in different parts of the world,
Underlining the importance of the creation of conditions that foster greater
harmony between migrants and the rest of the society of the States in which they
reside, with the aim of eliminating the growing manifestations of racism and
xenophobia perpetrated in segments of many societies by individuals or groups
against migrants,
Taking note of Advisory Opinion OC-16/99, issued by the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights on 1 October 1999, on The Right to Information on
Consular Assistance in the Framework of the Guarantees of the Due Process of Law,
in the case of foreign nationals detained by the authorities of a receiving State,
Taking note also of Advisory Opinion OC-18/03, issued by the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights on 17 September 2003, on the juridical situation and rights
of undocumented migrants,
Encouraged by the increasing interest of the international community in the
effective and full protection of the human rights of all migrants, and underlining the
need to make further efforts to ensure respect for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants,
Taking note of the decision of the International Labour Organization to have a
general discussion on migrant workers, based on an integrated approach, at the
International Labour Conference to be held in Geneva in June 2004,
Welcomes the renewed commitment made in the United Nations
1.
Millennium Declaration 7 to take measures to ensure respect for and protection of the
human rights of migrants, migrant workers and their families, to eliminate the
increasing acts of racism and xenophobia in many societies and to promote greater
harmony and tolerance in all societies;
Requests all Member States, in conformity with their respective
2.
constitutional systems, effectively to promote and protect the human rights of all
migrants, in conformity with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1 and the
international instruments to which they are party, which may include the
International Covenants on Human Rights, 8 the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 9 the International
_______________
7

See resolution 55/2.
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
9
Resolution 39/46, annex.
8

2

A/RES/58/190

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 10 the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families, 11 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 12 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 13 and
other applicable international human rights instruments;
3.
Calls upon States to promote and protect fully the human rights of
migrants, as contained in the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;6
4.
Acknowledges with satisfaction the entry into force of the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families, and the forthcoming entry into force of the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, 14 and of the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and
Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime; 15
5.
Strongly condemns the manifestations and acts of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants and the
stereotypes often applied to them, and urges States to apply the existing laws when
xenophobic or intolerant acts or manifestations or expressions against migrants
occur, in order to eradicate impunity for those who commit xenophobic and racist
acts;
Strongly condemns also all forms of racial discrimination and xenophobia
6.
with regard to access to employment, vocational training, housing, schooling, health
services and social services, as well as services intended for use by the public, and
welcomes the active role played by governmental and non-governmental
organizations in combating racism and assisting individual victims of racist acts,
including migrant victims;
Requests all States, in conformity with national legislation and applicable
7.
international legal instruments to which they are party, firmly to prosecute
violations of labour law with regard to the conditions of work of migrant workers,
including those related to, inter alia, their remuneration and the conditions of health
and safety at work;
Calls upon all States to consider reviewing and, where necessary,
8.
revising immigration policies, with a view to eliminating all practices which
victimize migrants and their families, and to provide specialized training for
policy-making, law enforcement, immigration and other concerned government
officials, including in cooperation with non-governmental organizations and civil
society, thus underlining the importance of effective action to create conditions that
foster greater harmony and tolerance within societies;
Reiterates the need for all States parties to protect fully the universally
9.
recognized human rights of migrants, especially women and children, regardless of
_______________
10

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
Resolution 45/158, annex.
12
Resolution 34/180, annex.
13
Resolution 44/25, annex.
14
Resolution 55/25, annex II.
15
Ibid., annex III.
11

3

A/RES/58/190

their legal status, and to treat them humanely, in particular with regard to assistance
and protection;
10. Reaffirms emphatically the duty of States parties to the Vienna
Convention on Consular Relations of 1963 16 to ensure full respect for and
observance of the Convention, in particular with regard to the right of foreign
nationals, regardless of their immigration status, to communicate with a consular
official of their own State in the case of detention, and the obligation of the State in
whose territory the detention occurs to inform the foreign national of that right;
11. Reaffirms the responsibility of Governments to safeguard and protect the
rights of migrants against illegal or violent acts, in particular acts of racial
discrimination and crimes perpetrated with racist or xenophobic motivation by
individuals or groups, and urges them to reinforce measures in this regard;
12. Urges all States to adopt effective measures to put an end to the arbitrary
arrest and detention of migrants, including by individuals or groups;
13. Encourages Member States that have not yet done so to enact domestic
criminal legislation to combat the international trafficking of migrants, which
should take into account, in particular, trafficking that endangers the lives of
migrants or includes different forms of servitude or exploitation, such as any form
of debt bondage or sexual or labour exploitation, and to strengthen international
cooperation to combat such trafficking;
14. Calls upon States, when enacting national security legislation measures,
to observe national legislation and applicable international legal instruments to
which they are party, in order to respect the human rights of migrants;
15. Encourages States to consider participating in international and regional
dialogues on migration that include countries of origin and destination, as well as
countries of transit, and invites them to consider negotiating bilateral and regional
agreements on migrant workers within the framework of applicable human rights
law and designing and implementing programmes with States of other regions to
protect the rights of migrants;
16. Encourages all Governments to remove obstacles that may prevent the
safe, unrestricted and expeditious transfer of earnings, assets and pensions of
migrants to their country of origin or to any other countries, in conformity with
applicable legislation, and to consider, as appropriate, measures to solve other
problems that may impede such transfers;
17. Welcomes immigration programmes, adopted by some countries, that
allow migrants to integrate fully into the host countries, facilitate family
reunification and promote a harmonious and tolerant environment, and encourages
States to consider the possibility of adopting these types of programmes;
18. Calls upon all States to protect the human rights of migrant children, in
particular unaccompanied migrant children, ensuring that the best interests of the
children and the importance of reuniting them with their parents, when possible and
appropriate, are the paramount consideration, and encourages the relevant United
Nations bodies, within the framework of their respective mandates, to pay special
attention to the conditions of migrant children in all States and, where necessary, to
put forward recommendations for strengthening their protection;
_______________
16

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 596, No. 8638.

A/RES/58/190

19. Requests States to adopt concrete measures to prevent the violation of the
human rights of migrants while in transit, including in ports and airports and at
borders and migration checkpoints, to train public officials who work in those
facilities and in border areas to treat migrants and their families respectfully and in
accordance with the law, and to prosecute, in conformity with applicable law, any
act of violation of the human rights of migrants and their families, such as arbitrary
detention, torture and violations of the right to life, including extrajudicial
executions, during their transit from their country of origin to the country of
destination and vice versa, including their transit through national borders;
20. Calls upon States to facilitate family reunification in an expeditious and
effective manner, with due regard to applicable laws, as such reunification has a
positive effect on the integration of migrants;
21. Encourages States of origin to promote and protect the human rights of
those families of migrant workers which remain in the countries of origin, paying
particular attention to children and adolescents whose parents have emigrated, and
encourages international organizations to consider supporting States in this regard;
22. Encourages States, in cooperation with non-governmental organizations,
to undertake information campaigns aimed at clarifying opportunities, limitations
and rights in the event of migration, so as to enable everyone, in particular women,
to make informed decisions, and to prevent them from becoming victims of
trafficking and utilizing dangerous means of access that put their lives and physical
integrity at risk;
23. Welcomes the proclamation of 18 December as International Migrants
Day 17 and the invitation to Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to observe it through, inter alia, the dissemination
of information on the human rights and fundamental freedoms of migrants and on
their economic, social and cultural contributions to their host and home countries,
the sharing of experience and the design of actions to ensure their protection;
24. Urges States to consider ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 18 and the
Protocols thereto, namely, the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children and the Protocol against the Smuggling
of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, and to implement fully those instruments;
25. Takes note of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the human rights of migrants, 19 and requests her
to continue taking into account the recommendations contained in the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action in the performance of her mandate, tasks and
duties;
26. Requests all Governments to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur
in the performance of the tasks and duties mandated, to furnish all information
requested and to react promptly to her urgent appeals;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution under the

_______________
17

See resolution 55/93.
Resolution 55/25, annex I.
19
A/58/275.
18

5

A/RES/58/190

sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”, and
requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session
an interim report on the fulfilment of her mandate.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

6
