General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

76

policies concerning food production, nutrition, food
security, food trade and food aid, as well as other
related matters, by all organizations of the United
Nations system,
Further recalling its resolution 31/121 of 16 December 1976, in which it requested the World Food Council, at its third session, to take immediate and concrete
steps to promote the early implementation of the resolutions adopted by the World Food Conference, including the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of
Hunger and Malnutrition, 8 and its resolution 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and
international economic co-operation,
Having considered the report of the World Food
Council on the work of its third session, held at Manila
from 20 to 24 June 1977, ~
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 2114 (LXIII) of 4 August 1977,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
World Food Council on the work of its third session
and expresses its appreciation to the Government and
people of the Philippines for acting as host to the session
and ensuring its outstanding success;
2. Highly commends the World Food Council for
the important initiatives it has taken, as embodied in
the Programme of Action to Eradicate Hunger and
Malnutrition contained in the Manila Communique of
the World Food Council, 10 inter alia, to increase food
production in the developing countries, improve and
ensure world food security, expand and improve food
aid programmes, improve human nutrition and liberalize
and improve food trade;
3. Adopts the Programme of Action to Eradicate
Hunger and Malnutrition contained in the Manila Communique of the World Food Council;
4. Commends those Governments, organizations of
the United Nations system and other bodies that have
already taken steps or are taking steps to implement
the programme of Action;
5. Calls upon all Governments, specialized agencies,
organs and other bodies within and outside the United
Nations system dealing with food, agriculture and
human nutrition to implement the Programme of Action fully and as a matter of urgency;
6. Requests the President of the World Food Council to work with the Governments and organizations
referred to in paragraph 5 above to promote full implementation of the Programme of Action and, to this
end, requests the Secretary-General to give the necessary assistance to the World Food Council;
7. Further calls upon all potential donors to announce before the end of 1977 their contributions to
the international emergency reserve of cereals;
8. Urges all Governments and United Nations organizations and bodies-particularly the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as well as
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Children's Fund. the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Food
Programme, the Consultative Group on Food Production a_nd Investment in Developing Countries, the International Labour Organisation, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the

World Health Organization, the World Bank, the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade-to give full
support and encouragement to the World Food Council
in discharging the important responsibilities assigned
to it by the World Food Conference and the General
Assembly;

Ibid., chap. l.
Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/32/19).
·
10 Ibid., part one, para. l.

; See also resolution 32/107 in the present section.
~_See_Report of the World Food Conference (United Nations
ruh_l1cat1on, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. II.

8

9 Official

9. Decides to review at its thirty-third session the
implementation of the Programme of Action.

98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
:J2/.53.

International Fund for Agricultural Developn1ent 11

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution XIII of 16 November 1974 of
the World Food Conference, 12 General Assembly resolutions 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, 3503
(XXX) of 15 December 1975 and 31/122 of 16 December 1976 relating to the establishment of the International Fund for Agricultural Development,
Conc~rned by the se!ious constraints facing the food
and ~gnculture sector m the developing countries and
especially the deteriorating situation of the least dev~lop~d and most seri~msly affected developing count~1es m the field of agncultural development and nutrit10n,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the Fund as expressed in the. Agreement establishing the International
Fund for Agncultural Developmentrn and emphasizing
that the Executive Board of the Fund should take into
consideration the advice and recommendations relevant
to these objectives formulated by the World Food
Council at its various sessions
1. Welcomes the progres~ made so far towards
enabling the International Fund for Agricultural Develop~ent to become operational and expresses its
a~pr~ciation to the Chairman of the Preparatory Comm1ss1on for the Fund for his efforts in this respect;
2 .. Calls upon all States eligible for original membership of 0e Fund that have not yet taken action to
bcco~e parties to the Agreement establishing the In~ernational Fun~ for ~gricultural Development to sign
It and to deposit an mstrument of ratification acceptance, approval or accession as a matter of 'urgency,
so as to enable the Fund to become fully operational
bef?re the end of 1977, with the full resources pledged
to 1t;
3: Invites all other States Members of the United
Nations. or member~ of specialized agencies or of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to take action
to become members of the Fund.
98th plenary meeting
8 Decemher 1977
:l2/~ 1-.

Uniterl Nations Univer!lity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972. 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973
'
1

1

1.i Sec lFAD/1.
