A /71/PV.96

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

96th plenary meeting

Friday, 8 September 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 62 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
Draft resolution (A/71/L.70/Rev.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.70/Rev.1.
Mr. Morejón Pazmiño (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I
have the honour to introduce to the General Assembly
the draft resolution entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”, as contained in document
A/71/L.70/Rev.1.
The draft resolution highlights the progress made
by African countries, with the support of development
partners, in the implementation of various programmes
and projects of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. It also underscores the need to address
the special development needs of Africa and to meet
all pledges to support its development, with a view to
promoting the effective and integrated implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the African Union’s 2063 Agenda and its first 10-year
implementation plan.

In particular, the draft resolution stresses the
importance of continuing to promote the key elements
that facilitate inclusive growth and the eradication
of poverty, including agricultural development and
food security; the development of infrastructure and
regional integration; commerce and investment; official
development assistance; the development of human
capital and women’s empowerment; industrialization
and structural economic transformation; and
environmental sustainability.
The draft resolution expresses concern about
Africa’s scant level of participation in international
trade and the growing debt burden of some African
countries. It also stresses that due emphasis must be
given to supporting Africa’s development priorities,
in keeping with the 2030 Agenda. The draft resolution
also highlights the key role that some of the primary
results of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda can play
in promoting the growth and development of Africa,
including by bolstering international fiscal cooperation
and combating illicit financial flows.
In addition, the draft resolution recognizes the role
of the African Union and that of regional economic
communities in promoting the regional integration
agenda, and it welcomes the progress made in ensuring
the free movement of people, goods and services in
Africa as an important step towards greater regional
integration and the establishment of a continental free
trade area.
The draft resolution recognizes Africa’s vulnerability
to the adverse effects of climate change and calls for

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-27953 (E)

*1727953*

A/71/PV.96

the international community, including developed
countries, to continue providing financial and
non-financial support to enable Africa to address
its adaptation needs, in line with the commitments
made in the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, including the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change.
By recognizing the importance of the growing
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union, the draft resolution also welcomes the adoption
of resolution 71/254, on the Framework for a Renewed
United Nations/African Union Partnership on Africa’s
Integration and Development Agenda 2017-2027 — also
known as PAIDA — as the successor programme to
the 2006 United-Nations Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union. The draft resolution
also welcomes the efforts of the United Nations and
the African Union to align the clusters of the Regional
Coordination Mechanism for Africa with Africa’s
development priorities.
Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
express my thanks to the representatives of Algeria and
Egypt for their commendable roles as coordinators on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China. I would also like to
thank the representatives of South Africa for their roles
in facilitating the consultations on the draft resolution
towards a successful conclusion and for doing their
utmost to reach consensus on the document. I should
also like to express my thanks to all delegations for
their constructive commitment and participation, as
well as the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa for
its support throughout the entire consultation process.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/71/L.70/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the document, there have
been no additional co-sponsors of draft resolution
A/71/L.70/Rev.1.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.70/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/71/L.70/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 71/320).
2/26

08/09/2017

Before giving the floor to delegations in explanation
of position, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of African
States. The African Group would like to express its
appreciation to all delegations for their support for
resolution 71/320, which is of the utmost importance.
For the past 15 years, the General Assembly has
deliberated under this agenda item on draft resolutions
that reflect the efforts of both African countries and
organizations in implementing the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), but equally on the
response of the international community in support
thereof. Over those years, the Assembly has always
reached consensus on the outcome of those deliberations
through the successive resolutions it has adopted. We
welcome the adoption by consensus today. The NEPAD
resolution is of the utmost importance to Africa, as
are the efforts undertaken to achieve the continent’s
sustainable development. The resolution highlights
challenges that the continent continues to contend with,
such as addressing the fight against poverty, enhancing
productive capacities and sharing job creation and
supporting the needed expansion of health services,
education and food security, among others.
The resolution also stresses the importance of the
international community in supporting the continent’s
prosperity. It underlines the need to address Africa’s
special development needs and fulfil all commitments
to support Africa’s development, so as to promote an
effective and integrated implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Agenda 2063 and its first 10-year implementation
plan. An important aspect of the engagement by the
international community is ensuring that the efforts
of African countries in pursuing their development
strategies are supported through sufficient means of
implementation. Among its elements are debt relief,
improved market access, support for the private sector
and entrepreneurship, the fulfilment of commitments
and official development assistance and increased flows
of foreign direct investment and transfer of technology.
In particular, the NEPAD resolution expresses
concern in relation to Africa’s low share in international
trade and the growing debt burden of some African
countries. In the current global economic system,
17-27953

08/09/2017

improved market access is very important for Africa,
and for developing countries in general. Our view is
that the interests of developing countries lie more
in making sure that market access is improved. On
one hand, improved access to markets will always
depend upon the ability of those who seek that access,
while also leaving the system intact. On the other
hand, improved market access — what the resolution
currently calls for — means changing the system, and
therefore denotes a completely different meaning. Those
elements are acknowledged and enjoy consensus within
the international community as part of the enterprise of
financing for development.
In conclusion, the African Group wishes to express
its appreciation once again to all delegations for joining
and maintaining the consensus. The African Group
will continue to work with all its partners to achieve
our development aspirations.
Ms. Amadeo (United States of America): We
take this opportunity to make important points
of clarification on resolution 71/320, on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), and
to underscore that this non-binding document does not
create rights or obligations under international law.
The United States applauds the efforts of the African
Union to execute NEPAD. We support the overall
mission of NEPAD to address the critical challenges
of poverty, development and Africa’s marginalization
internationally. In particular, NEPAD is an excellent
example of an African solution to African problems,
with support from like-minded international partners.
The United States is proud to support the efforts of
NEPAD and aims to remain engaged, so as to enhance
and expand the successes of NEPAD. However, the
United States remains deeply concerned about the trade
references within the resolution. As a result, we must
disassociate ourselves from paragraph 48. We cannot
join the consensus on the reference to improved market
access, because the United Nations is not a proper
forum for such a discussion.
We must also disassociate ourselves from paragraph
54. We cannot agree to language through which
the United Nations opines on some Members’ trade
policies towards other Members. In addition, we are
confused by the reference to multilateral institutions.
While certain multilateral institutions encompass trade
issues within their mandates, multilateral institutions
that are not customs unions do not have trade policies

A/71/PV.96

towards specific countries. We reject any interpretation
of paragraph 54 that would suggest that the United
Nations give direction to multilateral institutions with
respect to member countries’ trade policies.
While we applaud commitments to improve food
security and nutrition, the United States disassociates
itself from paragraphs 26 and 40 and notes such
language does not have standing in future negotiations.
We are troubled that its proponents are not willing to
acknowledge that measures aimed at developing the
industrial and agricultural sectors must be consistent
with relevant international rules and obligations.
The United States recognizes that every country
wants to put in place measures to promote economic
development and improve competitiveness. However, in
the case of World Trade Organization (WTO) members,
those measures must be consistent with WTO rules
and obligations. That consistency is important if such
measures are to facilitate progress towards sustainable
development.
The United States must also disassociate itself from
the consensus on language related to climate change
and the Paris Agreement. The United States recognizes
that climate change is a complex global challenge, and
we affirm our strong commitment to an approach that
lowers emissions while supporting economic growth
and improving energy security needs. We note that
President Trump announced his intention to withdraw
from the Paris Agreement but indicated openness to
considering re-engaging in the Agreement on terms
more favourable to the American people.
The United States again raises its concern with
references to technology transfer in paragraphs 48,
51 and 65 that do not indicate that such transfers must
be on a voluntary basis and on terms mutually agreed
by both parties. The United States continues to oppose
language that we believe undermines intellectual
property rights.
The United States is disappointed to see ongoing
references to the financial crisis of 2008 within the
document. We note that the impacts of the financial
crisis are no longer of any real relevance in the region,
and continued references to it detract from focus on
today’s challenges.
Paragraph 15 captures the current challenges
stemming from the fragility of and slowdown in global
growth, including debt sustainability. We believe that
sound economic policies and strong public financial

17-279533/26

A/71/PV.96

management, along with structural reforms, are needed
to enhance the quality of public investment and help
to enable the private sector to flourish. These are key
requirements for debt sustainability.
The United States will remain a strong partner to
African countries as they put in place the measures
necessary to achieve sustained, inclusive growth.
Regarding paragraph 55, the United States strongly
believes that the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
and the Paris Club offer effective mechanisms for
debt-crisis prevention and external debt problems and
have the necessary mandate and expertise. Prudent
debt management requires appropriate economic
management by Governments, and the IMF offers
tools to assist with that management. We also note our
objection to the inclusion of the word “comprehensive”,
which is not mitigated by the insertion of “as
appropriate” after “debt cancellation”.
As we have noted previously, the United States
continues to hold that the term “illicit financial flows”
in paragraph 68 has no agreed-upon international
definition. In the absence of any common understanding
of what constitutes such flows, we must instead focus
our attention on preventing and combating illegal
activities that produce or contribute to illicit financial
flows, such as bribery, tax evasion, money-laundering
and other corrupt practices. The United States is a strong
proponent of taking concrete action to combat these
illegal activities, and we have been active participants
in relevant multilateral processes such as the United
Nations Convention against Corruption, which is the
only global legal instrument that provides a clear set of
State party obligations to address these issues.
However, we reiterate that discussions on such
topics are best left to technical expert bodies such as the
Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and its working groups.
With these clarifications, we will accept the
adoption of the resolution for NEPAD.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We align ourselves
with the statement made by the African Group on
resolution 71/320, on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD).
Africa has since 2002 been committed to a bold
and ambitious development path, recognizing that
while it may not be able to change its past, it can and
4/26

08/09/2017

must shape its future and construct a new economic and
development paradigm.
In this light, Africa embarked on a multi-tiered
process of economic renaissance. The elaboration of
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development reflects
a commitment to bringing the continent into a new
age of peace, security, stability, economic growth and
sustainable development. With this commitment, Africa
received a promissory note of commitment and support
globally, including from all development partners. This
support is also manifested by the United Nations in this
important annual resolution, which seeks to address
the continent’s development and growth challenges
and commits to initiatives to realize these agreed
objectives, with the collaboration and partnership of
the international community.
Over the past two years, the international community
has committed to a number of unprecedented and
bold agreements, all of which embody the notion of
partnership, with the overarching priority of poverty
eradication. The resolution outlines the actions taken
by African countries and organizations in pursuit of
the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as Africa’s Agenda 2063, together
with a response by the international community.
This entails the creation of an enabling environment
through the availability of means of implementation,
with continued support for measures to address
the challenges of poverty eradication, hunger and
malnutrition, job creation and sustainable development,
including, as appropriate, debt relief, improved market
access, fulfilment of official development assistance
commitments, increased flows of foreign direct
investment, technology transfer, capacity-building and
support for the private sector and entrepreneurship on
mutually agreed terms.
The African continent has always enjoyed and
appreciated the unequivocal support of the international
community expressed in the adoption of this annual
resolution by consensus since 2002. I take this
opportunity to thank all delegations for their support and
constant engagement during the informal consultations
and for joining the consensus on the resolution just
adopted. My delegation further expresses appreciation
to the coordinators for their commitment and to the
Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on Africa for its assistance.
17-27953

08/09/2017

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
I shall now give the floor to those delegations that
wish to make statements following the adoption of
the resolution.
I now give the floor to the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Remond (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. We are glad that consensus could
be found on the text in front of us today (resolution
71/320). The text is certainly not perfect, but we have
decided to support it in recognition of the efforts of the
South African facilitators to bridge divergent positions.
This was a difficult task, and we commend them for all
their work.
While we joined the consensus on the resolution, we
have a number of substantive reservations on the text,
some of which we would like to put on record today.
First, last year’s explicit call for strengthening
intra-African trade in what is now paragraph 33, as well
as the provision on resisting protectionist tendencies
in paragraph 53, have both disappeared from the final
draft. We regret that and would like to underline that
this does not represent any change of position on our
side. Regional integration and international trade
remain key engines of sustainable development.
Secondly, no evidence has been provided to
substantiate the provisions contained in paragraph 28,
despite our repeated requests. We hereby formally ask
that the next report of the Secretary-General back such
assertions with concrete evidence.
Thirdly, we believe that it is time to update language
on the world financial and economic crisis to reflect
today’s realities. We hope that this year’s session of the
Second Committee can help us achieve that.
Fourthly, the new paragraph 45, although quoting
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, is taken
out of context. Its operational implications here are
unclear, and we underline that this does not constitute a
precedent for future resolutions.
Without entering into details, I will add that this
resolution has been used by some as a vehicle to fight for
language that is not directly relevant to the issue under
discussion. We will continue to resist such attempts.

A/71/PV.96

More generally, we have concerns as to the way
this exercise is currently framed. In many ways, this is
symptomatic of what we see as the ills of the General
Assembly sustainable development cluster. In this
respect, I should like to make four quick points.
The first point is that the first informal consultation
on this text took place on 30 May. That is two full
months before the final text was put on the silence
procedure. This process, we think, was unnecessarily
time-consuming.
Secondly, the resolution is far too long. Although it
was brought down from 99 paragraphs in the zero draft
to 92 paragraphs now, we do not feel that past pledges
to look constructively at streamlining the document
have been fully fulfilled. We fundamentally disagree
with the logic that longer is by definition better. The
structure of the text, three largely repetitive sections,
contributes to this duplication.
Thirdly, the resolution still largely duplicates the
Commission on Social Development’s resolution on
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development. We
had received assurances last year that efforts would
be made to articulate the two exercises in a more
complementary manner, yet not much has happened.
Reducing overlap by streamlining or merging the
resolutions will strengthen readability and impact.
Fourthly, as a result of our collective inability to
fix those structural flaws, the overall narrative of the
resolution has become somewhat unclear.
Last but not least, we would question the need for
adopting this resolution annually. Again, we contest the
logic according to which higher frequency means higher
importance. In that regard, more is not always better.
I would like to request that this statement be
included in the record of this meeting.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 62 and of agenda item 62 as a whole?
It was so decided.

17-279535/26

A/71/PV.96

Agenda item 65 (continued)
Rights of indigenous peoples
Draft resolution (A/71/L.82)
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/71/L.82.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The following statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8, the
General Assembly would request the following.
The Secretary-General would be requested to report
to the General Assembly, by the end of its seventyfourth session, on achievements, analysis and concrete
recommendations on the possible further measures
necessary to enable the participation of indigenous
peoples’ representatives and institutions in meetings
of relevant United Nations bodies on issues affecting
them, building on the report of the Secretary-General
on ways and means of promoting participation at the
United Nations of indigenous peoples’ representatives
on issues affecting them, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on progress made in the implementation
of the outcome document of the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly known as the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples, and the compilation
of views transmitted by the President of the General
Assembly, as well as on the informal discussions
convened during the seventy-first session, as reflected
in the relevant correspondence of the President of the
General Assembly.
The Assembly would also request the SecretaryGeneral, with the support of Member States, to seek
input from indigenous peoples from all regions of
the world in preparing the report to be submitted at
its seventy-fourth session, and in that regard would
encourage the Secretary-General to hold regional
consultations, including through the regional
commissions, as appropriate, with the support of
Member States and relevant agencies and entities of the
United Nations system, before the nineteenth session of
the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, and would
also request the Secretary-General to incorporate those
inputs in the report.
6/26

08/09/2017

The Assembly would also decide to continue
its consideration of possible further measures
necessary to enhance the participation of indigenous
peoples’ representatives and institutions in relevant
United Nations meetings on issues affecting them
at its seventy-fifth session, taking into account the
achievements in that regard of other bodies and
organizations throughout the United Nations system, to
be preceded by consultations with indigenous peoples’
representatives and institutions from all regions of the
world as an input to the intergovernmental process.
The Assembly would also request the President
of the General Assembly, as part of the preparatory
process for the consideration of such measures during
its seventy-fifth session, to organize and preside over
informal interactive hearings and to prepare a summary
of each hearing, during its seventy-second, seventythird and seventy-fourth sessions, on the margins of
the sessions of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues, with indigenous peoples, ensuring, to the extent
possible, balanced regional representation.
It is envisaged that the requests set out in the
draft resolution would entail additional resource
requirements as follows.
Under section 2, General Assembly and Conference
Management and Economic and Social Council Affairs,
pursuant to paragraphs 5, 6 and 7, the SecretaryGeneral would prepare a new report by the end of the
seventy-fourth session, for consideration during the
seventy-fifth session, on achievements, analysis and
concrete recommendations on the possible further
measures necessary to enable the participation of
indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions in
meetings of relevant United Nations bodies on issues
affecting them, while seeking input from indigenous
peoples from all regions of the world in preparation for
the report.
Furthermore, pursuant to paragraph 8, the President
of the General Assembly would organize and preside
over informal interactive hearings on the sidelines of
the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and prepare
a summary of each hearing, during the seventy-second,
the seventy-third and the seventy-fourth sessions of the
General Assembly, as part of the preparatory process
for the consideration of the report of the SecretaryGeneral during the seventy-fifth session.
In order to implement the requests in the draft
resolution, the Department for General Assembly and
17-27953

08/09/2017

Conference Management would incur costs related to
translation amounting to $55,600 during the biennium
2020-2021 as follows. Costs related to the translation
of the new Secretary-General’s report, with a limit
of 8,500 words, as requested in paragraphs 5 and 6,
from English into all of the official languages, would
amount to $27,800. Costs related to the translation of
the compilation of inputs, with a limit of 8,500 words,
as requested in paragraph 6, from English into all of
the official languages would amount to $27,800. Any
activities and related resource requirements during
2018-2019 related to section 2 would be undertaken
within the amount proposed under the regular budget
for the period 2018-2019.
Under section 9, Economic and Social Affairs,
pursuant to paragraphs 5 and 6, the Secretary-General
would prepare a new report on achievements, analysis
and concrete recommendations on the possible further
measures necessary to enable the participation of
indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions in
meetings of relevant United Nations bodies on issues
affecting them, while seeking input from indigenous
peoples from all regions of the world in the preparation
of the report.
The Department of Economic and Social Affairs
would prepare, distribute, collate and analyse a survey
of inputs from indigenous peoples’ representatives and
institutions from all regions of the world that would
serve as input for the preparation of the draft report,
before the nineteenth session of the Permanent Forum
on Indigenous Issues, in 2020. Those inputs would
be incorporated into the new report by the end of the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly in 2020
and the Secretary-General’s report.
In order to implement the requests in the draft
resolution, including the proposal pursuant to paragraph
7, the following resource requirements, which will be
funded by voluntary contributions, in the amount of
$93,300, would be required during the period 20192020: general temporary assistance at the P-3 level
for 12 months amounting to $93,300 to implement the
programme of work in support of the draft resolution,
which is presently not being undertaken in the
Secretariat. Temporary assistance is needed to prepare
and distribute the survey, compile and analyse the survey
responses and prepare the compilation for the nineteenth
session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues,
which, based on the current pattern of meetings, will
convene in the first half of 2020. The drafting of the new

A/71/PV.96

Secretary-General’s report on achievements, analysis
and concrete recommendations requires temporary
staff to review, analyse and consolidate responses from
various reports, compilations, informal discussions and
inputs in order to prepare the draft recommendations
on enabling the participation of indigenous peoples’
representatives and institutions in meetings of relevant
United Nations bodies on issues affecting them. The
temporary staff would consult with the necessary
Secretariat departments and offices, including the
Office of Legal Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
the preparation of the Secretary-General’s report.
The temporary staff would also coordinate with other
Secretariat departments and contractors in connection
with the editing, translation and preparation of the
report. As this resource requirement, amounting to
$93,300, would be funded by voluntary contributions,
the adoption of draft resolution A/71/L.82 would not
give rise to programme budget implications under
section 9 of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2018-2019 or the biennium 2020-2021.
The additional resource requirements in the amount
of $55,600 under section 2, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
Management, relating to the regular budget would be
included in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2020-2021.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/71/L.82 would not give rise to programme budget
implications under the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2018-2019.
Copies of the statement that I have just read out have
been distributed desk-to-desk in the Hall and will also
be made available on the PaperSmart Services portal.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.82, entitled
“Enhancing the participation of indigenous peoples’
representatives and institutions in meetings of relevant
United Nations bodies on issues affecting them”. May I
take it that the Assembly decides to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/71/L.82 was adopted (resolution
71/321).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.

17-279537/26

A/71/PV.96

Mr. Grant (Canada): I make this statement on
behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
In line with the outcome document of the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples (WCIP) and with
the aims of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples, we strongly believe that
indigenous peoples have the right to participate and
to be heard in decisions that affect them at the United
Nations. Our countries have actively participated in the
consultations and negotiations on this important issue,
and we can congratulate the four advisers appointed by
the President of the General Assembly — the Permanent
Representatives of Ghana and Finland, and the two
indigenous advisers, Mr. James Anaya and Ms. Claire
Charters — for achieving this outcome. We thank
them for their guidance and able leadership throughout
the process.
As our countries have stated previously, the
commitment to enhance the participation of indigenous
peoples in the United Nations is not a new concept.
In 2014, at the WCIP, participants, including States,
committed to consider ways to enable the participation
of indigenous peoples in relevant meetings of the United
Nations on issues affecting them. Thereafter, Member
States were given a clear mandate by resolution 70/232
to adopt a draft resolution on indigenous participation by
the end of the current session of the General Assembly.
We are here today to formally satisfy that mandate, but,
in doing so, our countries express disappointment that,
after approximately two years of consultations, we have
not been able to establish a new category for indigenous
participation in the United Nations. It is extremely
important, therefore, that resolution 71/321 ensures that
the door remain open to enhancing the participation of
indigenous peoples in the United Nations. Our countries
remain firmly committed to that goal.
We continue to urge all bodies and organizations
throughout the United Nations system to work to enable
the participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives
and institutions in relevant meetings on issues affecting
them. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
report on the achievements, analyses and concrete
recommendations on further measures necessary
to enable the participation of indigenous peoples’
representatives and institutions in the United Nations to
be delivered by the end of the seventy-fourth session of
the General Assembly. It is vital that we safeguard the
progress already made by Member States, indigenous
peoples and the advisers of the President of the General
8/26

08/09/2017

Assembly during the past two years. In that vein, we are
pleased that the report will build on the consultations
heard during the seventy-first session of the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General’s previous report
(A/70/84) on progress made in the implementation of
the outcome document of the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples.
It is also important to recognize the invaluable
contributions of indigenous peoples throughout
this consultation process. We thank the numerous
individuals and representatives of institutions who
travelled from often far and remote locations to
share their views here at the United Nations. Their
contributions were influential. They enriched and
informed our discussions. We are pleased to note that the
resolution that we adopted today will continue to enable
the participation of indigenous peoples going forward,
including through a series of interactive hearings to
be held on the sidelines of the Permanent Forum on
Indigenous Issues from next year until the seventyfourth session of the General Assembly. The mandated
regional consultations will also be an essential element
for our deliberations going forward, while ensuring
that a broad range of views from indigenous peoples
are carefully considered. We welcome the expansion
of the mandate of the United Nations Voluntary Fund
for Indigenous Peoples to assist representatives of
indigenous peoples’ organizations and institutions
to participate in the hearings to be organized by the
President of the General Assembly.
As our discussions move forward over the next few
years, it will remain critical to our countries to ensure
that the United Nations gives consideration to broader
participation by indigenous peoples, including in the
General Assembly. We remain committed to ensuring
that indigenous peoples, wherever they live, are able to
influence global decision-making at the United Nations,
and we look forward to the day when indigenous
peoples are able to engage across the United Nations,
while speaking with independent voices even when
they differ from those of Member States and presenting
the views of peoples who have not been heard.
Mr. Chu Guang (China): I take the floor on
behalf of the Group of Like-minded Megadiverse
Countries — including Bangladesh, Cameroon, Egypt,
India, Indonesia, Iran, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Morocco, Myanmar, Nigeria, the Philippines,
the Russian Federation, Thailand, Viet Nam and
my own country, China — to join the consensus on
17-27953

08/09/2017

resolution 71/321, entitled “Enhancing the participation
of indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions
in meetings of relevant United Nations bodies on issues
affecting them”.
The adoption of this resolution serves to underscore
the decision to continue discussions on the significant,
yet very complex, question of enhancing the
participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives and
institutions in meetings of the relevant United Nations
bodies on issues affecting them. The diverse groups of
indigenous peoples reflect the global diversity of the
world’s populations. Therefore, although there has been
an appreciable convergence of several aspects over
the course of the three-year-long consultation process
on the issue under consideration since the adoption
of the outcome document of the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples (WCIP) in 2014, it is not surprising
that significant divergence exists on several issues with
regard to the whole spectrum of questions related to
the issue.
The broad-based and transparent consultation
process, under the able guidance of the President of
the General Assembly and the appointed advisers, was
instrumental in facilitating a remarkable degree of
understanding among Member States and indigenous
peoples on a wide range of issues related to the complex
views involved. On the one hand, the Member States
have learned a lot about indigenous peoples and the
issues affecting them. On the other hand, indigenous
peoples have also been able to learn about the various
sensitivities of Member States with regard to their
positions and concerns. There is unanimous agreement
that there is no internationally agreed-on definition of
indigenous peoples, and that such peoples’ situations
vary from region to region and from country to country.
Not all countries have indigenous peoples, and ethnic
and national minorities should be distinguished from
indigenous peoples.
The resolution recognizes that the participation of
indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions
in meetings of the relevant United Nations bodies on
issues affecting them should respect the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as the sovereignty and territorial integrity or political
unity of Member States. It should also maintain the
intergovernmental nature of the United Nations. There
are existing mechanisms that envisage and facilitate
the participation of indigenous peoples in the work of
the United Nations, such as the Permanent Forum on

A/71/PV.96

Indigenous Issues, the Expert Mechanism on the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples, the United Nations Voluntary
Fund for Indigenous Peoples and the Special Rapporteur
on the rights of indigenous peoples. In that context,
we understand that paragraph 4 of resolution 71/321
is applicable only to the arrangements that currently
exist, and in accordance with the established rules and
procedures of all bodies and entities within the United
Nations, and should be read in conjunction with the
decision enshrined in paragraph 7 of the resolution,
which states that consideration of measures necessary
to enhance the participation on indigenous peoples in
relevant United Nations meetings on issues affecting
them will continue at the seventy-fifth session. The
resolution should not be misunderstood to be launching
new mechanisms.
Disagreement persists on several issues related
to the process and the objectives, but the significant
progress that has been made since the process began,
resulting in the resolution just adopted today, is a
landmark and a notable achievement. In that regard, we
would like to once again convey our sincere appreciation
to the advisers, who helped to establish a really fruitful
and open atmosphere in the process and guided us with
their valuable and unique expertise. We hope that our
future discussions will maintain that spirit. We need
to preserve the results that have been achieved and
build on them in the next rounds of intergovernmental
discussions led by Member States.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): At the outset, on behalf of the
four co-advisers, I would like to express our profound
thanks to Member States and the representatives of
indigenous peoples for their collective effort and the
hard work that went into the negotiation of resolution
71/321. The advisers — Ambassador Kai Sauer,
Permanent Representative of Finland, Ms. Claire
Charters, Mr. James Anaya and myself — would like
to take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for
the confidence that has been placed in us in entrusting
us with this important task. We are grateful to you
and your team for the support and encouragement that
we have been given throughout the consultation and
negotiation process.
There can be no denying the fact that indigenous
communities, by their very nature, face unique social,
cultural and economic challenges. It is therefore
imperative that we continue to conduct a dialogue
on appropriate means for enabling their effective
participation in the work of the Organization. In our

17-279539/26

A/71/PV.96

view, the complex issues and challenges identified in
the course of our consultations and negotiations, as
well as the particular concerns expressed by Member
States, can be resolved through continued dialogue. The
willingness of the negotiating parties to reach out and
understand the positions of the other side was evident,
but fell short of reaching consensus on key issues. We
are hopeful, however, that the spirit of compromise
and good faith that led to the adoption of today’s
resolution will be reflected in its implementation,
as we move forward on enabling the participation of
indigenous peoples in this body on issues that affect
them. It is our hope that the gains that have been made
through the resolution will be used to work for the
positive development of all indigenous peoples across
the globe and to help allay any misconceptions that
might have hindered this issue’s speedy progress in the
United Nations.
Our Organization is committed to leaving no one
behind in the quest for sustainable development. If we
are to truly live by that principle, the time has indeed
come for us to allow the voices of our indigenous
peoples, wherever they exist, to be heard and to have
a meaningful impact on our collective efforts as a
global organization.
I should not conclude without thanking my
colleagues and co-advisers for their excellent
cooperation and teamwork. I would also like to thank
the secretariat of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues and to all the staff of the Secretariat who have
supported our work since we launched this process in
March 2016. I must confess that this has been a great
and rewarding learning experience for me and my
co-advisers on indigenous issues, and I hope it has
been the same for the several delegations that actively
participated in the journey.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State
of Bolivia would like to express its satisfaction at the
General Assembly’s adoption by consensus today of
resolution 71/321 and hopes that it will contribute to
increasing indigenous peoples’ participation beyond
the modalities already envisaged in the Permanent
Forum on Indigenous Issues, the Expert Mechanism on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Peoples and the Special
Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the rights
of indigenous peoples.
10/26

08/09/2017

The resolution reaffirms our solemn commitment
as Member States to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations in a spirit of
cooperation with the world’s indigenous peoples. It also
reflects our respect for the provisions of the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples on conducting good-faith consultations and
cooperating with indigenous peoples before adopting
and implementing legislative or administrative
measures affecting them, as well as establishing ways
to ensure their participation in matters that concern
them. The resolution also embodies the fulfilment of
the commitments made at the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples to ensuring the participation of
indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions
in meetings of the relevant United Nations bodies on
matters that concern them.
Bolivia’s history has been marked by years of
exclusion of its indigenous peoples. Despite the fact
that more than 60 per cent of the country’s population
is indigenous, Bolivia, founded in 1825, did not have
a President of indigenous origin until the election of
Mr. Evo Morales Ayma’s Government in 2006. Since
then, and with the adoption of our new 2009 Political
Constitution, Bolivia identifies itself as a plurinational
State, based on cultural plurality and respect for the
rights of indigenous peoples. It recognizes, among
other rights, their rights to freely exist; to their cultural
identity, religious beliefs, practices and customs and
their own view of the world; to self-determination,
institutions that are part of the overall structure of
the State, and their traditional knowledge; to have
their languages, rituals, symbols and clothing valued,
respected and promoted; and to be consulted, through
the appropriate procedures, and to participate in State
entities and institutions.
In addition, and in that process of claiming the rights
of indigenous peoples, Bolivia is the only country that
has ratified, by law, the United Nations Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Through recognition
and respect for the pre-colonial existence of native
indigenous peoples and rural workers and ancestral
control of their territories, Bolivia will continue to
dismantle old colonial practices and will continue its
efforts to respect and promote the rights of all indigenous
peoples, at the national and international levels.
In that regard, the Plurinational State of Bolivia
hopes that resolution 71/321 will allow structural
changes that guarantee the right to participation of
17-27953

08/09/2017

the world’s indigenous peoples and, in particular, the
empowerment and participation of indigenous young
people and indigenous women in order to strengthen
their leadership. We also hope that specific and
appropriate participation mechanisms will be developed
for those within the same population group who are most
vulnerable, such as indigenous people with disabilities,
indigenous women, indigenous children and elderly
indigenous people.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): The Government of Mexico welcomes the
efforts undertaken to facilitate the participation of
indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions in
meetings of relevant United Nations bodies on issues
affecting them, in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 33 of the outcome document of the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples.
We thank the Permanent Representative of Finland
and the Permanent Representative of Ghana for their
work at the forefront of this important negotiation
process. We also commend the commitment and hard
work of the two advisers on the indigenous process.
Likewise, the delegation of Mexico also thanks all
delegations for their constructive participation in
the process.
The delegation of Mexico takes the floor to explain
the position that the Government of Mexico holds on an
issue that it considers a priority, given that Mexico is
pluricultural nation that was originally sustained by its
indigenous peoples. In line with that position over time,
Mexico has continued to actively promote the rights
of indigenous peoples and to strengthen the issue’s
normative and institutional framework, both within
the United Nations and in other multilateral forums. In
collaboration with various States and always in close
cooperation with indigenous peoples’ representatives,
Mexico has promoted historic processes that have
resulted in tangible progress with regard to respect
for, and the protection of, the individual and collective
rights of indigenous people. It is now time to give
tangible expression to the rights set forth in the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and
the commitments outlined in the Conference’s outcome
document, including the participation of indigenous
peoples’ representatives and institutions in meetings of
the Organization’s bodies.
Mexico firmly believes that the participation of
indigenous peoples enriches the work of the United

A/71/PV.96

Nations. As with other specific groups, the principle of
“nothing about us without us” is equally applicable to
issues that affect indigenous peoples. Mexico joined the
consensus on resolution 71/321 because we recognize
that the text includes important elements, such as the
request for a report by the Secretary-General, with
concrete recommendations, interactive hearings and
regional consultations with indigenous peoples, and
the extension of the mandate of the Voluntary Fund for
Indigenous Peoples.
We believe that the negotiation process served to
highlight the vast complexity of the issue of indigenous
peoples within the Organization. We would like to
underscore the space given to indigenous peoples
throughout the entire process, as well as their active
and ongoing positive participation, while, at the same
time, regretting that, at times, Latin America was
underrepresented.
Two years after the beginning of the process that
resulted in the resolution we just adopted, Mexico
acknowledges that its outcome satisfies very few
and falls far short of expectations. Mexico deeply
regrets that the States Members of the United Nations
have not reached an agreement on the approval of a
new category that would allow indigenous peoples’
representatives and institutions to participate in this
session, and joined the consensus with lessons learned
and a few conclusions.
First, nothing in the text of the resolution we just
adopted undermines the commitments made in the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples or in the outcome document of the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples.
Secondly, existing participation forums should be
strengthened and, we hope, expanded in future.
Thirdly, in order for indigenous peoples and
Member States to join forces and work together, it is
essential to assess both the region’s unique features
and the intergovernmental nature of the Organization.
We sincerely hope that the lessons learned from this
process will inform the future work of the Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session, when a new phase of this
process begins.
Please note, Mr. President, Mexico’s resolute
support of your efforts to facilitate the participation
of indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions

17-2795311/26

A/71/PV.96

in meetings of the relevant United Nations bodies on
issues affecting them.
Mr. Morejón Pazmiño (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): In 2014, after the United Nations had been in
existence for more than half a century, the first World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples was held here.
Ecuador supported the proposal to hold the conference
from the start and took active part in organizing
the event. It was a historic and special occasion that
fostered the promotion and protection of the rights of
indigenous peoples throughout the world. It is one of the
commitments made at the Conference that has brought
us here today. Our task is to consider ways to enhance
the participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives
and institutions in meetings of relevant United Nations
bodies on issues affecting them.
We acknowledge the work of the advisers to the
President of the General Assembly in organizing
consultations that sought to successfully meet the
aspirations of indigenous peoples. My country, which
is well aware that this is an outstanding issue for
the international community and underscores the
importance of achieving greater and more effective
participation of indigenous peoples in the United
Nations system, supported the process and contributed
positively to it. We endorse the establishment of a new
mechanism or committee that would select indigenous
peoples’ representatives and institutions to participate
in meetings of the United Nations, and maintain
geographic balance.
We reiterate that indigenous peoples are not
recognized as non-governmental organizations. It
is therefore necessary to create a new category for
indigenous peoples’ representatives or institutions.
We underscore that any steps taken to enhance the
participation of indigenous peoples must guarantee
balanced geographic representation that ensures
the presence and participation of, inter alia, the
indigenous peoples of the region of Latin America and
the Caribbean.
The voice of indigenous peoples — their life
experiences and knowledge — must be heard and
recorded. It is therefore necessary to have the right
participation procedures to enable them to do so,
without undermining the intergovernmental nature
of the Organization. Our Government is determined
to recognize and celebrate diversity and to respect
the rights of indigenous peoples and nationalities to
12/26

08/09/2017

preserver their own ways of life. Respect for collective
rights is fundamental, as is respect for their social
organization and legal systems. We must protect
and promote their knowledge, the exercise of their
rituals, their respectful relationship with nature, their
production practices and fair trade.
While Ecuador supports resolution 71/321, we
regret that we were unable to reach agreement on
enhancing the participation of indigenous peoples
representatives’ and institutions in the meetings of
relevant United Nations bodies on issues affecting
them. Although we will revisit this topic at the General
Assembly during its seventy-fifth session, it will be
impossible for the aspirations of indigenous people to
become a reality unless we overcome the economic,
social, political and cultural gaps that have affected
those people and nationalities since colonial times.
Budgetary considerations and regional consultations
will be essential for success the next time we consider
this topic.
Governments are obligated to act efficiently in
adopting appropriate measures in order to honour the
commitments undertaken in the outcome document
of the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples. It is
crucial to maintain a broad intercultural dialogue in
order to jointly create solutions and alternatives — as
a central tenet for cooperation and solidarity among
indigenous States and peoples all over the world.
Finally, the President of Ecuador, Mr. Lenín Moreno
Garcés, sums up his commitment to dialogue with the
following phrase “Nothing for you all without you all”.
Attaining that objective nationally and internationally
will be possible only with the participation of leaders and
representatives of indigenous peoples and nationalities.
Ms. Pham (Viet Nam): Viet Nam welcomes the
adoption of resolution 71/321, entitled “Enhancing the
participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives
and institutions in meetings of relevant United Nations
bodies on issues affecting them”, which creates
momentum for the process of enhancing the participation
of indigenous people’s representatives and institution
on issues affecting them in the United Nations.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to the President of the General
Assembly and to the advisers for their great efforts to
facilitate the process. On the way forward, we would
like to emphasize the following.
17-27953

08/09/2017

First, Viet Nam attaches great importance to
international intergovernmental consultations as the
best way to reach consensus and promote cooperation.
During consultations among Member States over the
past two years, we witnessed divergent views due to a
diversity in backgrounds among countries and regions.
We also saw the indispensable role of consultations in
bringing countries closer to find common ground. The
intergovernmental nature of that process must therefore
be consistently upheld to develop greater understanding
and consensus among all Member States.
Secondly, while reaffirming the leading role of
Member States in this process, Viet Nam sees the merit
in engaging the indigenous peoples’ representatives
and institutions. In that regard, we take note of this
engagement under various forms, as mentioned in
paragraphs 5, 6 and 8 — with the understanding that
those engagement activities will provide objective
information for future considerations.
Lastly, Viet Nam remains committed to actively
participating in this process and looks forward to
working with other Member States in a cooperative and
constructive manner.
Mr. Joshi (India): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of
the delegation of China on behalf of the Group of
Like-minded States earlier today.
India is a strong supporter of the promotion
and protection of the rights of indigenous peoples.
We supported the adoption of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in 2007.
India is also supportive of the process of enhancing the
participation of indigenous peoples and institutions in
relevant meetings of United Nations on issues affecting
them, as per resolution 70/232. We appreciate the
efforts made by the advisers, the Member States and
the indigenous peoples to implement that resolution.
At the same time, during the consultation process,
it was once again clear that there is no internationally
agreed definition or criteria of identification of
indigenous peoples. We would recall that the concept
of indigenous peoples relates to specific situations of
people who have suffered from historical injustices as a
result of their colonization and the dispossession of their
lands, territories and resources. That complex concept
cannot be expanded arbitrarily to also include societies
where diverse ethnic groups have lived together for
thousands of years in order to create artificial divides.

A/71/PV.96

Because of that lack of clarity about the definition
of indigenous peoples, today there are three different
situations among Member States with regard to the
concept of indigenous peoples — one group of countries
that identifies certain sections of their populations
as indigenous and as distinct from the other sections
of non-indigenous peoples residing in the State; a
second group that identifies their entire population
as indigenous; and a third group that rejects the
proposition that they have any indigenous population
groups in their country. It is our understanding that
the current process applies only to those countries that
recognize indigenous peoples as distinct from the other
non-indigenous people residing in the country.
My delegation will continue to remain actively
engaged in future consultations and intergovernmental
negotiations on this issue in future in order to reach a
decision by consensus.
Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks the
advisers for their dedicated work and for helping us arrive
at a pragmatic outcome, as reflected in resolution 71/321.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the People’s Republic
of China on behalf of the Group of Like-minded
delegations. However, we wish to add three points in
our national capacity.
First, Bangladesh did not join the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. We
underline that the language contained in paragraphs 2
and 3 would not have any implication on our position
vis-à-vis that document, which we do not consider to
have universal application or relevance.
Secondly, Bangladesh will continue to remain
engaged with the issue of possible further measures
to enhance the participation of indigenous peoples’
representatives and institutions in relevant United
Nations meetings on issues affecting them at the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session. We
would, however, underscore the critical importance
of maintaining the intergovernmental nature of the
consultations, particularly on any outcome of the
process. The process can indeed benefit from input from
the indigenous people’s representatives and institutions
based in countries where they are recognized as such.
The regional consultations envisaged in paragraph 6
would need to remain mindful of the diverse positions
and policies on this issue across countries and regions.

17-2795313/26

A/71/PV.96

Thirdly, the rigorous informal consultations in the
past two years made it evident that, in the absence of
any internationally agreed definition of indigenous
peoples, there needs to be a creative solution to address
the question of enhanced participation of indigenous
people’s representatives and institutions in United
Nations meetings. If we were to circumvent the need for
a definition, then the issue would have to be addressed
in a differentiated manner, corresponding to the
diverse historic and political contexts across regions
and countries on the subject. Any attempt to adopt a
uniform approach would perhaps further risk widening
divergence among Member States and compromise our
collective efforts to create opportunities for enhancing
participation in United Nations meetings involving
indigenous peoples from countries where they are so
recognized and deserve to contribute to discussions on
issues affecting them.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
I would like to add my own sincere thanks to
Ambassador Kai Sauer of Finland and Ambassador
Martha Pobee of Ghana, as well as Ms. Claire Charters
and Mr. James Anaya, the advisers to the informal
consultations, for having so skilfully led the complex
negotiations on this important matter.
I also thank Member States for their valuable
contributions to reaching an agreement on resolution
71/321.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
65 as a whole?

08/09/2017

It was so decided.
Agenda item 106 (continued)
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Draft resolution (A/71/L.80)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.80.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a pleasure to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.80
to the General Assembly today on behalf of its two
principal sponsors, Guatemala and my own country,
Spain.
We wished to introduce this innovative draft
resolution to help prevent and combat two forms
of criminal activity that have so far been largely
overlooked by the Assembly: trafficking in persons for
the purpose of organ removal and trafficking in human
organs. With this new initiative, we have sought to
address three aspects of those crimes that we believe
should be analysed: the human rights, health care and
criminal aspects. We believe that, as a result of such
an approach, we can develop much more effective
national policies and partnerships at the international
and regional levels to combat these crimes. We need
a multidisciplinary approach, and we are introducing
this draft resolution in the General Assembly today
precisely to promote cooperation among the various
agencies and bodies involved.

The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft resolution A/71/L.80,
circulated under agenda item 106, “Crime prevention
and criminal justice”.

The prevention and prosecution of the two types of
crime we are facing require the cooperation and adequate
training of authorities and health-care specialists, as
well as State security forces and bodies, because the
guiding principles of transplantation established by the
World Health Organization are violated in both types
of crime. That is why in the draft resolution we request
the World Health Organization to develop international
guidelines on the health, criminal and human rights
aspects relating to those crimes, in collaboration with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

In order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
resolution, it will be necessary to reopen consideration
of agenda item 106. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda
item 106 and proceed immediately to its consideration?

Furthermore, we believe that a well-regulated
national system for organ transplants is key to
preventing and prosecuting those offences. Such
crimes occur chiefly for two reasons — first, because
of a growing structural imbalance between demand for

It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items

14/26

17-27953

08/09/2017

A/71/PV.96

and availability of organs available for transplant, and
secondly, because of economic and social problems that
render individuals involved in this kind of trafficking
more vulnerable.

develop international guidelines on the health, criminal
and human rights aspects relating to trafficking in
persons for the purpose of organ removal and trafficking
in human organs.

Data provided by the Global Observatory on
Donation and Transplantation reveal that in 2015, there
were 126,670 organ transplants reported globally.
Of that number, 84,000 were kidney transplants. It is
estimated that such activity barely covers 10 per cent
of global needs for transplants. The World Health
Organization calculates that between 5 to 10 per cent
of transplants around the world — and this is highly
significant — are carried out using trafficked organs.
That could be the tip of the iceberg of a problem that,
due to a lack of research and information, may be much
more widespread.

The General Assembly would request the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to engage in a
dialogue with members of the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons and other relevant
intergovernmental international organizations, in
particular the World Health Organization, in close
consultation with Member States, so as to enable the
Office to improve data collection and analysis on
instances of trafficking in persons for the purpose
of organ removal and relevant prosecutions, and to
promote research among diverse fields, such as the
medical and health management fields, as well as on the
part of the anti-trafficking community, while bearing in
mind that data on trafficking in persons for the purpose
of organ removal are being gathered for the Global
Report on Trafficking in Persons, in accordance with
the provisions set out in General Assembly resolution
70/179, of 17 December 2015.

Our countries consider that well-regulated national
systems of transplants, regulated by the principles
of transparency, equal access and altruism, could
significantly reduce those cases of organ trafficking.
We believe in a system based on the guiding principles
of the World Health Organization on the transplant of
human cells, tissues and organs.
On behalf of Guatemala and Spain, I thank all
countries that have sponsored this important draft
resolution and have expressed their support for the
initiative. I commend in particular the work of the experts
of the various missions who conducted the negotiations
of the draft resolution. Without their dedication, effort
and commitment, it would have simply been impossible
to present the ambitious resolution today.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/71/L.80.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The following statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly and will be
distributed desk-to-desk in the Hall and made available
on the portal.
Under the terms of paragraphs 10, 11 and 12, the
General Assembly would request the World Health
Organization, in collaboration with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR), among other relevant bodies, to

The General Assembly would also request the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in collaboration
with other entities of the United Nations system,
including the World Health Organization (WHO), to
continue providing capacity-building and technical
assistance to States, upon request, to assist them in
strengthening national capacities to effectively prevent
and combat trafficking in persons for the purpose of
organ removal and trafficking in human organs.
With regard to the request contained in operative
paragraph 10, it is estimated that extrabudgetary
resources in the amount of $405,400, inclusive of
programme support costs, would be required to
engage with the World Health Organization and the
OHCHR in at least two meetings aimed at jointly
developing international guidelines, with each of the
three organizations focusing on its mandate, with
UNODC responsible for developing international
guidelines focusing on the criminal justice responses
to combat trafficking in persons for the purpose of
organ removal and trafficking in human organs; and
develop and validate international guidelines aimed
at identifying gaps in legislation and its application
aimed at strengthening Member States’ knowledge
of and capacity to combat the trafficking in persons
for the purpose of organ removal and trafficking in
human organs.

17-2795315/26

A/71/PV.96

The resource requirement includes the following
cost elements: one professional post at the P-4 level
for three working months to provide expertise and
oversee the development of guidelines on the criminal
aspects of trafficking in human organs based on the
analysis of information provided by Member States
and to engage in a dialogue with relevant international
organizations ($56,300); one professional post at
the P-3 level for six working months to organize the
expert group meetings, provide substantial input to
the drafting of the guidelines, guide the international
consultant and oversee the conduct of the assessment
missions and the drafting of the outcome reports
($90,500); one General Service (Other level) post for
four working months to support the organization of
the two expert group meetings and the assessment
missions to the three countries ($39,300); local staff for
three working months to support assessment missions
($13,800); consultancy service to support the research
work, the substantial preparation of the two expert
group meetings, the drafting of the issue paper, and
the legislative assessment of six countries, including
the three assessment missions ($44,700); travel costs
to facilitate UNODC’s participation in meetings with
WHO and OHCHR in Geneva for two trips by two staff
members ($7,900); the conducting of two expert group
meetings for two days in Vienna with 14 participants
from various regions ($76,800); printing of the
guidelines in 60 pages, including situational analysis
($18,100); and assessment costs for conducting a review
of the relevant legislation in six countries from Africa,
Asia and Latin America, including three country visits
to selected countries from these regions ($58,000).
With regard to the request contained in operative
paragraph 11, it is estimated that extrabudgetary
resources in the amount of $307,400, inclusive of
programme support costs, would be required to assess
status of knowledge and data availability in the field
of trafficking in persons for organ removal, including
the identification of relevant stakeholders in this field
of work; engage with other United Nations entities,
including through but not limited to the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons and
WHO, in conducting an expert group meeting for the
selection of relevant indicators of trafficking in persons
for organ removal for data collection, a meeting that will
also identify possible research activities in the medical
and health fields to improve knowledge on trafficking
in persons for organ removal; carry out international
data collection on the basis of the indicators selected
16/26

08/09/2017

at the meeting; report to and evaluate with the relevant
stakeholders the information and data collected, and
gather feedback for further improvements on data
collection and analysis; and include the results in the
different editions of the UNODC Global Report on
Trafficking in Persons. No supplementing activities and
costs are needed for the dissemination of this analysis.
The resource requirement includes the following
cost elements: one General Service (Other level) post for
12 working months to support data collection, storage
and analysis as well as the organization of expert group
meetings ($117,900); consultancy services to assess the
status of knowledge, identify relevant stakeholders,
evaluate and report the data and information collected,
and communicate systematically with other United
Nations entities ($106,700); travel costs to support
consultations with United Nations entities: two trips
to Geneva and one trip to New York by one staff
member ($14,100); two expert group meetings for
two days in Vienna with 10 participants from various
regions ($46,100); information technology support in
the development of informatics tools for the collection
and storage of data on trafficking in persons for organ
removal ($22,600).
With regard to the request contained in operative
paragraph 12, it is estimated that extrabudgetary
resources in the amount of $572,100, inclusive of
programme support costs, would be required to provide
capacity-building and technical assistance to Member
States. The objective would be to assist at least three
Member States — one country from Africa, one country
from Asia and one country from Latin America — in
strengthening national capacities to effectively prevent
and combat trafficking in persons for the purpose
of organ removal and trafficking in human organs;
and undertake a situational analysis of trafficking in
persons for organ removal and organ trafficking in at
least three Member States to ensure evidence-based
policy and tailored capacity-building.
Using as a basis UNODC’s 2015 Assessment
Toolkit: Trafficking in Persons for Organ Removal,
the assessment would include in-depth field work and
interviews to analyse and draft recommendations on
the following areas: legislative and policy framework;
criminal justice sector response, including interviews
with law enforcement, prosecutors and the judiciary;
assistance and protection measures, including the
immediate assistance needs of victims; screening
procedures for organ donation, including measures to
17-27953

08/09/2017

assess consent; assessment of medical and health-care
professionals and staff to ascertain factors that increase
the risk of trafficking in persons for organ removal
and organ trafficking, and identify areas for future
collaboration and cooperation; interviews with embassy
and consulate staff to identify areas for cooperation,
prevention and identification; and interviews with
civil society.
The resource requirement includes the following
cost elements: one professional post at the P-4 level for
one working month to guide the technical assistance
and capacity-building efforts to prevent and combat
trafficking in organs in three selected States ($18,800);
one professional post at the P-3 level for six working
months to lead the country assessments and the
technical assistance provided to the three countries and
to oversee the development of specialized investigative
tools ($90,500); one General Service (Other level) post
for two working months to support the organization
of the assessment missions and technical assistance
activities as well as the recruitment of consultants
($19,700); and local staff support for nine working
months shared among the various countries ($41,400).
In addition, it would include national and international
consultancy services to conduct assessments on
trafficking in persons for organ removal, including
detailed legislative and policy analysis, fieldwork and
research among key stakeholders in the three countries,
to develop the specialized investigative tools and to
support the delivery of technical assistance activities
to the countries — $129,800; costs on assessment on
trafficking in persons for organ removal, including
detailed legislative and policy analysis, fieldwork
and research among key stakeholders — $65,300; the
development of specialized investigative tools, i.e.,
video crime scene investigation interactive tool and
accompanying basic module, adapted to the national
legislative and policy context — $18,500; three
specialized capacity-building workshops per country,
subject to analysis and recommendations from the
assessments, targeting law enforcement, prosecutors,
judiciary, health officials, medical and transplant
professionals, as well as civil society — $188,100.
The activities related to the requests contained in
operative paragraphs 10, 11 and 12 would be carried
out in 2018 provided that the extrabudgetary resources
mentioned above are made available. The related
additional resource requirements are summarized as
follows: other staff costs for additional requirements

A/71/PV.96

in 2018 — $419,800; consultants — $322,900;
experts — $275,300; staff travel — $70,800;
contractual services — $42,200; general operating
expenses — $6,000; subtotal net — $1,137,000;
programme support costs of 13 per cent — $147,900;
which amounts to a total of $1,284,900.
Hence, the adoption of draft resolution A/71/L.80
would not entail any additional appropriation under the
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017 and the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.80, entitled
“Strengthening and promoting effective measures
and international cooperation on organ donation and
transplantation to prevent and combat trafficking in
persons for the purpose of organ removal and trafficking
in human organs”.
For the Assembly’s information, the draft resolution
has closed for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of A/71/L.80: Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Croatia, Cyprus,
Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malaysia, Malta, Panama, Peru,
the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Sao Tome
and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United
Kingdom and Uruguay.
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.80?
Draft resolution A/71/L.80 was adopted (resolution
71/322).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Phipps (United States of America): We
would like to begin by thanking Spain, in particular
Victoria Ortega and María José Castillo, for guiding

17-2795317/26

A/71/PV.96

the negotiations of Member States in order to bring
attention to two important, yet overlooked, global issues,
those of trafficking in human organs and trafficking in
persons for the purpose of organ removal. The number
of individuals in need of life-saving organ transplants
far exceeds the number of viable and available organs
around the world. This window of need has created a
black market for the purchase of organs and poses health
risks to both the individuals who sell their organs out of
desperation or are coerced into organ removal, as well
as those receiving these organs.
The motive to purchase an organ is an
understandable one. The United States has joined the
consensus but regrets that resolution 71/322 moved
away from a health-oriented, regulatory focus in favour
of a crime-focused approach to the issue. Many of the
measures set forth in this resolution have the potential,
however, to advance States’ efforts and international
cooperation on organ donation and transplantation
and contribute to preventing and combating both
trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal
and trafficking in human organs.

08/09/2017

their organs, and who are contributing to a crime, and
individuals who are defrauded or coerced into having
their organs removed, who are victims of a crime.
The United States remains concerned that this critical
distinction is not maintained throughout the resolution.
Also, while the resolution refers to “individuals
who sell their organs”, it also refers to this same group
as organ “donors” or “victims” even when an individual
receives a monetary benefit. This incongruity obfuscates
the focus of the resolution, which is to promote effective
measures and cooperation relating to organ donation
and prevent and combat the illegal selling and buying of
organs, as well as the more egregious removal of organs
by force, fraud or coercion.

While these two crimes — trafficking in persons for
the purpose of organ removal and trafficking in human
organs, — both prey on the poor and the desperate, the
black market of human organs is supplied both by people
who sell their organs under desperate situations and
those who are forced, defrauded or otherwise coerced
into having their organs removed. The United States
would like to underscore the importance of maintaining
the distinctions between the two crimes.

Furthermore, although the United States makes
substantial efforts to meet the interests of victims in
all federal prosecutions, including the protection of
their dignity and physical security, the United States
Constitution, under its due process and sixth amendment
confrontation clauses, precludes any legislation
that purports to grant anonymity to victims. Those
fundamental provisions accord defendants a right to the
evidence against them, including the ability to confront
their accusers. No federal, state or international
legislation can contravene these individual rights.
Accordingly, the United States is not able to fulfil the
request to protect anonymity as detailed in paragraph
9 (b). Nevertheless, United States prosecutors can and
routinely make every reasonable effort to protect the
dignity and security of victims.

The crime of organ trafficking, clearly established
in the vast majority of Member States’ laws, makes it
illegal to both sell and to buy organs. While recognizing
this as a criminal activity, States may recognize that
individuals who sell their organs are desperate and
may have been driven to make ill-advised decisions
for a variety of reasons. Nonetheless, their decisions to
sell their organs contribute to a black market industry
built on their and others’ suffering, and pose risks to
their health, putting them in harm’s way and at risk of
being exploited by human traffickers. Regardless of
individual circumstances, people trafficking in organs,
even their own, are in fact engaged in a crime, and as
such States do not have an international law obligation
to protect them.

In conclusion, the United States remains committed
to working with other countries to pool resources and
broaden coordination to end both trafficking in human
organs and trafficking in persons for the purpose of
organ removal. However, the United States maintains
its position that anyone who sells any of their organs
is in fact neither an organ donor or a victim. As long
as these distinctions continue to be ignored, as this
resolution ignores them, the international community
will inadvertently continue to support the black-market
industry of organ trafficking and continue to jeopardize
the health of those who sell their organs, those who are
victims of human trafficking for the purpose of organ
removal, and those organ recipients who rely on the
black market for their health needs.

The United States has therefore emphasized that
the distinction be made between individuals who sell

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.

18/26

17-27953

08/09/2017

A/71/PV.96

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of the Holy See to the United Nations.

of the United Nations to fulfil its mandate under the
Charter of the United Nations.

Archbishop Auza (Holy See): I would just like
to express my delegation’s sincere gratitude to the
Permanent Missions to the United Nations of Spain
and Guatemala, as well as to the entire membership for
the successful negotiation and adoption of resolution
71/322. My delegation hopes that this resolution
will lead Member States to consider consolidating
further effective and invaluable national, regional and
international initiatives and instruments to provide
medical and ethical guidelines for the donation and
transplantation of organs, as well as combatting
trafficking in them.

To that end, I thank all delegations for their
hard work, dedication and constructive engagement
throughout the consultation process. This year’s draft
resolution includes a number of key developments to
make a more effective General Assembly. It includes
provisions relating to the alignment of the General
Assembly’s agenda with the Sustainable Development
Goals and will facilitate ongoing consideration of
ways to address gaps and duplication in the General
Assembly’s agenda as it relates to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. It includes changes to the
way in which the Journal of the United Nations will
be published, thereby reflecting the Organization’s
commitment to multilingualism. I am pleased to see that
it includes provisions on the need to enhance decorum
during the high-level segment of the general debate and
that it provides a foundation for further improvements
to be made in that area.

Organ donation and transplantation are a testament
to human progress and goodwill and the amazing
progress of medical science. We must ensure that the
practice remain safe, transparent and voluntary. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes all commitments to
address the many economic and social inequalities that
lead people to provide or sell their organs involuntarily.
The Holy See condemns in the strongest possible terms
the criminal networks that prey upon the vulnerable
and profit from their exploitation, in particular in
trafficking in persons and in the involuntary removal
and trafficking of organs.
The President: We have heard the last speaker on
this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 106?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly (A/71/1007)
Draft resolution (A/71/1007, para. 64)
The President: The General Assembly meets today
to adopt the latest draft resolution (A/71/1007, para.
64) on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly. This year’s draft resolution follows the
General Assembly’s long-standing annual practice of
working to continuously enhance its role, authority,
effectiveness and efficiency, and to improve the ability

I would like to extend my deepest gratitude
to Ambassador Vladimir Drobnjak of Croatia and
Ambassador Lana Zaki Nusseibeh of the United Arab
Emirates for their outstanding leadership of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly, and for steering that process through
to a successful outcome. The process of revitalizing the
work of the General Assembly is not an easy one, but
is a necessary task. It is one that requires diligence,
determination and an unwavering commitment to
ensuring that the General Assembly can best fulfil its
role of guiding the critical work of the United Nations.
I wish all delegations the very best for their work
during the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly in pursuit of our goal to revitalize the
Assembly so that it continues to be in the best possible
shape to carry out the great global responsibilities that
have been given it.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft
resolution. In this connection, since the report of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly (A/71/1007) was circulated
only this morning, it will be necessary to waive the
relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure,
which states that:
“[a]s a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated

17-2795319/26

A/71/PV.96

to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting”.
Unless I hear any objections, I shall take it that
Assembly agrees with my proposal of waiving rule 78.
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, which is
contained in paragraph 64 of the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly (A/71/1007). May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 71/323).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group (ACT), a cross-regional group
composed of 25 small and mid-sized countries seeking
to improve the working methods of the Security Council:
Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, Gabon,
Ghana, Hungary, Ireland, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, the Maldives, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Uruguay and
my own country, Estonia.
We welcome the Assembly’s adoption today
of resolution 71/323 and would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and the United
Arab Emirates, the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly, for their excellent work, creativity
and dedication.
The ACT group would like to make a few comments
on the cluster dealing with the selection and appointment
of the next Secretary-General and other executive
heads, as addressed in the resolution. After the Ad Hoc
Working Group’s consensus agreement on resolutions
69/321 and 70/305, which dramatically improved the
level of transparency in the process of selecting the
Secretary-General, the natural next step would be
solidifying those achievements without delay. In that
regard, the ACT group regrets that for the resolution
just adopted the Working Group was not able to reach
20/26

08/09/2017

a consensus on wording for the lessons-learned process
of the most recent and genuinely historic selection of
the Secretary-General.
ACT and other groups have recently concluded their
assessments of the selection process so that they can
be used to contribute to future versions of the process.
In the view of the ACT group, there are two broader
issues that still remain to be thoroughly discussed in
the sessions leading up to the next selection. The first
concerns communication between the Security Council
and the General Assembly and the second, the selection
and appointment of senior officials.
Mr. Orozco Barrera (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like commend and thank
Ambassadors Drobnjak, of Croatia, and Nusseibeh,
of the United Arab Emirates, for their leadership and
the commitment with which they guided the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly. Their guidance was unquestionably
essential to achieving resolution 71/323, which both
strengthens various concepts in the resolutions
adopted in 2015 and 2016 and incorporates innovative
elements. My delegation welcomes the fact that the
language in today’s resolution keeps to the parameters
of transparency, accountability, best practices and
inclusiveness that were so fundamental to resolutions
69/321 and 70/305, of 2015 and 2016, respectively.
I would like to briefly cite some of those
achievements. In my delegation’s view, in the area of
transparency, one of the lessons learned in the process
of selecting the Secretary-General was the importance
of holding informal hearings before the Assembly met,
and then presenting documents that included the visions
of candidates and the guiding principles that would
govern their work in office. The success and usefulness
of that process has now led to the inclusion of a similar
procedure for the selection of the candidates for the
presidency of the General Assembly at its seventythird session. It has also led to the creation of a tool
to enable the States Members of the United Nations to
publish information about the various parallel events
held at Headquarters throughout the year, and has
institutionalized the continuous broadcasting of the
general debate as well as the thematic meetings of the
Ad Hoc Working Group.
Furthermore, with regard to the goal of improving
the current system of elections and candidature
campaigns, we studied the possibility of establishing
17-27953

08/09/2017

a code of conduct that could be adopted with the goal
of enhancing the Assembly’s standards and its norms
of transparency and equity. Improvements can also be
made in the area of accountability in the interaction
between Permanent Missions and the Secretariat through
periodic interactive dialogues and the establishment of
focal points in the Department of Management.
With regard to best practices, I should emphasize
the importance of instituting regular meetings between
the outgoing and incoming Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Chairs of the six Main Committees.
Unfortunately, where inclusivity is concerned, there
should have been a little more effort to have women
represented as Committee Chairs. The importance of
all of those elements has increased in the wake of the
current efforts of the Secretary-General and Member
States’ commitment to promoting and ensuring gender
equality throughout the United Nations system.
In conclusion, I would like to mention how
important it will be to have consultations with all
Member States on strategic approaches to dealing
with potential duplication and gaps among the items
on the General Assembly’s agenda with regard to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which will
undoubtedly help us to implement the activities and
mandates of our Organization more effectively.
The President: In his statement, the representative
of Colombia mentioned the Chairs of the Committees
and the fact that the outgoing President of the General
Assembly should perhaps have had more to do with
that.
I would like to go on record before the Assembly as
saying how disappointed I am that there are no women
Committee Chairs at the seventy-second session. In
front of everyone here I am on record as saying that.
But it has nothing to do with the outgoing President
of the General Assembly; it is the Member States that
make those decisions. I have said — and I hope it will
be one of my legacies — that we are relying on the
regional groups to address this issue. If we want to
have gender parity in our representation, particularly
for the important Chairs of the six Main Committees,
it is up to the regional groups to nominate women to
put forward. The Assembly generally simply accepts
whomever the regional groups propose. So it is the
Member States that should address the matter through
their regional groups. It is not for either outgoing or

A/71/PV.96

incoming Presidents of the Assembly to do something
about. I put that back to the States very firmly.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): On behalf of my colleague
Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh and myself, I would like
to express our satisfaction with the successful outcome
of our efforts under the auspices of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly. With today’s adoption of resolution 71/323 we
have a good resolution before us and every confidence
that it will further improve and enrich the work of
the General Assembly. Our sincere appreciation goes
to Member States for all the constructive cooperation
and creative assistance they have given us during the
seventy-first session. It has been a privilege to chair the
Ad Hoc Working Group, and I do not exaggerate when
I say that today’s resolution is a success for us all. Once
again, consensus has carried the day, demonstrating
how much can be achieved when we work together in
a spirit of creative compromise and with clear common
goals before us.
Two years ago, resolution 69/321 focused primarily
on the area of the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, bringing multiple improvements to
the process. Last year, resolution 70/305 emphasized
strengthening the Office of the President of the General
Assembly and increasing its accountability. We should
recall that a code of ethics for the President of the
General Assembly is now included, as annex XI, in the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and that as
a result of resolution 70/305, His Excellency Mr. Peter
Thomson became the first President of the Assembly
in the history of the United Nations to take an oath
of office.
During the seventy-first session, our work in the
Ad Hoc Working Group was aimed mainly at improving
working methods. Among our achievements this year
I would particularly like to underline the efforts to
improve the interactive dialogue between Permanent
Missions and the Secretariat; the decision to publish
the first part of the Journal of the United Nations in all
six official languages of the United Nations throughout
the year, starting on 1 January 2018; and improvements
in election procedures and balloting. In addition,
special attention should be given to paragraph 30 of the
new resolution, which is designed to align the agenda
of the General Assembly with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

17-2795321/26

A/71/PV.96

We would like to sincerely thank the Secretariat
and, in particular Ms. Ruth de Miranda and Mr. Georg
Zeiner, for their continuous and highly professional
support extended throughout the year. Last but
definitely not least, we sincerely thank the President
of the General Assembly at its seventy-first session,
Mr. Peter Thomson, and his team for all the confidence
entrusted in the co-Chairs and all assistance provided.
It was indeed an honour to chair this ground-breaking
process and, once again, we thank the Assembly.
The President: I am sure that all Member States
agree with what I said earlier about thanking both the
Permanent Representative of Croatia and the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates for their
great leadership and very important work.
We have heard the last speaker in explanation of
position. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 121?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
Draft resolution (A/71/L.84)
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Brazil, who will introduce
draft resolution A/71/L.84.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): On behalf of the States
members of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) — Angola, Cabo Verde, GuineaBissau, Equatorial Guinea, Mozambique, Portugal,
Sao Tome and Príncipe, Timor-Leste and my own
country, Brazil — it is my honour to introduce, under
agenda item 126 (t), draft resolution A/71/L.84, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”.
The Community encompasses 276 million people
in nine countries and four continents, bound by a
common language and strong cultural ties. Portuguese
is the fifth most spoken language in the world. The
Community’s goals are to strengthen diplomatic and
political dialogue, enhance cooperation in all areas
and promote the Portuguese language. The CPLP
22/26

08/09/2017

is committed to reinforcing cooperation among its
member States and with other States and regional and
multilateral organizations, such as the United Nations
and its agencies, funds and programmes.
At the eleventh Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the CPLP, held in Brasilia on 31 October
and 1 November 2016, on the theme “The Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”, leaders recognized the
need to further promote political dialogue, the exchange
of experiences and cooperation to support, within the
Community, the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. At
the conference, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia
and Uruguay were admitted as associate observers.
The Community was fortunate to have the then
Secretary-General-designate,
António
Guterres,
present at its eleventh Summit. He was the first citizen
of a Portuguese-speaking country to occupy such a
distinguished position. As stated during the debate on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, the CPLP
is committed to the same general principles underlying
the functioning of the United Nations. The draft
resolution aims to deepen the CPLP’s partnership with
the United Nations in the pursuit of common objectives,
particularly in the sectors of human rights, health,
education, science, culture, food and agriculture, public
administration and science and technology.
The draft resolution recalls the importance of civil
society and the private sector in the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals within the
Community and notes with appreciation the first Global
Economic Forum of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
held in Timor-Leste in February 2016. It also stresses
the importance of partnerships to improve coordination
and cooperation in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
The draft resolution also takes note, with appreciation,
of the CPLP’s commitment to the promotion of
human rights, as well as to gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls.
The draft resolution stresses the need for GuineaBissau to continue to take concrete steps towards peace,
security and stability, welcomes the adoption of the sixpoint road map brokered by the Economic Community
of West African States, and endorses the Conakry
Agreement as the primary framework for a peaceful
resolution of the political crisis. It notes the active
engagement of the Secretary-General and his Special
17-27953

08/09/2017

Representative for Guinea-Bissau and recognizes the
role played by the Peacebuilding Commission and the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau. The draft resolution also welcomes the
support of the international community for GuineaBissau’s efforts in strengthening its democratic
institutions and moving towards sociopolitical stability,
reconciliation and economic development.
In conclusion, on behalf of the CPLP member
States, allow me to express our deep appreciation to
the countries that contributed to enriching the text
and those that sponsored the draft resolution. We are
very pleased with such a high level of sponsorship and
support this year, and therefore kindly request that the
draft resolution be adopted without a vote.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.84, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed on the draft
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/71/L.84: Algeria, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana,
Burundi, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Djibouti, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
Germany, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nauru, the
Niger, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Qatar, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Singapore, South Africa, the
Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, the United Arab Emirates,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.84?
Draft resolution A/71/L.84 was adopted (resolution
71/324).

A/71/PV.96

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (t) of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft decision A/71/L.85, circulated
under sub-item (x) of agenda item 126, “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development - GUAM”.
In order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
decision, it will be necessary to reopen consideration
of the sub-item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (x) of
agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(x) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
Draft decision (A/71/L.85)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/71/L.85, entitled “Succession
by the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development – GUAM in the General Assembly”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/71/L.85?
Draft decision A/71/L.85 was adopted (decision
71/556).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (x) of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.

17-2795323/26

A/71/PV.96

Agenda item 31 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the seventyfirst session. It is my understanding that it would be
desirable to include agenda item 31 in the draft agenda
of the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include agenda item 31 in the draft agenda
of its seventy-second session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 31?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 33
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the Assembly
decided to include agenda item 33 in the agenda of the
seventy-first session. It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item
to the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to defer consideration of this item
and to include it in the provisional agenda of its seventysecond session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 33?
It was so decided.

08/09/2017

consideration of this item be deferred to the seventysecond session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its seventy-second
session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 37?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 38
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the
Assembly decided to include this item in its agenda on
the understanding that there would be no consideration
of this item by the Assembly until further notice. In
connection with the item, I have received a note verbale
dated 11 April 2017 from the Permanent Mission of the
Comoros to the United Nations requesting the inclusion
of this item in the provisional agenda of the seventysecond session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include the item entitled “Question of the Comorian
island of Mayotte” in the draft agenda of the seventysecond session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 38?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 40

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan

The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development

The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda
of the seventy-first session. In connection with this
item, I have received a letter dated 15 August 2017
from the representative of Azerbaijan, requesting that

The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the Assembly
decided to include item 40 in the agenda of the seventyfirst session, in accordance with decision 60/508,
of 31 October 2005. In decision 60/508, the General
Assembly decided that this item shall remain on the

Agenda item 37

24/26

17-27953

08/09/2017

A/71/PV.96

agenda for consideration upon notification by a Member
State. Accordingly, this item has been included in the
draft agenda of the seventy-second session.

Agenda item 115 (continued)

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
40?

(i) Appointment of members of the Board of
the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on
Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns

It was so decided.
Agenda items 41 to 46
Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi
nuclear installations and its grave consequences
for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
international peace and security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the Assembly
decided to include items 41 to 46 in the agenda of the
seventy-first session, in accordance with paragraph 4
(b) of the annex to its resolution 58/316, of 1 July 2004.
In resolution 58/316, the General Assembly decided that
these items shall remain on the agenda for consideration
upon notification by a Member States. Accordingly,
these items have been included in the draft agenda of
the seventy-second session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
41 to 46?
It was so decided.

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments

The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the
Assembly decided to include this sub-item in the agenda
of the seventy-first session. It is my understanding
that it would be desirable to defer consideration of
this sub-item to the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of sub-item (i) of
agenda item 115 and to include it in the draft agenda of
its seventy-second session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (i) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the seventyfirst session. It is my understanding that it would be
desirable to include this item in the draft agenda of the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include agenda item 120 in the draft
agenda of its seventy-second session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 120?
It was so decided.

17-2795325/26

A/71/PV.96

08/09/2017

Agenda item 123 (continued)

Agenda item 155 (continued)

Strengthening of the United Nations system

Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor

(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the seventyfirst session. It is my understanding that it would be
desirable to include this item in the draft agenda of the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include sub-item (a) of agenda item 123 in
the draft agenda of the seventy-second session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (a) agenda item 123?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the
seventy-first session. In connection with this sub-item,
I have received a note verbale dated 5 September 2017
from the Permanent Mission of Algeria to the United
Nations requesting, on behalf of the Group of African
States, the deferral of this sub-item to the seventysecond session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include sub-item (a) of agenda item 126 in the draft
agenda of the seventy-second session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.

26/26

The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the seventy-first session. It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item
to the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of agenda item 155 and
to include it in the draft agenda of its seventy-second
session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 155?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15
The role of the United Nations in promoting a new
global human order
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016, the Assembly
decided to include this item in the agenda of the seventyfirst session.
In connection with this item, I have received a
letter dated 5 September 2017 from the representative
of Guyana to request that consideration of this item be
deferred to the seventy-third session of the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third
session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 15?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

17-27953
