22
THIRD

MEETING

Held

at Church House, Westminster, London,
on Monday, 28 January 1946, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. N. J. 0. MAKIN (Australia).
Present:
The representatives of the following
countries : Australia, Brazil, China, Egypt,
France, Mexico, Netherlands, Poland, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.
16.

1, Adoption

Provisional

agenda

of the agenda.

TROlSlEME

SEANCE

Tenue d Church House, Westminster,
L~n&@s*
18 lundi 28 januier 1946, d 15 heures.
&&dent:
M. N. J. 0. MAKIN (A-&die
1.
Prdsents: Les repr&entants des pays suivmw r
Australie,
Bresil,
Chine,
Egy@e,
Prac%
des R&p?Mexique, Pays-Bas, Pologne, Union
bliques sociahstes SOVi&@X!S,
RoYaUmie-urua
Etats-Unis d’Am&ique.
, 16.

1. Adoption

Ordre

du jour provisoire

de l’ordre du jour.

2. Letter from the Head of the Iranian delegation to the Executive Secretary dated 19
January 1946.l
Letter.from
the Head of the USSR delegation to the President of the Security Council
dated 24 January 1946 (document S/W/2) .I

2. Lcttre du chef de la dClCgation iraniennc
au
Secretaim exkcutif, datCe du 19 jmvier
1946l.
Lettre du chef de la delegation
de l”Unian
des Rtpubliques
socialistes sovietiqu@
au
President du Conseil de &ur+id,
da& du
24 janvier 1946 (document S/w/2)
‘.

3, Letter from the Acting Head of the USSR
delegation to the President of the Security
Council dated 21 January 1946.2

3. Lettre du chef par intkrim de la d&;gatian
de 1’Union des RCpubliques socialistes SOV&
tiques au PrCsident du Conseil de FA?cu~~.~&
datte du 21 janvier 19462.

4. Letter from the Head of the Ukrainian SSR
delegation to the President of the Security
Council dated 21 January 1946.*

4. Lettre du chef de la d&legation clc la :Rep~blique socialiste sovi&ique
d’Ukraine
atl
PrCsident du Conseil de s&uritE,
dat
21 janvier 1946’.

5. Letter from the Head of the Yugoslav delegation to the Executive Secretary (undated) .’

5. Lettre du chef de la dc%gation yougodiswe
au SecrCtaire extcutif (sans date) ‘$

17.

Filming of proceedings

The PRESIDENT : The first matter that 1 would
like to submit to members of the Security Council is the question as to the filming of the proceedings of this session. A request has been made
that there might be a filming, not just of a part
of the proceedings, but of the whole of the proceedings. This morning, when this matter was
referred to me, I indicated that possibly the
Council might feel willing to approve of from ten
minutes to a quarter of an hour of its proceedings
being filmed for documentary purposes, but it is
quite evident that this does not suffice for the
needs of those who are associated with the filming
of the proceedings. I understand from the representations that ~the Press has made about the
matter, that the Press feels that if there is to b,e
a complete documentation of the proceedings of
the Council, it is essential for the whole of the
proceedings to be filmed.
I would like members,of the Council to determine whether there is any condition of discomfort or distraction that is likely to arise by reason
of this. I may say that the Press has indicated
to me that it has sought to minimize the amount
of lighting that, has to be done for the filming of
our proceedings so as to cause no more discomfort than is necessary to members of ‘the Security
’ Sea, oficial
Rmords of the Security Council, First
yew, First Series, Supplement No. 1; Annex 2A.

‘Ibid.,
‘Ibid.,
‘Ibid.,

Supplement No. 1; Annex 3.
S upplement No. 1; Annex 4.
S upplement No. 1; Annex 5.

17.

Prise de vues de la s6anee

Le PROWENT
(traduit de l’anglais) : La pr&
miere question que je voudrais soumettre
8ux
membres du Conseil de stcuritC est relative B la
prise de vues de la stance tout enti&re. On m’as
demand& l’autorisation
de filmer, non pas trne
partie. de la seance, mais la sCance tout enti&rc.
Ce matin, lorsque la question m’a CttS posclie, j’ai
fait observer que le Conseil accepterait peut-&tie
de laisser filmer la seance pendant &x M
ou un quart d’heure, a titre documentairc
il est bien Cvident que cda n’est pas su
pour satisfaire les opCrateurs de p&es de
Je crois savoir que, d’ap& leurs propres d&Clarations, les repr&entants de la presse consid&rent:
qu’il est essentiel de filmer indgralement
211tg
dtbats du Conseil si l’on veut possCder un
documentation compl&e.

Je voudrais done savoir si, de l’avis &s rrmm+
bres du Conseil, ces prises de vues seraierit
cause de gene ou de distraction pour les rep
sentants. J’ajoute que, selon ses dColaratic
Presse a cherche a causer le mains de g&e
sible aux membres du Conseil, en rCd
l’&clairage’ au minimum
compatible avec ],es
cessitis de la prise de vues, Quelqu’un
a-t-a
‘vpir

Prem&

Procds-usrbaux

oflcisls

du Conseil ds s~~ou,.ig ’
Suppl&ment
No 1;. I;

Annhe, Premibre Strie,

Annexe 2A.
’ Ibid.9 SupplCment No 1; Annexe 3.
: fi!fj pplkment
No 1; Annexe 4.
2 .j UPplCment No 1; Annexe 5.

St
s
,f<

23
Council in their deliberations, Has any member
of the Council any observations to make about
the question whether the whole of the proceedings should be filmed or whether there should be
only part of the proceedings filmed?

observations B prisenter, en ce qui concerne la
prise de vues de la totalit& ou d’une partie seulement de la sdance?

Mr. BEV~N (United Kingdom) : We may be
very handsome and everybody may want to see
us, but it is very uncomfortable to have these
lights. I should have thought that if they had a
period in which they could film the proceedings
for the sake of posterity, that would be enough
and leave us a little comfort to discuss our problems.

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de Vanglaz’s) : Nous sommes peut-&re t&s beaux, et il
se peut que tout le monde desire nous voir, mais
il est g&-rant d’&tre expose! B ces projecteurs. I1
me semble que si on accordait aux operateurs un
certain temps pour filmer la stance, histoire de
satisfaire la postCritC, cela serait suffisant et nous
laisserait un peu de tranquillit& pour nous occu‘per de nos problemes.

BADAWI Pasha (Egypt) : I am of the same
opinion. They could have ten or fifteen minutes,
but not all the time. They could take the liberty
of filming once or twice for a short period from
time to time during the session.

BADAWI Pacha (Egypte) (traduit de PangZuis) : Je suis du m&me avis. Les operateurs
pourraient disposer de dix ou quince minutes,
mais pas de toute la seance. 11spourraient peuti?tre tourner pendant quelques instants, une ou
deux fois au tours de la s&me.

The PRESIDENT: It has been suggested to me
that it would not be possible to have the proceedings filmed from time to time; it either has
to be just for a short period, or for the whole of
the session, May I suggest that we might possibly
permit the filming to proceed for fifteen minutes,
and then determine whether it might be desirable
to have it discontinued. Those who are making
the film must realize that permission is given for
only fifteen minutes; after that we shall consider
whether there may be any further filming of
this present session of the Security Council.

Le PRUDENT (traduit de l’anglais) : On m’a
fait entendre qu’il ne serait pas possible d’optrer
de temps en temps: il ne peut s’agir que d’un
court moment, ou de toute la dance. Nous pourrions peut-&re autoriser les 0pCrateurs A tourner
pendant un quart d’heure. Nous pourrions alors
decider s’il y a lieu d’interrompre la prise de
vues. Les optirateurs devront cependant comprendre que l’autorisation ne leur est donnee que
pour quinze minutes, et que nous d&iderons ensuite si la prise de vues de cette seance doit
continuer.

18.

Adoption

of the agenda

18.

The PRESIDENT: The first item is the adoption
of the agenda for this Security Council meeting,
I should like to say that, since the documentation
for item 2 was listed, another communication
from the delegation of Iran has been received
and distributed. Is it the Council’s wish to add
to the documentation
already listed in item 2
the note of 26 January 1946 from the Head of
the Iranian delegation to the President of the
Security Council. ?l If there are no objections, I
take it that that proposition is adopted.
The proposal was adopted.

The EXECUTWE SECRETARY: I must apologize, Mr, President, for a mistake for which I am

‘Ibid.,

Supplement

No. 1; &mex 5.
^.

de I’ordre

du jour

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’angluis) : Le
Conseil doit tout d’abord proceder A I’adoption
de l’ordre du jour de la presente sCance, Depuis
que la liste des documents relatifs au point 2 de
l’ordre du jour a et6 Ctablie, nous avons recu de
la d&legation de l’Iran une autre comrnunication qui a td distribute. Le Conseil d&sire-t-il
ajouter a la documentation qui existe deja sur
le point 2, la note adresste, le 26 janvier 1946,
au Prisident du Conseil de sCcuritC par le chef
de la delegation iranienne’? S’il n’y a pas d’objections, je considkre la proposition comme adoptee,

s

La proposition est adopt&e.

The PRESSDENT: The next thing, before we
actually adopt item 1 of the agenda, is a communication that was received from the representative of Yugoslavia bringing to the notice of
the Security Council an application by the country of Albania for membership of the United
Nations.* There has been some unfortunate misunderstanding regarding the way in which it
was listed today upon the agenda. I will call
upon the Executive Secretary to explain how that
has happened.

‘See Oficial &GO&J of the Security Couscil,
Year, First Series, Supplement No. 1; ‘Annex 2A.

Adoption

First

Le PRESIDENT (tmduit de PangZaG) : D’autre
part, avant de proceder B I’adoption du point 1,
je dois signaler que nous avons regu de la dtlCgation de la Yougoslavie une communication
portant a la connaissance du Conseil de sPlcur~t~
une demande d’admission aux Nations Unies,
pr&entte
par l’Albanie2.
Malheureusement,
il y a eu un malentendu en ce qui concerne
I’inscription de cette question a l’ordre du jour
de la sCance d’aujourd’hui, Je donne la parole au
Secr&aire extcutif, qui vous expliquera exactqment ce qui s’est prod&,

Le &sas&mmE EX~C~JTIF (traduit

de Pm- I

glais) : Je m’excuse d’une erreur dont je auis :
’ Vpir Ptocdwcrbaux,
ofJioicls .du Can~cil de JhWitdj
( ;I
~~x~2AhnCe,
l?reuubrc She, SupplCmqnt ,No,f 1 ,i ” 1I/
,”
“2
(),,,U
‘,I
n
’ Ibid., S’upplhcat No 1; Annex@ 5~. 8,1’~‘_ ,_(; .I ’ ”
I ,,,:‘I
>
9__
,‘. :’ I/ L,,:>,. ‘,
,:
>I
J
‘, . ~;*

’
:
’v

24

responsable.Vous pourrez voir dans une lettre’
que j’avais a&es&e en votre nom, le 26 janyqier,

r,=+spon$ble. You will see in the letter1 dated
26 January
which I wrote on your behalf to
members of the Council, that I raised this question and suggested that it was your wish that the
co&cil
should discuss at the beginning of this
meet;ing whether this item should be put on the
agendaor not. It is apparent from the letter
itself that item 5 should not have been put on
the draft agenda, which was attached. It is for
you now to decide whether it should in fact go
on the agenda.

aux membres du Conseil, que j’avais souI’e$
cette question et indique que vous desiriez VQrr
le Conseil discuter au d&but de la presente s&tnce
l’imcription
de la demande de I’Albanie a l’ordre
du jour. I1 ressort de la lettre elle-meme que.Io
point 5 n’aurait pas cl0 &tre inscrit au projet
d’ordre du jour qui y &ait joint. C’est marr%tenant au Conseil de dtcider si cette question d&
ou non figurer sur cet ordre du jour.

The PRESIDENT
: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Council that the application of
Albania shall be treated as an item of the
agenda?

considtrer que Ie Conseil desire traiter la demande de 1’Albanie comme un point de l’ordre
du jour?

Mr, STETTINIUS (United States of America).:
You will recall’ that I referred briefly to this
question the last time we met. In view of the
position taken by the Executive Committee, and
also by the Preparatory Commission, that new
applications for membership would not be acted
upon at the first part of the General Assembly
session,I feel it would be best not to include this
item at this session of the Council. The admission of new Members is a serious and important
matter, requiring the most careful consideration
of the Members of the United Nations, In the
circumstances, it is apparent that the only reasonable and fair method of giving proper and
adequate consideration to applications for new
membership would be to defer all applications
until some time prior to the next meeting of the
General Assembly, when the Security Council
would have had an opportunity to deal with the
number of applications that have accrued at
that time,

( Etats-Unis
d’Am&ique
)
(traduit ‘de l’anglais) : Vous vous souvenez qUe
j’ai deja parlC brievement de cette question h
notre derniere seance. Le Comiti: ex&cutif et 1st
Commission preparatoire
ayant estimj: clue 1cS
demandes d’admission de nouveaux Membres nr~
devraient pas &tre examintes au corns de la prem&e partie de la premiere session de 1’AssembI~c
gCnCrale, il vaudrait mieux, je pense, ne pan
inclure ce point a l’ordre du jour de cette session.
L’admission de nouveaux Membres est une quation grave et importante qui demande l’examen
le plus attentif de la part des Membres
des
Nations Unies. Dam ces conditions, il est clair
que la seule man&e raisonnable et juste d’accorder. aux demandes la consideration
qu’elles
meritent est d’en renvoyer l’examen B une epoque
qui prectderait de peu la deuxitme partie de la
session de I’Assemblee g&&tle.
Le Con&l aurait
aiors l’occasion d’etudier I’ensemble
des demandes dadmission reFues a cc moment-la.

The PRESIDENT: You move that?

Mr, STETTINIUS (United States of America) :
That is the motion: that that item should not be
included in the agenda of this meeting.
Mr. MODZELEWSKI (Poland)
(translated
from Prench) : I do not think we should be setting a good example by postponing the question
of the admission of Albania. The United Nations
is concerned that all countries which qualify for
membership should not be kept waiting too long,
if they apply for. admission. There is nothing to
prevent us from considering the substance of the
question, if not today, then at least at our next
meeting.
Mr. DE FREITAS-VALLE (Brazil) : I think this
is not a particular question concerning Albania.
The point is that it would be far better to have
all applications for new membership studied during the intervals between Assemblies, and to
have the Security Council meeting just before
the Assembly report on them. This is a question
of principle regarding all such new applications.

’ SCC. Oficial
Records
of the Security Council, First
Yw, First Series, Supplement No. 1; Annex 5.

Le PP&IDENT (traaluit de l’anghis) : Puiis-je

M.

STETTINIUS

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Z’anglais) : C’est I$
votre proposition?
M.

( Etats-Unis

STETTINIUS,

d’Am&ique

)

(traduit de Z’anglaisj : Je propose que cette ques-

tion ne soit pas inscrite
prtsente seance.

a l’ordre

du jour de Ia

(Pologne) : Je ne crois pm
un bon exemple en ajonrnant la question de l’admission de l’Albanie, Les
Nations Unies ont inter& a ce que tous les Btaa
qui meritent d’en &tre j?/iembres n’attendent p&q
trap s’ils demandent a &tre admis, Bien ne nOuS
emp&che d’etudier la question de fond, sinon
aujourd’hui,
du moins B notre prochaine seance.

Me MO~ELEWSKI
que nous donnerions

M. DE FREITAS-VALLE
Z’anglais) : Je crois qu’il

(Bresil) (traduit de
ne s’agit pas seulement
du cas particulier de l’Albanie. Le fait est qu’il
vaudrait bien mieux procider g l’etude de tot&es
les nouvelles demandes d’admission,
au co~urs
des intervalles entre les sessions de l’Assembl6e.
Le Conseil de sEcuritC en ferait alors un rapport
a la stance prectdant la session de l’Assembll6e.
C’est une question de principe, qui s’appliqtm
&
toutes les nouvelles demandes de cet ordre.
1 yoir
T;ee~25

Pm+-verbaux.

officiels

AnnCe, Premhe

du

S&e,

Conseil

de sdcu&d

Suppldment

No

1f

25
Mr. BEVIN (United Kingdom) : I support thai
view.
Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : There h
no necessity to link the question of admitting
any one country to membership of the United
Nations with other, or a series of other, question:
of a similar nature. On the contrary, it would
seem to me that consideration of all applications
as and when they are submitted would be very
convenient and necessary. Apart from this, as
far as I recall, the Security Council at its last
meeting1 decided to place the question of
Albania’s membership of the United Nations on
the agenda for the following meeting. In my
opinion, therefore, this item should be placed on
the agenda and the substance of the matter
should be discussed.
BADAWI Pasha (Egypt) : The question depends rather on the prospects of the length of
‘this part of the session. It would assist us if we
could tell beforehand how long this part of the
session would last. Naturally, as long as it is a
question of time and a question of the necessary
opportunity to discuss this question, unless we
know something about the length of this part of
the session of the General Assembly it is difficult
for us to decide it.
Mr. Wellington
Koo (China) : This question of the application of Albania for membership
of the United Nations really has two aspects:
one of principle and one of procedure. I think
that in principle, every peace-loving nation could
apply for membership, and it is for the Security
Council to decide. Therefore, so far as the insertion of this question in the agenda is concerned,
personally I think that perhaps we might do that
if there is no serious objection, There is also the
question of procedure. This is the first application, and the Council is just organizing itself. I
take it that the Council, in order to be in a position to consider not only this application but
any other applications, naturally will want to
formulate some procedure which should be suitable for all cases.

If this view is sound, I think the Council will
be fully justified in considering when to take up
that question, and whether it would not be
useful first of all to have a small sub-committee
to suggest some procedure for dealing with applications in general. In short, I look upon this
question in two parts. One is a matter of principle which would seem to lead us to put the
question on the agenda. On the other hand, the
Council is its own master and can decide when
to take up the discussion of a particular matter.
Before taking up and considering any application, I think it is desirable, perhaps, to have some
simple procedure which will be applicable not
only to this one case, but also to other cases.

The PRESIDENT: May I suggest to the representative of the United States of America that
zSte pages

20 and, 21.

M. BEVIN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de Z’angluis) : J’appuie ce point de vue.
M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Rtpubliques social&es sovietiques) (traduit du ruse) : II n’est
pas indispensable de faire dependre une question
concernant l’admission d’un Etat aux Nations
Unies d’une ou de plusieurs autres questions
analogues. Je crois au contraire qu’il serait t&s
opportun et mCme indispensable d’examiner
toutes les declarations a ce sujet, au fur et ?L
mesure qu’elles nous parviennent. En outre, si
j’ai bien compris, il a CtC dCcidt B la derniere
seance’ du Conseil de securiti: que la question de
l’admission de 1’Albanie aux Nations Uniea
figurerait i l’ordre du jour de la prochaine sCance
du Conseil. J’estime done que la question devrait
hre portee a l’ordre du jour et examinCe quant
au fond.
BADAWI Pacha (Egypte)
(traduit de Panglais) : Tout dCpend, dans une certaine mesure,
de la durCe probable de la prCsente session de
1’Assemblte g&&ale. Notre &he serait facilide
si nous pouvions dire d’avance combien durera
comme il
la pr&ente session. Naturellement,
s’agit d’une question de temps et de savoir s’il
est opportun de discuter la question, il nous est
difficile de decider sans avoir une idee de la
durte de cette partie de la session.
M. Wellington
Koo (Chine)
(trddtlit de
Panglair) : En r&.litt, cette question de la demande d’admission de 1’Albanie au sein des
Nations Unies se prbente sous deux aspects: il y
a une question de principe et une question de procedure. Je pense qu’en principe toutes les nations
pacifiques peuvent demander leur admission,
et c’est au Conseil de sCcuritC de d&cider. C’est
pourquoi, en ce qui concerne l’inscrlption de la
question a l’ordre du jour, j’estime personnellement que nous pourrions y proceder s’il n’y a
aucune objection majeure. 11y a aussi la question
de procedure. 11 s’agit de la premi&re dernande
d’admission, et le Conseil de stcuritC en est encore
a la periode d’organisation. Je suppose que pour
Ctudier non seulement la demande de l’Albanie,
mais toutes celles qui pourraient nous parvenir,
le Conseil desirera naturellement determiner une
procCdure qui s’appliquerait a tous les cas.
Si mon point de vue est raisonnable, je pense
que le Conseil aurait parfaitement
le droit
d’examiner quand on devrait d&cuter cette question, et s’il ne serait pas opportun de nommer
tout d’abord un sous-comitt restreint qui sugg6
rerait une procedure s’appliquant d’une man&e
g&n&ale a toutes les demandes, Autrement dit,
je considere que la question est double: d’une
part, une question de principe, qui pardt nous
amener B inscrire la question a l’ordre du jour;
d’autre part, le Conseil est le ma!tre de sea actes
et peut decider du moment oti il engagera la
discussion sur un sujet particulier. Avant d’examiner une demande, je crois .qu’il serait d&able de dCterminer une procCdure simple, applicable non seulement a ce cas particulier, mais &
tolls les cas.
Le ~L&IDENT
(traduit de l’anglais) : Je Bow
drais faire observer au repr&entant des ’ EtatsN
’ Voir pages

20 ct 21.
II

,,

,,

j

26

i

even if this item is placed upon the agenda, it is
within the province of the member to make such
move as he may feel proper at that time wrth
regard to the course he has suggested? The fact
of it being included in the agenda at this stage
does not determine the matter. That is a matter
which will be considered at the stage when we
reach that item on the agenda. It wiIl then still
be Possible for the representative of the United
States of America or any other member of the
Council to ,make his suggestion.

Unis d’Am6rique que, m&me si cette question est
inscrite a l’ordre du jour, ‘il sera toujours po:ssiblc
a un membre de faire telle proposition qu’il jugera utile, lorsque la question viendra en discussion. Le fait que la question soit inscrite a l’ordre
du jour en ce moment n’affecte en rien la situation. Cette question sera examinte
quand le
Conseil en arrivera a cc point de l’ordre du jour,
et il sera encore possible B ce moment-la, pour le
reprCsentant des Etats-Unis d’AmQique
ou tout
autre membre du Conseil, de faire dcs suggestions.

The suggestion of the representative of the
United States of America is that the placing of
this item, the application of Albania for admission as a Member of the United Nations, on
the agenda of this. Security Council should be
deferred until some time just before the second
part of the first session of the General Assembly.
IS that correct?

Le representam des Etats-Unis d’Amf:rique
propose que la question de l’admission de l’Albanie au sein des Nations Unies soit inscrite plus
tard B l’ordre du jour du Conseil de st5curit6,
c’est-a-dire & une seance qui prCcCderait de peu
la deuxieme partie de la premiere session de
I’Assemblte gtntrale. Est-ce exact?

Mr. STETTINIUS (United States of America<) :
I think the important point is that, as a result
of the action of the Executive Committee and the
Preparatory Commission, undoubtedly a number
of peace-loving States which would like to join
the United Nations refrained from making ap
plication during this period. My suggestion is not
aimed, as the representative of Brazil has said,
at Albania at all. The question of admitting
Albania does not enter into the matter. It is
merely a question of fairness and equity to all
peace-loving States. I think it would be much
better to adopt a procedure for deferring this
whole question and dealing with it at the forthcoming meeting of the Assembly.

M. STETTINIUS
( Etats-Unis
d’Amc5rique)
est,
(traduit de l’anglais) : Le point important
je crois, qu% la suite des decisions du Ciomit6
extcutif et de la Commission prbparatoire,
un
certain nombre d’Etats pacifiques, qui, saris
aucun doute, seraient desireux de se joindre aux
Nations Unies, s’abstinrent,
a l’epoque,
de
demander leur admission. Ma suggestion ne vise
done pas la seule Albanie, comme l’a d&liar& le
reprtsentant du Br&il. L’admission de 1’Albanie
n’est pas en question. II s’agit seulement de
loyaute et d’Cquit6 envers les Etats pacifiques et
je pense qu’il vaudrait bien mieux adopter une
procedure et Ctudier toute la question low de la
prochaine partie de la session de l’Assembl&: g&n%
rale.

The PRESIDENT: I will now submit this matter to the vote of the Council, Those who are in
favour of the submission by the representative of
the United States of America that the matter be
deferred and not included ‘at this stage upon
the agenda of the Security Council, please indicate by raising the right hand,

Le PR~SIDBNT (traduit de Z’anglaz’s) : J”invite
le Conseil a se prononcer a cc sujet. La proposition du reprtsentant des Etats-Unis d’Am&ique
tend a ajourner la demande de 1’Albanie et g ne
pas inscrire la question & l’ordre du jour du
Conseil de stScuritC pour le moment. Que ceux
qui sont en faveur de cette proposition veuillent
bien lever la main.

Show of hands.

Le uote a lieu B main levke.

Against?
Show of hands,

Contre?
Le vote a lieu ct main levke.

Abstentions?
Show of hands.

Abstentions?
Le vote a lieu (z main levke.

The PRESIDENT: I am afraid some members
have not quite understood the position,
Mr.

PAUL-B• NCOUR (France)
(tran&zted
from voting, and I
should like to give the reason for doing so, The
representative of the United States of America
asked that the question be postponed until the
second part of the present Assembly, The Chinese
representative suggested, and I fully approve,
that we should first settle the procedure. But did
he mean that we should settle it now and that the
question of the admission of Albania could be
considered during the present session or, on the
/.
-.

from French) : I abstained

, Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Panglais) : Je crois
que certains membres n’ont pas tres bien compris;
la situation.
M. PAWL-BONCOUR (France) : Je m’abstiens
et je voudrais en donner la raison, Le rep&sentant des Etats-Unis d’Am&ique
a demandt
que la question fat ajournte jusqu’a la deuxitme
partie de la pr&ente AssemblCe. Le representant
de la Chine a propod (ce dont je suis t&s partisan) que nous fixions d’abord la procedure. &/iais
entendait-il que nous la fixions d&s maintenant
et
que la question de l’admission de 1’Albani.e pourrait &tre Ctudite db la presente session ou, au
contraire, sa formule impliquait-elle,
cornme l’a

27
contrary, did his suggestion imply, as the United
States representative asked, that the particular
case of Albania should be placed on the agenda
for the next session? I abstained from voting
because I was not sure of the exact meaning of
the proposal.

demand6 la d&nation
des Etats-Unis, que le
CBSparticulier de-1’Albanie serait mis a l’ordre
du jour de la prochaine session? Je m’abstiens
parce que j’ignore la portee exacte de la proposition.

BADAWI Pasha (Egypt) : The application has
been put on the agenda of the Council, on the
immediate agenda. That conveyed the idea that
it should be discussed in the course of this week
or next week. The proposal of the representative
of China amounted to a distinction between the
actual agenda and a kind of permanent agenda
for the Council on which he was willing that this
application should be registered. If a distinction
is admitted between an actual and immediate
agenda and a general agenda kept of ‘questions
for the Council according to the dates of their
arrival, there will not be the least objection to
the inscription of this application on the general
agenda. But, as I have already mentioned, the
problem is that of not knowing exactly the time
which would be required ‘in this part of the session to discuss this question. Supposing that
there is a discussion of the general principles,
which would be applicable to other countries, I
think that this discussion would require some
time. Unless we know something certain about
the length of time which this point would take,
we are really unable to vote for immediate discussion of this problem.

BADAWI Pacha (Egypte) (~ru&it de Pangluti) : La demande a Cd inscrite a l’ordre du
jour du Conseil: je veux dire B l’orclre du jour
immCdiat. Ce qui signifie qu’elle devrait &re discutke cette semaine, ou la semaine prochaine. La
proposition du representant de la Chine &ablissait une distinction entre l’ordre du jour imm&
diat et une sorte d’ordre du jour permanent du
Conseil. Et le representant de la Chine ttait pr&
B voir cette demande inscrite B l’ordre du jour
permanent. Si l’on ttablit une distinction entre
un ordre du jour irnmediat et un ordre du jour
gentral, celui-ci comprenant les questions dans
l’ordre de leur reception, il n’y a pas la moindre
objection a inscrire la demande de I’Albanie a
I’ordre du jour gCn&al. La difficultC est, comme
je l’ai deja dit, que nous ne savons pas exactement combien de temps il faudrait, au cours de
cette partie de la session de l’Assembk$e, pour
discuter la question. A supposer que nous discutions des principes gCnCraux a appliquer pour
I’admission d’autres pays, cette discussian nous
prendrait, je crois, un certain temps. A mains
d’avoir quelque indication sur la durCe de cette
par-tie de la session de l’Assemblte, il nous est
impossible de nous prononcer pour la discussion
immddiate de ce probleme.

Mr. Wellington
Koo (China) : Will you
allow me to make an explanation? Perhaps in
putting forward my views a little while ago I
spoke a little too brieffy.

M. Wellington Koo (Chine)
(truduit de
rang&) : Pouvez-vous me permettre de donner
quelques explications ? Peut-&re me suis-je exprim6 un peu trop brikement en vous exposant,
tout a l’heure, mon point de vue.
I1 y avait d’une part une question de principe
qui me paraissait importante. Quand un pays
demande son admission, sa demandk est certtiement recevable et, si elle est pr&entCe en bonne
et due forme, il me semble qu’elle doit venir A
l’ordre du jour. C’est ensuite au Conseil de
decider quand, et comment, il la discutera et de
dgterminer si I’Etat en question satisfait ou non
aux conditions requises par la Charte. Quand le
Conseil doit-il en discuter? C’est & lui-mCme de le
d&cider. Ainsi, l’inscription d’une demande B
l’ordre du jour n’oblige aucunement le Conseil g
discuter la question aujourd’hui, demain ou la
semaine prochaine.
D’autre part, le point d’ordre pratique souleve
par le representant des Etats-Unis d’Am&ique
me parait 6galement t&s important. Je pense
que, pour une question de cette importance, non
*
pas seulement
pour
telle
ou
telle
demande
en
-.
.,:g
particulier, mais pour toutes celles que nous recevrons, celle de 1’Albanie &ant la premi&,
le
Conseil dtsirera examiner le cas, l’ttudier d’une
fagon plus complete, et, peut-&re, adopter une
,, ,,
prockdure g&n?rale, applicable, non seulement h
un cas particulier, mais a toutes les demand&,
Cela, pour ma part, me pa&t tr& desirable, I \ _:
C&t pourquoi, vu ce double aspect de&
:,,
question, je propose d’inscrire celle-ci 4 Co%lre,
du jour, laissant enti&ement ~au ‘Oonseit de s&7 : ,,ii/$
curit le soin de ‘d&ider du, ,moment,,,o~
&;$a;
i,
I/,‘I ‘,,:I
‘,,L
,” I< ),. _,,) I_ a,‘>,’
l”:)L1
.~,,
” i,,,‘,“’
”1
,> : I _>;:
,, ’ ,,A), _’ ’ ‘j.’

I was impressed, on the one hand, by the
question of principle. When a nation has applied
for membership, that application is certainly
admissible, and if it has been made in the proper
manner, then it seems to me that it should go
on the agenda. However, when and how to discuss it, and whether the qualifications of the particular applicant State meet or do not meet the
requirements under the Charter are points for
the Council to discuss. When is the Council to
discuss them? That is entirely up to the Council
to decide. Thus, the placing of an application
on the agenda by no means binds the Council
to discuss it today, tomorrow or next week.
On the other hand, I was very much impressed
also by the practical point raised by the representative of the United States of America. In a
matter of such importance, not with reference
to any one particular applicant, but with reference to all applications, since this is the first case,
the Council would want to consider the question
from a more comprehensive viewpoint, perhaps
studying, formulating and then eventually adopting some general procedure which would be applicable not to one case, but to all cases. It seems
to me that that would be very desirable.
Therefore, in view of both aspects of the
question, I suggest that we place the question
on the agenda, leaving it entirely to the Security
Council to decide whencto, discuss it, Personally,
) r,!
‘.

28
I would urge the Security Council not to take it
up until some general procedure is worked out
so that whatever procedure we follow- in this
particular case will also be followed .m other
cases, This will show the orderly way m which
the Security Council seeks to deal with applications in general.
Therefore, when you put the question to the
vote to me it is a matter of principle that I
vote> for insertion in the agenda. But if you
should take a vote on the second part, understood in the sense I have just explained, I would
vote for it also, because it seems to me that both
are very useful and very practical and would lead
to consideration.
Let me add one more word. Inclusion in the
agenda in no way commits the Council or any
member as to the position each delegation may
take; it simply puts the question on the agenda
and leaves it to the Security Council to decide
when to take it up and how to take it up.
Mr.

MODZELEWSKI

(Poland)

(translated

from French) : The question of procedure

has
been raised, With regard to this subject, I should
like to remind all the members that the Security
Council sits permanently. The fact of fixing the
agenda of the Security Council today does not
mean that we must exhaust the agenda today.
The General Assembly will probably end in February, but the Security Council will continue to
sit. It will therefore be able to continue dealing
with the questions proposed during the present
session of the Assembly. Besides, the Security
Council will have a number of questions to settle
between the two General Assemblies. That is
why I voted against the proposal of the representative of the United States of America,
I voted in favour of discussing the Albanian
application in order not to discourage other
States not Members of the United Nations who
may wish to make similar applications.
Mr. VYSHINSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : It seems
to me that if we accept the proposal made by
Mr, Stettinius, certain complications may arise
in discussing the question of the admission of
new Members to the United Nations.
This proposal is to the effect that we should
not discuss single applications, but should wait
until several have been made. On the one hand
it is not stated how many such application;
would be deemed sufficient for the matter to receive consideration. How many should there be:
two, three, or five? On the other hand, it is not
certain that a sufficient number of these applications would be filed by the date fixed for discussion of the matter.
And again, in Article 4 of the Charter which
deals with the question of admission bf new
Members, there is nothing which precludes the
consideration of single applications. There is
nothing in the Charter to support Mr, Stettinius’
ProPosal. 1 would even be inclined to think that

discutera. Personnellement, j’engagerai le COnsa
de s&uritd g ne point l’aborder
jueiqu’a
Ce
qu’une procddure g&n&ale ait Ct.4 fix&% <”
manihre que cette proctdure, quelle gu’elle SO&
appliqu& B cc cas particulier,
soit Cgalement
appliqu& aux autres cas et puisse &tre un e=mple
de la manitre dont le Conseil de sicuritd traitera
les demandes en g&&al.
C’cst pourquoi, lorsque la quEstion est misc
aux VO~X, c’est pour moi une question de principe quc de voter pour l’inscription & l’ordre du
jour. Mais si l’on vote sur le deuxikme aspect de
la question, je voterai tgalement pour, car la
deux cbtts du problhme me semblent avoir leur
utilitf? et leur caracdre pratique et ils sent h
Ctudier.
Permcttez-moi une dernihre observation : l’inscription a l’ordre du jour n’engage nullement
16
Con&
ou l’un de ses membres, a prendre te&
g
ou telle position. Ce n’est qu’une inscription
l’ordre du jour et toute latitude est Iaisst?e au
Conseil pour d&cider du moment et de la :manibe
dont il I’abordera.
M, MODZELEWSKI
(Pologne) : On a pa%
de la question de proddure. A ce sujet, je VOUdrais rappeler it tous les membres que le Comei
de sCcuritt sitge d’une fac;on permanente.
Le
fait de fixer aujourd’hui
I’ordre du jour du
Conseil de sCcuritC ne signifie pas que nous
devions ipuiser aujourd’hui
m6me cet ordre du
jour. L’AssemblCe g&&ale
se terminera
probablement au mois de fCvrier; mais le Conseil
de sCcuritC continuera de siCger. II pourra done
continuer g s’occuper des questions qui sent proposies au tours de la prCsente session de l’Assemblie. Du reste, le Conseil de sCcuritC aura h
trancher plusieurs questions entre les deux AssemblCes g&&ales.
C’est pourquoi
j’ai votP;
centre la motion proposCe par le reprCsenta.nt
des Etats-Unis d’AmCrique.
Je me suis pronon& en faveur de la discussion
de la demande de 1’Albanie pour ne point ddcourager les autres Etats non membres
des
Nations Unies qui dCsirent nous prCsenter une
demande similaire.
M. VYCHINSKY
(Union des Rtpubliques
socialistes soviCtiques) ( traduit du russe ) : J’estime
que si nous acceptons la proposition de M. Stettinius, certaines complications
pourraient
surgir
au moment de la discussion du problkme ‘de l’admission de nouveaux Membres dans l’organisation des Nations Unies.
Cette proposition est de ne pas examiner
les
demandes une a une, mais d’attendre. quc plusieurs demandes nous parviennent. Mais il n’a
pas 6t6 spccifi6 quel serait le nombre de dernandes
qu’on devrait considCrer comme suffisant pow
l’examen de la question. Combien devrait-on
en
avoir: deux, trois ou cinq? D’autre pae, il n’et
pas certain qu% la date dCsignCe pour l’examm
de la question, les demandes nous serorlt parvenues en nombre suffisant.
En outre, 1’Article 4 de la Charte, qui traite
de la question de l’admission de nouveaux Membres, n’exclut nullement l’examen de demandea
isolhes, 11 n’y a rien dans la Charte qui permette
d’appuyer la proposition de M. Stettinius. Quant
au fond de la question, je dirai m&me gue c--tte

29
it is to some extent contrary to the Charter,
inasmuch as this procedure may not be conducive to the admission of new Members, but
may on the contrary create certain complications. Therefore, this proposal is not based on
the Charter .
Consequently, I suggest including the question
of the admission of Albania in our agenda, while
leaving the date when it will be examined to be
discussed at one of the later meetings of the
Security Council.
Mr. VAN KLEFFENS (Netherlands)
: I think
that the suggestion of Mr. Vyshinsky is a very
wise one. I think that any State which applies
for membership is entitled to have its application
dealt with within a reasonable time. I do not
think that it is at a11 unreasonable, especially
when the Assembly is at present in what you
might call its constituent phase, to consider shaping things in such a way that the Assembly may
be able to deal with the matter in the second
half of its first session, and, I should say, irrespective of whether or not at that time there are
any other applications for admission from other
States.
Mr. STETTINIUS (United States of America) :
My objection to the placing of this item on the
-agenda applies to today’s meeting. I wish to
make ,it clear to Mr. Vyshinsky that I am not
talking in terms of quantity, but of timing, the
time when the various applications of the peaceloving nations of the world should be considered.
I am entirely in sympathy with the sentiments
just expressed by the representative
of the
Netherlands.
The PRESIDENT: Do I take it that the representative of the United States of America agrees
that this item be included in the agenda?
Mr. STETTINIUS (United States of America) :
Yes, as long as I understand that it is going on
the continuing agenda and not on the specific
agenda that is now before us.
The PRESIDENT: When this item is put on the
agenda, then it is competent for the Council
members to take such view as they think proper.
Do I take it, then, that this item is included in
the agenda? I would remind you that there is
only one agenda. Are there any objections?
Mr, VYSNINSKY’
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(translated
from Russian) : I would
like to be quite sure that I have understood the
proposal correctly. When we place an item on
the agenda, we do so in order to discuss it, not
in order to evade discussion. Consequently, if we
decide to include the question of admitting
Albania to membership
of the Organization
it
is presupposed that we shall discuss it, but that
the Security Council will decide the exact date
of discussion, and that it will take place during
the present session pf the Assembly.

proposition se trouve, dans une certaine mesure,
en contradiction avec la Charte; en effet, la procedure envisagee pourrait ne pas favoriser l’admission de nouveaux Membres dans I’Organisation, mais creerait au contraire des complications. Ainsi cette proposition n’est pas fond6e sur
la Charte.
C’est pourquoi je propose d’inscrire B l’ordre
du jour la question de I’Albanie; quant B la date
de l’examen de cette question, je propose d’en
discuter B l’une des prochaines seances du Conseil
de sCcuritC.
M. VAN KLEFFENS
(Pays-Bas) (trnduit de
l’anglais) : Je crois que la proposition
de
M. Vychinsky est tout 2. fait sage. A mon avis,
tout Etat qui demande son admission a le. droit
de voir sa demande examinte dans un delai raisonnable. Je ne crois pas, surtout 6tant donnC que
1’AssemblCe en est encore a ce que l’on pourrait
appeler son stade d’organisation, qu’il soit d&aisonnable de prgparer les questions, d’une man&e
telle que 1’AssemblCe puisse les traiter, au cours
de la deuxieme partie de sa premiere session, et
cela, saris se prioccuper de savoir s’il y aura ou
non a ce moment-la d’autres demandes d’admission 6manant d’autres Etats.
M. STETTINIUS
(Etats-Unis
d’Am&ique)
(traduit de Panglais) : Mon objection portait sur
la mise a l’ordre du jour de la question pour la
sCance d’aujourd’hui.
Je voudrais preciser pour
M. Vychinsky que je ne parle pas tant de la
quantite des demandes que de l’epoque oh les
diverscs demandes des nations pacifiques du
monde devraient &tre examinees. Je suis entierement d’accord avec les sentiments que vient
d’exprimer le repr&entant des Pays-Bas.
Le PR~IDENT
(traduit de l’angluis) : Dois-jr:
comprendre que le reprbsentant des Etats-Unis
d’Amtrique
est d’accord pour que la question
soit inscrite a l’ordre du jour?
8
M. STETTINIUS
(Etats-Unis
d’AmCrique)
(traduil de l’anglais) : Oui, s’il s’agit de l’ordre
du jour a longue tcheance du Conseil de &uritC, et non de l’ordre du jour particulier qui est
aujousd’hui devant nous.
Le PRESIDENT (truduit de l’ang2ai.r) : Si cette
question est inscrite a l’ordre du jour, c’est au
Conseil de d&cider ce qu’il jugera opportun.
Puis-je done considtrer que cette question est
inscrite a l’ordre du jour? Je voudrais vous rappeler qu’il n’y a qu’un ordre du jour. Y a-t-i1
des.objections?
M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Rtpubliques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Je VOUdrais m’assurer que j’ai bien compris la proposition, Quand nous inscrivons une question a
l’ordre du jour, nous le faisons pour la discuter
et non pour en Cviter la discussion, Done, si nous
dgcidons d’inscrire a l’ordre du jour la question
de l’admission de 1’Albanie dans l’organisation,
cela suppose que nous allons discuter cette question. Quant a la date exacte de la discussion,
c’est le Conseil de stcuritt qui la Fxera, et cela
-’
pendant la pr&ente session de 1’AssemblCe. g&b ,’ 1’ ‘, ,i;,l,$
9,’”
,’
rale.
,&,,>
%
,,:z
;‘P

30
that I am not ready to discuss the admission oj
new Members to the Organization during the
Assembly now in session. I think it needs longer
time to study, and it needs further opportumty
for consideration. I have no objection to its going
on the agenda, but I thought, if I understood
the representative of China aright, that is what
he wanted, too.

I’ordre du jour. Mais je ne suis pas prct a
discuter l’admission de nouveaux Membres,
au
tours de la presente session de 1’Assemblde gentrale. Je pense qu’il nous faudra davantage
de
temps pour etudier cette question et que nOUs
devons pouvoir l’examiner plus a loisir. Par CXu-n?i~quent, j’accepte la mise a l’ordre du jour, m$a,
si j’ai bien compris le reprtsentant de la Chrr%
c’est Cgalement dans ce sens qu’il s’Ctait prononc&

The PRESIDENT:
May I emphasize to members of the Council that there is only one agenda,
Therefore, if you include an item in the agenda,
you include it in the agenda for the consideration of this Council in its order, as it is set
down in that particular list. But you are competent, &hen you arrive at that particular item, tC
determine whether the matter is one suitable for
immediate discussion, or whether it should be
deferred, or in what kind of treatment YOUshould
exercise the services of the Council in regard ta
that particular matter. It is a matter which you
fully determine at the time when you arrive at
that item for consideration.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Z’anglais) : Je VOUdrais souligner que le Conseil de sCcurit6 n’a
qu’un seul ordre du jour. Par consequent, si IIOUS
mettons une question a l’ordre du jour, c’est pour
qu’elle soit examinee par le Conseil dans l’ordre
oh elle est inscrite sur la l&e. Mais quand nous
arriverons a ce point particulier
de l’ord,re du
jour, il nous appartiendra
de decider s’il est de
nature B &tre immbdiatement
discut$ s’il dolt
&tre ajournC, ou si nous devons le trarter d’une
autre manitre.
C’est la une question clue le
Conseil est parfaitement
libre de d&id.er
au
moment oi3 il en arrive B ce point particulier
de
l’ordre du jour.

Mr. PAUL-B• N~JOUR (France)
(translated
from French) : I should like to have a clear
understanding of this question. I agree with the
representative of China that, before deciding on
the admission of a new Member, we must draw
up ruIes of procedure that will enable us to
determine whether the applicant fulfils the conditions for admission.

M, PAUL-B• NCOUR (France.) : Je voudrais
bien voir clair dans cette question. Je suis de
l’avis du representant de la Chine, lorsqu’il
ciit
qu’avant de statuer sur l’admission d’un nouveau
Membre, nous devons Ctablir les rtgles de pro&dure qui nous permettent de verifier s’il se trouve
en condition d’&tre admis.

I regret, however, that we do not see our way
to determine these rules of procedure during the
present session, and that the admission of new
Members whom we may invite or desire should
be thus delayed. I share the view of the representative of China concerning the necessity, before coming to a final decision on a particular
application, of establishing first the general rules
of procedure which would enable us to see our
way clearly in dealing with applications for admission and to ascertain whether the applying
States fulfil the required conditions. I venture
to express regret that we do not contemplate
establishing these rules of procedure during the
present session, and that we postpone to a later
and hypothetical session the admission of new
Members, which we ought, on the contrary, to
encourage.

En sens inverse, je regrette qu’on n’apersoive
pas la possibilitt de fixer ces regles de proddure
au tours de cette session et que l’adrnissioon de
nouveaux Membres, que nous pouvons solliciter
ou dCsirer, soit ainsi retardee. Je partage l’avis
du repr&entant
de la Chine sur la r&es&,
avant de statuer sur une demande d&erminCe,
d’&ablir d’abard Ies regles g&r&ales de procb
dure qui nous permettent de voir cl&r dans les
demandes d’admission et de contr6ler si les Etats
candidats a l’admission repondent aux conditions
voulues. Je me permets d’exprimer
le regret que
nous n’envisagions pas la possibilitC de fixer ces
regles de procedure, d&s la prksente session, et que
nous remettions ?Lune session ult&ieure
et Plypothetique l’admission de nouveaux Membres,
que
nous devons au contraire encourager.

The PRESIDENT: That would be, I take it, a
suitable matter actually to be determined at the
time when we arrived at that item of the agenda,
and when it came before the Council for discussion.

Le PRUDENT
(traduit de l’angZais)l : C’est
une question sur laquelle, je suppose, nous pourrons nous prononcer lorsque nous en arriveronx
a ce point de l’ordre du jour, et quand il sera
en discussion devant le Conseil.

Now, are we ready to make a decision upon it?
Are we all in favour of this item being placed
on the agenda? If there are no objections, then
it is adopted.

Maintenant
sommes-nous p&s a prendre uric
d&ion?
&es-vous tous d’avis de porter la ques-,
tion a l’ordre du jour? S’il n’y a pas d’objections,,,
il en est ainsi d&id&

The agenda was adopted.
19. Filming
of proceedings
The PRESIDENT: I would call the Council’s
attention to the fact that the lights have now
been on for about an hour, and the filming has

L’ordre du jour est adoptk.
19. Prise de vues de la sahcce
Le PRI~DENT
(traduit de Panglab) : Jr: \roti$~$
drais signaler aux membres du Conseil qut: vo@@!
plus d’une heure que l’on nous flrne: et ~~24
$9,
”j “$2:
‘:I &\
h>jIgj
‘:-Pb:&
“>,I-

31
been taking place during that period of time.
That is considerably longer than I had first indicated. But I would like to know now, after the
experience the Council has had of the matter,
whether it wishes to continue.
Could I take it that we might have a vote
without discussion of the matter? Those in favour
of having the filming continue, kindly put up
their hands.
I take it that it is the wish of the Council that
the filming of the proceedings of the Security
Council shall now be concluded. I would ask the
operators kindly to switch off the lights that are
being used for this purpose.

la lurni8re des projecteurs. C’est beaucoup plus
que je ne l’avais indiquC tout d’abord. Je voudrais savoir si le Conseil, aprts l’experience qu’il
vient de faire, desire voir la prise de vues se
poursuivre.
Nous pourrions peut-&re mettre la question
aux voix sans la discuter. Que les representants
qui sont d’avis de voir la prise de vues continuer
veuillent bien lever la main.
Je considere que le Conseil est d’avis que la
prise de vues sur les d4ibtrations du Conseil de
stcuritt doit maintenant se terminer. Je demande
aux opCrateurs de bien vouloir faire eteindre les
projecteurs dont ils seservaient k cette fin,

%Q.

33.

Letter from the head of the Iranian
d@egatisn
to the Executive
Secretary

da*Zeefl 19 Jcmuury
1946’
The PRESIDENT : We have now reached item 2
of the agenda. The Council at its last meeting
decided to invite the delegation of Iran to be
present when this item was discussed. I think it
was the intention of the Council to act under
Article 31 of the Charter. If the Council had not
‘already decided to issue an invitation,
it might
have beer-r necessary to consider at this stage, in
view of the Iranian communication
of 26 January, whether an invitation should be issued under
Article 32. That matter need not concern us
further at this meeting. I merely mention it so
that our records will show that we have not been
unmindful
of it.

I ask the Council whether it wishes to ask the
representative of Iran to take his seat now at the
Council table in order that he may exercise the
right to participate, without vote, in the discussion? I point out that the right is the same
whether under Article 31 or Article 32 of the
Charter. Are there any objections to the procedure of inviting Iran to take its seat at the table?
The procedye

was adopted.

The PRESIDENT:
representative kindly

I would ask the Iranian
to come to the table.

The representative
table.

of Iran took h’is seat at the

en arrivons maintenant au point 2 de l’ordre du
jour. A sa derni&e stance, le Conseil a d&id&
d’inviter la dClEgation de 1’Iran a &tre pr&ente,
lors de la discussion de ce point. Je crois qu’il
etait dans l’intention du Conseil d’agir conformtment a 1’Article 31 de la Charte. Si le Conseil
n’avait pas d6ja d&id& d’adresser une invitation,
il aurait pu etre nCcessaire d’examiner maintenant, en raison de la communication
reCue de
l’lran, le 26 janvier, si une invitation devait &tre
adressie a la delegation iranienne, en vertu de
1’Article 32. 11 est inutile de nous preoccuper
davantage de cette question aujourd’hui. J’en fais
simplement mention pour que les pro&-verbaux
de la seance montrent bien que nous y avions
song&.
Je demande au Conseil s’il d&ire prier le
reprtsentant de l’lran de prendre place B lafable
du Conseil afin de pouvoir exercer son droit de
participer, ,sans dro$ de vote, & la discussion. Je
fais observer que ce droit qui lui est ainsi accord6
est le m&me, qu’il s’agisse de I’Article 31 ou de
1’Article 32 de la Charte. Y a-t-i1 des observations? Quelqu’un s’oppose-t-il a ce que nous invitions PIran a venir sieger au Conseil?
I1 en estainsi dt!cidd.
Le PRI~DENT
(traduit

de l’anglais) : Je
demande au reprksentant de l’lran de bien
vouloir venir prendre place a cette table.
Le repdsentant de -PIran prend place d la

_

,

table du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT:
This is the first occasion
on which the Security Council has been called
upon to act under Chapter VI of the Charter,
which is entitled, “The Pacific Settlement of
Disputes”. Our.proceedings
are likely to serve as
a precedent for the Council’s future action, Eventually, rules of procedure will no doubt be
worked out on the basis of what the Council has
actually done in this and similar matters, and
each successive step will be clearly laid down.
At present our provisional rules do not deal at
all with these matters. Today, therefore, we shall
be obliged to decide on our procedure ad hoc.
‘See Oficial Records of the Security Council,
Year, First Series, Supplement No, 1; Annex 2A.
..,_
. :‘._~II,:”1,

Lettre du chef de la dtMgation
iranienne au Secrhire
exicutif
datbe
du 19 janvier 1946’
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’angzais) : Now

First

Le PRPSIDENT (traduit de Patzglaz’s): C’est
la premiere fois qu’il appartient au Conseil de
sCcurite d’agir en vertu du Chapitre VI de la
Charte intitulC “Rtglement pacifique des diff&
rends”. La procedure que nous adopterons
servira vraisemblablement
de prCcCdent pour
I’action du Conseil dans l’avenir. Plus tard, nous
Claborerons, saris doute, des r6gle.s de procCdure
sur la base de ce que le Con&l de stcurite aura
fait cette fois-ci et pour les questions analogues;
toutes les &apes successives seront clairement
etablies.
Pour I’instant, notre r@$ement provisoire ne
traite pas de ces questions. Nous serons done
;
obligCs aujourd’hui
de dtcider de notre pfo~d,
I
,,j,““”
dure pour ce cas particulier.
8,”;.‘:+
‘*i,
i:.*
,::;$/,$
lvoir

Prochverbaux

ofii~isls dti &&il

ds .&~;it~,

32
The matter is before the Council itself to determjne, Before I ask for observations, I shall
venture to offer a suggestion which can serve as
a basis for discussion. On the subject matter of
this item, the Council has received certain written communications from the delegations of Iran
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, respectively. The world has the right to expect of
this Security .Council that it will deal with all
such matters in a regular way, and in accordance with the principles of justice and fair play
which are stated in the Charter. My suggestion,
therefore, is first, that the Council should commence its consideration of this item by giving to
the delegation for Iran, and then to the delegation for the USSR, an opportunity to make oral
observations, either in explanation of or in supplementation
of their written communications.
In this way, the Council will be fully seized of
the matter under consideration.

La question est mamtenant devant le C?nseil
et c’est a lui de decider. Avant toutefom
de
demander
aux representants
de me
fa.ire
connaitre leurs observations, je voudrais me PCs”
mettre de presenter une suggestion qui Pouzrr~
nous servir de base de discussion. En ce 4u1
concerne la question que nous avons a &cuter
en ce moment, le Conseil a reGu certaines cXnnmunications &rites, emanant respectivement
&Zs
d&$gations de 1’Iran et de 1’Union des R%ubliques socialistes sovietiques. Le moncfe$ esb en
droit d’attendre de nous que nous t.raihons de
telles questions rCguli&ement,
et conform~ment
aux principes de justice et d’iSquitC qui s()nt
exposes dans la Chart& Ma suggestion es& Par
consequent, la suivante : premi&rement,
lo
Conseil abordera l’examen de cette question
en
donnant a la delegation de YIran, puis a la d&5gation de I’URSS, l’occasion de presenter OIX~ment des observations, soit pour expliquer,
soit
pour dtvelopper leurs communications
Cerites.
De cette maniere, le Conseil sera pleinement
sibis1
de la question a examiner.

The adoption of some such practice, as a general procedure initiating the discussion of matters such as this, may be thought to establish best
the impartiality
and the objectivity of the Council’s consideration of the item.

L’adoption d’une mtthode de ce genre comme
procedure g&&ale, pour engager la discussion
sur une question comme celle-ci, me sembIe
devoir prouver, de la meilleure faGon poas&le,
l’impartialid
et l’objectivid
avec lesquell@s le
Conseil examinera le probleme.

Then, certainly, after these statements have
been completed, the suggestion is that I should
throw the subject open to discussion by the
Council. It will then be the right of any member
to move any relevant resolution within the
powers conferred on the Council by the Charter.
Does the Council wish to adopt this procedure
that 1 have outlined?

En deuxieme lieu, cette dCclaration &ant f&e,
je propose d’ouvrir la discussion au sein du
Cons&l, Tout Membre aura alors le droit
de
proposer toute rCsolution relative B la question
en discussion, dans la Iimite des pouvoirs quc la
Charte confAre au Conseil.
Le Conseil d&e-t-i1 adopter la procCdure que
je viens d’indiquer?

Mr. VYSHIN~SKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(translated from Russian) : I raise
no objections to your-suggestion regarding procedure, but one factor must be borne in mind.
May I remind you that, in reply to the Iranian
Government’s first statement, the Soviet Government pointed out that the question could be
settled by bilateral negotiations? The Soviet Government does not and did not refuse this means
of settlement. At the last Security Council meeting, we objected to any discussion of the substance of this question, but we agreed to the
matter being placed on the agenda for today’s
meeting. That is, we agreed to limit the discussion to the procedural aspect of the question. We
raise no objection to the discussion solely of this
aspect of the question,

M. VYCHINSICY (Union des Rbpubliques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du rmsse): Je n’ai
pas d’objections centre votre proposition r&rtive
a la procedure, mais il y a un point a ne: pas
perdre de vue, Permettez-moi
de vous rappeler
que le Gouvernement sovietique, en reponse ih la
premiere declaration du Gouvernement
iranien,
a indique que le probl5me pourrait Ctre r&ssolu
par des negotiations biladrales.
Le Gouvc;rn’ement sovittique ne refuse pas et n’a jamais r&us&
de regler la question de cette mar&e,
A la &rniere seance du Conseil de securite, nous nous
sommes elevts centre toute discussion portam
sur Ie fond de la question, mais nous avons
accept6 de I’inscrire a l’ordre du jour de la s&anee
d’aujourd’hui.
Par consequent, nous acccptons
de limiter Ia discussion aux questions de pro&h-e. Nms ne nous opposons pas a un exaen
Portant uniquement sur cet aspect de la qucs&n,

The PRESIDENT: I take it, therefore, that the
procedure that I proposed to the Council is
agreed to.
The procedure was adopted.

(Iran) : I am handing

PR~~SIDENT

(traduit

de l’anglais) ;

p

La mkthode est adopt&e.

The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of Iran to make such statement supplementary to or in clarification of the written communication that was addressed to the Council in
regard to this particular matter.
Mr. TAQIZADEH

Le

considere done que le Conseil adopte la m&bode
clue je lui ai propode.

in a

(traduit

de l’anglais) : J'invite

le representant

de 1’Iran & nous ,+&-

Le PRBSIDLNT

maintenant

33
memorandum’
setting forth the contentions of
the Iranian
Government
in the dispute which
has arisen between the Iranian Government and
the Soviet Government.
This dispute has been
brought by the Iranian Government to the attention of the Security Council, under Article 35
of the Charter, in a note’ dated 19 January 1946
communicated
to Mr. Gladwyn Jebb, Acting
Secretary-General.

J’ai l’honneur de remettre au Conseil un memorandum’ exposant le point de vue du Gouvernement iranien sur le diff&end qui a surgi entre le
Gouvernement
iranien et le Gouvernement
de
l’union sovi&ique, diff&end sur lequel le Gouvernement iranien a attirC l’attention du Conseil
de &curit& en exhcution de l’Article 35 de la
Charte, dans une note’, datEe du 19 janvier
1946 et adressCe h M. Gladwyn Jebb, SecrCtaire
g&n&al par inttrim.

I would like to emphasize that the Iranian
Government
regrets no less than any other
Member Government of the United Nations that
the Organization
has been faced at the commencement of its work with the situation in Iran
and should have to deal with a dispute between
two of its Members. The Iranian Government
sincerely deplores that it finds itself in dispute
with a country with which it not only has a longstanding friendship, but which is also its ally
under the Tri-Partite
Treaty of Alliance
of
29 January 1942.’ Iran helped in no small measure towards Soviet victory by placing her entire
resources at the disposal of the Allies for the
prosecution of the war. Very considerable quantities of war supplies reached the Soviet Union
by way of Iran, which was then almost the only
route open. Iranian railways, roads and all means
of transport were utilized for this purpose, even
at the cost of depriving the Iranian population
of food supplies.

Je voudrais souligner que le Gouvernement
iranien ne regrette pas moins que tout autre
Membre
des Nations Unies que, d& le commencement de ses travaux, l’organisation
ait eu
% faire face a la situation en Iran, et doive s’occuper d’un difEend
surgi entre deux de ses
Membres. Le Gouvernement iranien ddplore sin&ement
ce diErend
avec un pays avec lequel,
non seulement il entretient depuis longtemps des
relations amicales, mais qui est aussi son alliC en
vertu du Trait6 d’alliance tripartite du 29 janvier 1942’. L’Iran n’a pas peu contribuC B la
victoire sovihique, en mettant B la disposition
des Alli&, pour la poursuite de la guerre, toutes
ses ressources. Des quantitQ
considCrables de
fournitures de guerre sont parvenues a 1’Union
sovi&ique par la route de 1’Iran qui, & l’dpoque,
Etait presque la seule route ouverte. Les chemins
de fer, les routes et tous les moyens de communication de 1’Ira.n ont Ctd utilis& $ cette fin, mEme
au prix de difficult& pour le ravitaillement
de
la population du pays.
~

I would remind the Council of the fact that
the assistance given by Iran in the prosecution
of the war against the common enemy, particularly by facilitating
the transportation
of supplies from overseas to the Soviet Union, was
ofFicially recognized in the Tehran Declaration’
signed on 1 December 1943, by Mr. Churchill,
Marshal
Stalin and President Roosevelt. ‘Iran
broke off diplomatic
relations with the Axis
Poweis, Germany and Italy, in September 194 1;
it declared war on Germany on 9 September
1943 and on Japan towards the end of February
1945.

Je me permets de rappeler au Conseil que,
par la DCcIaration de Teheran’, sign&e le ler d&
cembre 1943, par M. Churchill,
Ie mar&ha1
Staline et le Prtsident Roosevelt, les All& ont
officiellement
reconnu l’assistance donnCe par
l’lran
dans la poursuite de la guerre centre
l’ennemi commun, particulihement
en facilitant
le transport du ravitaillement
d’outre-mer a destination de 1’Union sovi.$tique. L’Iran a rompu
les relations diplomatiques
avec les Puissances de
l’Axe, 1’Allemagne et l’Italie, en septembre 1941;
il a d&la& la guerre a l’Allemagne,
le 9 septembre 1943, et au Japon, vers la fin de fdvrier
1945.

The memorandum
which I am handing in
presents the facts which are relevant to this most
unfortunate
dispute. It will be seen that the
Iranian Government
has sought a solution of
this dispute by direct approach to the Soviet
Government, and, in accordance with Article 33
of the Charter, has sought to reach this solution
by negotiation,
As you will see from the appendices to the memorandum,
the Iranian Government has addressed to the Soviet Government
a number of notes setting forth the interventions
on the part of Soviet authorities in her internal
affairs in breach of Iranian independence
and
sovereignty, and has requested the Soviet Government to discuss and remedy these matters.

Le mCmorandum
que je pr&ente -expose les
faits relatifs a ce diffkrend extremement regrettable. On se rendra compte que Ie Gouvernement iranien a recherchC une solution de ce diff&end par des nCgociations directes avec le
Gouvernement
sovi&que, et que, conformCment
& 1’Article 33 de la Charte, il s’est efforc& d’atteindre cette solution par ntgociations. On constatera, d’ap& les annexes au mCmorandum, que
le Gouvernement iranien a adressk au Gouvernement soviCtique un certain nombre de notes
exposant les interventions
des auto&s
soviCtiques dans les affaires interieures de l’Iran, en
violation de l’indhpendance
et de la souveraineth
de 1’Iran et qu’il a demand6 au Gouvernement
sovietique de bien vouloir discuter ces questions
et leur trouver une solution.

First

’ Vpir Pro&-verbaux
o$iciels
du Conseil
de skcyritl,
Premihre Strie, SupplCment No 1;
~ Premitre An&e,
1 Aryxe 2B.
Ibid,, Suppl6ment No 1; Annexe 2A.
‘ibid.,
Suppliiment No 1; Annexe 2B, appendice A.

‘See

Oficial

Records

of

Year, First Series, Supplement
‘Ibid.,
’ Ibid.,

Supplement
Supplement

the

Security

Council,

No. 1; Annex.2B.

No, 1; Annex .2A.
No. 1; Annex ZB, appendixA.

,*

34
But the Soviet Government has either not replied to these notes or has found itself unable
to admit the protests of the Iranian Government.
Furthermore, the Iranian Prime Minister offered
jn December 1945 to proceed to Moscow accompanied by the Iranian Foreign Minister in order
to arrive at a settlement with the Soviet Government. This offer was ignored. In the light of the
refusal of the Soviet Government either to discuss these matters or to cease these disturbances
in Iran’s internal affairs, the only course for the
Iranian Government was to bring the dispute
to the attention of the Security Council as a
situation which might lead to international
friction.

Mais ]e Gouvernement
.WiitiqUe
ln’a
Pa
ripondu & ces notes ou ne s’est pas cru en rmZsure
d’admettre les protestations fakes par k, ?Ouvey-nement iranien. En outre, le Premier Mmlstre
de ]‘Iran a of&y-t en dticembre 1945, de sle rendre
a Moscou avec 1: Ministre des Aff aires ktraW&rm
de l’Iran, afin de parvenir B un accord avec le
Gouvernement
sovi&ique. I1 n’a pas 6te tenu
compte de cette offre. A la suite, du refus du
Gouvernement
soviCtique, soit de discuter Cm
questions, soit de cesser ces ingkrences dans les
affaires inttrieures de l’lran, il ne rest.& plus
d’autre parti au Gouvernement
iranien que de
porter cette question devant le Conseil #de s&uritt, comme situation susceptible d’entrziker
un
d&accord entre nations.

The detailed circumstances which have given
rise to this situation are set forth in the memorandum. It is therein shown that, in breach of
international law and of the Tri-Partite Treaty
of Alliance of 29 January 1942 between the
Union
of Soviet ,Socialist Republics, Great
Britain ‘and Iran, also contrary to the ThreePower Declaration
by the United States of
America, Great Britain and the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics concerning Iran which was
made at the Tehran Conference in December
1943, and contrary to the principles embodied
in the Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations, there have been a number of interventions in Iranian internal affairs by the Soviet
authorities.
*

Lks circonstances dCtaill6es qui ont dorm6 naksance a cette situation sont exposees dans ce
mtmorandum.
On y verra qu’en violation
du
droit international
et du Trait& d’alliance
tripartite conclu entre l’Union
des RCpubliqu~
et
socialistes soviCtiques, la Grande-Bretagne
l’lran, le 29 janvier 1942, et contrairemcnt
a la
Declaration des trois Puissances faite par 1~s
Etats-Unis d’Amiirique,
la Grande-Breta@le
et
1’Union des RCpubliques socialistes sovi&tiqtZ+
au sujet de I’Iran, ?L la ConfBrcnce de TcfhCran
en dtcembre 1943, et contrairement
aux principes figurant au PrtSambule de la Char&
des
Nations Unies, les autorites sovikiques sent intervenues un certain nombre de fois dan.s les affaires indrieures de 1’Iran.

Although the Tri-Partite, Treaty provides that
the presence of the Allied forces on Iranian territory shall not constitute a military occupation
and that it shall disturb as little as possible the
administration
and security forces of Iran, the
economic life of the country, the normal movements of the population and the application of
Iranian laws and regulations, nevertheless the
Soviet authorities have disturbed the administration of Iran by interfering with it in the zone
where Soviet troops are stationed. In Azerbaijan
this policy has been carried so far that the
Iranian Government has been prevented from
exercising any power whatsoever in this part of
Iran; the security forces of Iran have been prevented from exercising their proper functions of
suppressing disorders; the Soviet authorities have
disrupted the economic life of the country by
setting up at the frontier of the so-called Soviet
zone internal barriers which all merchandise and
civilians have been allowed to pass only at the
discretion of the Soviet authorities; -no armed
forces of the Iranian Government have been
allowed to proceed beyond these limits. The
Soviet authorities have prevented the Iranian
authorities from applying Iranian laws-and regulations in these areas, in some cases by applying
their own ruling, in others by forbidding the
local authorities to enforce the law of Iran.

Bien que le Trait6 tripartite
stipuk: que la
prtisence de troupes allikes sur le territoire iranien
ne constitue pas une occupatign militair~e, et doit
troubler aussi peu que possible I’administration
et les forces de police de I’Iran, ainsi que la vie
tconomique du pays, les mouvements :normauq
de la population et l’application
des lois et rkglements de l’Iran, nCanmoins les autoritC5s sovi&
tiques ont troublt l’administration
de II’Iran en
la .contrecarrant dans la zone 02 se trouvenr les
troupes sovi&tiques. En Azerbjidjan,
cette politique est allCe si loin que le Gouvernement
iranien
a 6th dans l’incapacitt
d‘exercer des pouvoirs
quelconques dans cette partie de SIran; les forces
imniennes de stcurit6 n’ont pas pu rennplir leur
r6le et faire cesser les dksordres, Les auto&&
sovidtiques ant boulevers6 la vie Cconornique du
pays en klevant a la front&e dc la zone dite
soviitique des barrih-es que les civils et. lee MWchandises ne pouvaient franchir qu’avt:c Ia per”
mission des autoritks sovi&iques; aucllne force
armie du Gouvernement iranien n’a dtk auto&&
a traverser cette ligne. Les auto&& sovi&iqu&
ont emp&ch6 les autoritCs iraniennes d’appliqua
les lois et rkglements de I’Iran dans cezl regions:,
dans certains cm, elles ont appliquk leurs proprm
r%lements; dans d’autres, elles ont interdit
aux
autoritis locales de faire appliquer lets lob iray,
niennes.

While the Iranian Government to a certain
extent tolerated these breaches df territory and
international
law during the war, it contends
that, now that the war is over, this interference
with Iran’s independence and sovereignty should
certainly be ended, Since the end of the war,

Bien que le Gouvernement
iranien ait to1
dans une certaine mesure, ces infractions au d
international et cette violation de territ&-e
pe
dant la guerre, il estime, ndanmoins;, que,
guerre &ant termirke, il y certaineme:nt lieu
mettre fin a ces empi&ements sur l’ind,$penda

35
certain unruly elements in Azerbaijan have
sought to cause dissension and disturbances. It
would have been an easy matter for the Iranian
Government to carry out its duty of re-establishing order if it had been possible for the security
forces to proceed tom these affected areas. This
access was denied, and Iranian troops were
halted at the Russian barriers. This, in the submission of the Iranian Government, is clearly
an interference in the internal affairs of Iran.

It will be seen from the memorandum that this
is only one instance among many, The result
has been that whole districts are no longer under
the control of the central Government, which,
owing to the action of the Soviet authorities,
is not able to send troops or officials to these
parts. As such action on the part of the Soviet
authorities is in contravention of the Tri-Partite
Treaty, the Iranian Government urges that the
Security Council recommend that the terms of
the Tri-Partite
Treaty be strictly adhered to;
that until the evacuation of Soviet troops from
Iranian territory is duly completed, in accordance with their, obligations, no action be taken
by the Soviet authorities in Iran contrary to
this treaty or to the Tehran Declaration, and
that troops and officials be allowed to carry out
their normal functions of government, and that
the authority of the central Government be not.
interfered with in any way by the Soviet forces
or officials in Iran. The Iranian Government also
asks that the Security Council should recommend
the withdrawal by the Soviet authorities of all
moral and material support from the rebels in
Azerbaijan or dissident elements elsewhere.

It will be within the recollection of two members of the Security Council, namely the United
States of America and Great Britain, that each
Government
on being informed that Soviet
troops, had prevented Iranian security forces
from proceeding to Azerbaijan, made representations to the Soviet Government that the Government of Iran should have full freedom to send
its armed forces to any part of Iran in order to
maintain order in its own territory. The representation of the United States was contained in
a note dated 24 November 1945, delivered by
the United States Ambassador in Moscow to the
Soviet Government.’ This note, after invoking
the Treaty- of Alliance and the Declaration of
Tehran, stated that the fulfilment of the assurances given at Tehran required that “the Government of Iran should have full freedom, without interference from Soviet, British or American
military or civil authorities, to move its armed
forces through Iran in such a manner as it may
consider necessary in order to preserve its authority and to maintain internal security”.’

et la souverainetk de l’Iran. Depuis la fin de la
guerre, certains elements indisciplinCs de YAzerbai’djan ont cherche a provoquer dcs dissensions
et des troubles. 11 aurait &tC facile au Gouvernement iranien de rCtablir l’ordre, s’il avait pu
envoyer dans les zones de dissidence des forces
de police. Les autorites sovietiques ont interdit
a ces forces de pCn&trer dans ces zones, et les
troupes iraniennes ont et6 arr&ttes aux barrieres
russes. Ce fait est, de l’avis du Gouvernement
iranien, une nette ingerence dans les afIaires in&
rieures de 1’Iran.
On verra, d’apres le mCmorandum, que ce
n’est la qu’un exemple parmi beaucoup d’autres,
Le rtsultat de cette situation est que des districts
entiers du pays ne sont plus sous le contrale du
Gouvernement central qui, a la suite de l’action
des autoritCs sovietiques, n’est plus en mesure
d’envoyer dam ces districts des troupes ou des
fonctionnaires. Les faits de ce genre constituant
de la part des autorites sovittiques une infraction aux clauses du Trait6 tripartite, le Gouvernement iranien demande avec insistance que le
Conseil de sCcuritC recommande la stricte observance des termes de ce TraitC; B savoir que,
jusqu’g I’kacuation
des troupes sovi&iques du
territoire iranien, conformement aux engagements pris, les autorites sovi&iques ne prennent
aucune mesure en Iran qui soit contraire a ce
Trait6 ou a la Diclaration de TihCran, que les
troupes et les fonctionnaires in-&ens soient autorisCs a exercer leurs fonctions normales, et que
l’autorite du Gouvernement central ne soit l’objet
d’aucune ingCrence de la part des fonctionnaires
ou des troupes sovietiques en Iran. Le Gouvernement iranien demande egalement que le Conseil
de sCcuritC recommande le retrait par les autor-it& sovietiques de tout l’appui moral et mattriel
qu’elles accordent aux rebelles en Azerbaidjan
ou aux elements dissidents dam d’autres rCgions.
Deux des membres du Conseil de s&nib, les
Etats-Unis d’Amtrique et la Grande-Bretagne,
se rappelleront que, ayant &tk inform& du fait
que les troupes sovietiques avaient emp&chC les
forces de police de I’Iran de penttrer dans l’Azerbaydjan, ils ont fait des representations B ce sujet
au Gouvernement sovietique, demandant que le
Gouvernement iranien ait pleine libertt d’envoyer
ses forces arm&es dam toutes les parties du pays,
afin de maintenir l’ordre sur son propre territoire. Les reprt%entations faites par le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis sont contenues dans une
note datee du 24 novembre 1945 et remise au
Gouvernement soviCtique par l’ambassadeur des
Etats-Unis a Moscou. Cette note, apres s’ttre
referee au Trait6 d’alliance et a la Declaration
de Teheran, stipulait que, conformement aux
engagements pris a Teheran, Ye Gouvernement
iranien devait avoir pleine libertt, saris que puissent intervenir les autorites militaires ou civiles
sovietiques, britanniques et amCricaines, de d6placer sesforces armtes dans l’ensemble du pays,
de la fac;on dont il estime ntcessaire de le faire
pour le maintien de son autorite et de la securitb
int&ieure”.

’ Pour lc texte des notas auxquelles
il eat fait alJurion
‘For texts of the Government
notes referred
to in this
ici, voir Pro&-verbaux
oficiels
du Copsei?
de stfcw
statement,
em O&Sal
Records
of the Security
Council,
ritl, Premi&
Ann&,
Premi&ie S&c,
Supplbeqt
No 1;
First Year, First ,Series, ,Supplement
NO. 1; Annex 26
1 Annexe 2B, appendice
A.
appendix
A.
,,
, ”
’
I,

”

_

”
i,:
.s,,
.,e,,p‘j
;,:i,“,

*:, :,~$!!
,&&j
I,’ 3 2’)
b .,y)q
‘. / , .#,z
I’, ?,,,(‘j
,,;” ;;z,i

36
The representations of Great Britain, which
were contained in a letter dated 27 November
1945 from the British Ambassador in Moscow
to Mr. Molotov, the Soviet Commissar for Foreign Mairs, also referred to the Tehran Declaration and stated that it seemed reasonable to the
British Government
that the Iranian Government should wish to maintain
order in its own
territory and that it seemed legitimate
that it
should move its forces about its own country to
do so. The British Government
stated that it
trusted that the Soviet Government
would give
instructions in this sense to its forces in Iran that
they should not interfere with the Iranian Government in the exercise of its sovereign right of
maititaining
order in its own territory.

On 29 November
1945, the Soviet Government answered the United States Government
note of 24 November. The Soviet Government
maintained
that the events that had taken place
in northern Iran were not an armed uprising
and were not directed against the Iranian Goverment, but had been caused by reactionary elements which have opposed the extension of
national rights to the population
of northern
Iran.
As regards the Iranian
security forces, the
Soviet Government stated’that it was not hindering the movement of forces which were already
in the districts of northern Iran, but that it had
opposed the dispatch of new Iranian troops to
northern districts on the grounds that this would
increase the disorders and the bloodshed and
would further compel the Soviet Government to
brisg in more Soviet troops to preserve order
and to assure the security of the Soviet garrison.
As the Soviet Government
considered the introduction of additional
Soviet forces into Iran as
undesirable, it considered that the introduction
of new Iranian forces into the Northern Provinces would serve no useful purpose.
It clearly appears from this note that the attitude of the Soviet. Government is directly contrary to the Treaty of Alliance and to the Tehran
Declaration.
The Iranian Government,
not the
Soviet Government,
is the judge of the strength
and nature of the disturbances in Azerbaijan,
since the Soviet Government
is bound by treaty
not to interfere with the internal affairs of Iran.
Therefore, the Soviet Government,
by its admission that it did not regard the introduction
of
new troops into Iran as necessary, acknowledged
that it had committed a breach of the Treaty of
Alliance, which provides that the stationing of
Soviet troops is not a military
occupation and
that there should not be any interference in the
internal affairs of Iran.
The Iranian Government
had communicated
directly with the Soviet Government on the subject of sending troops and officials to northern
Iran. In a note to the Soviet Government of 17
November, the Iranian Government notified the
Soviet Government
that instructions had been

D’autre part, les reprisentations
faites par le
Gouvernement
de la Grande-Bretagne
figurent
dans une note du 27 novembre 1945, adresde
par l’ambassadeur du Royaume-Uni
B Moscou
?t M. Molotov, Commissaire soviCtique aux Affaires itranghres. Cette note se rCftrait &gale:tnent
a la Dkclaration de TChtran, et indiquait qu’il
semblait raisonnable au Gouvernement
britannique que le Gouvernement iranien d&i&t maintenir l’ordre sur son propre territoire, et que, &
cet effet, il devait avoir la facultC de dCplacler ses
troupes dans toute l’Ctendue du pays. Le Gouvernement britannique dCclarait encore qu’il &ait
certain que le Gouvernement
soviCtique donnerait des instructions, dans ce sens, g ses forces
station&es en Iran, afin que celles-ci n’entriavent
pas les mesures que pourrait prendre le Gouvernement iranien dans l’exercice de son droit
souverain de maintenir
I’ordre sur son propre
territoire.
Le 29 novembre
1945, le Gouvernement
soviCtique rCpondait a la note du 24 novembre
du Gouvernement
des Etats-Unis d’AmQrique.
I1 maintenant que les &&ements
qui s’Ctaient
dCroul6 dans le nord de 1’Iran ne constituaient
pas un soulevement armC dirigC centre le Gouvernement iranien, mais qu’ils avaient ttCi provoquCs par des ClCments rtactionnaires
qui s’opposaient a l’extension des droits tiationaux aux
populations du nord de 1’Iran.
En ce qui concerne les forces de police iraniennes, le Gouvernement
sovi&ique
exposait
qu’il n’empCchait pas les mouvements des forces
iraniennes qui se trouvaient dcj& dans les districts du nord de l’Iran, mais qu’il s’ttait oppo&
a l’envoi de nouvelles troupes iraniennes dans
ces districts pour la raison que leur arrivie ne
pourrait qu’accroitre le dCsordre et les effusions
de, sang, et obligerait le Gouvernement sovi&ique
& envoyer davantage de troupes pour maintenir
l’ordre et assurer la stcuritt des garnisons sovittiques. Comme le Gouvernement
sovi.ttique
considkrait qu’il n’&ait pas ddsirable d’amener
de nouvelles troupes en Iran, il estimait que l’envoi des troupes iraniennes supplkmentaires
dans
les provinces du nord ne serait d’aucune utilitt.
11 ressort clairement de cette note que l’attitude du Gouvernement sovi&ique est en contradiction avec le Trait6 d’alliance et la D&&ration
de T&h&an. C’est au Gouvernement
iranien, et
non au Gouvernement sovi&ique, qu’il incombe
de juger de la nature et de l’importance
des
troubles d’Azerba!djan,
puisque le Gouvernement sovittique s’est engag par trait6 a ne pas
s’immiscer dans les affaires inttrieures de l’Iran.
Par consequent, le Gouvernement
soviCtique, en
dCclarant qu’il ne considtrait pas comme ntcessaire l’envoi de troupes en Iran septentrional,
reconnaissait avoir commis une violation du
Trait& d’alliance, qui stipule que le stgtionnement
des troupes soviitiques ne constitue pas une occupation militaire et qu’aucune ing&ence dans les
affaires intdrieures de 1’Ira.n ne doit se produire.
Le

Gouvernement

iranien

et

entrk

en

convema-

tion directe avec le Gouvernement soviCtique sur
la question de l’envoi de troupes et de fonctionnaires dans le nord de I’Iran. Da
Gouvernement sovi&ique, en date du 17 novembre 1945, le Gouvernement iranien a fait savoir

37
issued that the Governor-General
and Governors
of Azerbaijan
should be sent out to fill their
posts. In addition, orders had been given for the
dispatch of troops to restore order. The Iranian
Government requested the Soviet Government to
give the necessary immediate instructions to the
Soviet military authorities to refrain from interfering with the freedom of action of the Iranian
army and constabulary. The Iranian
Government warned that if urgent attention was not
paid to these matters the situation was such that
disastrous consequences might ensue, and that if
unfortunate incidents occurred owing to lack of
freedom of movement
of its armed forces, it
would have the right to impute responsibility for
this failure to the Soviet military authorities.

After the Iranian forces had been halted by
the Soviet authorities on 21 November 1945, the
Iranian
Government
addressed two notes, on
22 and 23 November 1945 respectively, requesting that telegraphic instructions be given to the
Soviet authorities immediately
to let these forces
go through.
On 26 November,
the Soviet Government
answered the urgent requests of the Iranian
Government by stating, as mentioned above, that
if the Iranian Government sent troops to Azerbaijan this would cause disturbance and bloodshed and that it was therefore not considered
advisable to allow reinforcements to proceed to
Azerbaijan.
The rest of the note of the Soviet Government
was a categorical denial of numerous incidents
of interferences which the Iranian Government
had cited in its note of 17 November. The submission of the Soviet Government, in its notes of
26 .November to the Iranian Government and of
29 November to the United States Government,
that it had prevented the dispatch of troops to
Azerbaijan ‘makes it unnecessary for me at this
stage to deal with the other numerous acts of
interference by the Soviet military and civil authorities in the internal affairs. These acts are
fully set forth in the memorandum
I am presenting today.
On 1 December,
the Iranian
Government
addressed a reply to the Soviet Government in
which satisfaction was expressed for the assurance implied in the Soviet note that these incidents would not be repeated, that the interference
in the Northern Provinces would cease .and that
the security forces would be able to move about
freely. The Iranian
Government
asked that it
should be informed of the urgent steps which the
Soviet Embassy would be taking to ensure freedom of movement for the Iranian military and
civil authorities in the Northern Provinces. Exdeption was taken to the statement of the Soviet
Government in its note that it could not be held

au Gouvernement sovibtique que des instructions
avaient &t? donn6es pour que le gouverneur gCnCral et les gouverneurs de 1’Azerbai’djan soient
envoy& dans cette province pour y prendre possession de leurs postes respectifs. Le Gouvernement soviCtique ttait inform6 en outre que des
ordres avaient td don&s pour l’envoi de troupes
ayant pour mission de r&ablir l’ordre. Le Gouvernement iranien demandait au Gouvernement
soviCtique de donner immediatement
toutes instructions nCcessaires aux autorit& militaires sovi&
tiques pour que celles-ci n’entravent pas la liberd
d’action de I’armCe ou de la police iraniennes.
Le Gouvernement iranien avertissait, en outre,
le Gouvernement sovietique que si une attention
immCdiate n’Ctait pas accordie 8. ces probK?mes,
la situation serait telle qu’il pourrait en rbulter
des con&quences disastreuses et que, s’il ‘se produisait des incidents regrettables par suite du
manque de libertt de mouvement
des forces
arm&es iraniennes, le Gouvernement iranien serait en droit de rejeter la responsabilitC de ces
ffcheux &Cnements sur les autoritis militaires
soviCtiques.
Apr& que Ies forces iraniennes eurent Cd arr&
t&es par les autoritCs sov%tiques le 21 novembre
1945, le Gouvernement iranien adressa au Gouvernement sovi&ique les 22 et 23 novembre respectivement, deux notes demandant que des instructions t&graphiques
soient don&es aux
autorit&
militaires
sovietiques en Iran pour
qu’elles la&sent passer les forces iraniennes.
Le 26 novembre, le Gouvernement soviCtique
rCpondit en dCclarant, comme il a deja 6th indiqd, que si le Gouvernement iranien envoyait
de nouvelles troupes en Azerba’idjan, il en rtsulterait des troubles et que le sang coulerait davantage, de sorte qu’il n’Ctait pas possible de permettre b des renforts iraniens de se rendre en
Azerba’idjan.
Dans le reste de sa note, le Gouvernement
sovittique dCmentait cattigoriquement
de nombreux cas d’ingtrence dans Ies affaires du Gouvernement iranien, que celui-ci avait citts dans
sa note du 17 novembre. Les dCclarations du
Gouvernement sovietique, dans ses notes du 26
novembre au Gouvernement
iranien et du 29
novembre au Gouvernement des Bats-Unis, indiquant qu’il avait empechC l’envoi de troupes
en Azerba’idjan, me dispensent de parler maintenant de nombreux autres cas d’ingirence
des
autorites civiles et militaires sovittiques dans les
affaires inttrieures de l’Iran, actes qui sont indiquCs en details dam le mCmorandum que j’ai
d&post aujourd’hui.
Le ler dtcembre, le Gouvernement iranien a
adressk au Gouvernement
soviCtique une note,
dam laquelle il exprimait sa satisfaction de l’assurance implicite qui lui Ctait donnie, dans la
note soviCtique, que ces incidents ne se reproduiraient pas, que toute ingCrence sovi&tique dans
les provinces du nord de 1’Iran cesserait, et que
les forces de st?curitC iraniennes seraient autorisdes
j se d&placer librement. Le Gouvernement iranien demandait
a &tre inform6 des mesures
urgentes que I’ambassade sovi&ique comptait
prendre pour assurer la ,libertt de mouvement
des auto&& civiles et militaires iraniennes dans
les provinces du nord. Le Gouvernement iranien

38

I am confident that, in the spirit of justice
which animates the new world Organization, and
in accordance with the principle laid down in
Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Security Council will grant
Iran’s request that pending the completion of
the due withdrawal of the Soviet forces, Iran
should have full freedom of action in its own
territory.
I would like to add that, in presenting these
facts, the Iranian delegation is animated by the
desire for the maintenance of good relations with
the Soviet Union. I have attempted to deal
courteously and objectively with the facts of this
unfortunate situation, which, it is the earnest
hope of the Iranian deIegation, will be clarified
in the cause of lasting friendship between the
Soviet Union and Iran through the recommendation of the Security Council.

refutait le fait que le Gouvernement
sovi~tique
ne pouvait &tre tenu pour responsable de l’absence de fonctionnaires iraniens dana Ces P?‘ovinces, puisquc la presence de ces fonetionn~r~
ne pouvait avoir d’utiliti: que si des forces d,e
stcurite iraniennes etaient mises a, leer dispoation.
Comme l’expliquait
ma lettre du :26 jantier
au Conseil de stcurite, la note du ler d&embre
ne correspondait nullement a la conclusion
d’nn
accord, Elle maintenait au contraire la den~ande
du Gouvernement
iranien que les fOrcCS iraniennes soient autoristes B se rendre clans les
districts septentrionaux.
Le 15 d&embre 1945, a la veille de: la co&rence des trois Ministres des Aifaires &ran&es
a MOSCOU, le Gouvernement
iranien a Wlr@S~
aux Gouvernements de la Grande-Bre:tagne,
des
Etats-Unis d’Amtrique
et de PUnion sovi&tique,
une note par laquelle il demandait 1’1Svacuntion
complete et immtdiate
de son territoiire
par 1~s
troupes allites. En attendant qu’il y. soit fait
droit, il demandait que les forces militatlres &rmg&es actuellement en Iran s’abstinsisent d’entraver le libre mouvement des forces clc &&tit&
iraniennes, afin de permettre au Gouvernement
iranien de retablir la securitC.
Dans ces circonstances, 1’Iran dennande a~tuellement que les auto&& sovittiques cessent de
s’immiscer dans les affaires interieures de PIran,
et que les forces militaires et les foncstionnaires
iraniens ne soient pas emp&chb de pbn&rer et de
circuler librement dans le territoire oi!r sent stationntes les forces sovi&iques, qu’ils ne soient pas
emp&chts d’exercer librement toutes leurs fonctions et, plus particuli&rement,
que les forces
iraniennes de st?curitC ne soient emp$cht%s
en
aucune man&e de se rendre en Azerblnj’djsm,
ou
dans toute autre partie de l’Iran, pour y rCtablir
I’ordre et la loi. Le Gouvernement i:ranien
demande en outre que le Gouvernement sovi&ique
donne toutes instructions n&essaires pour que Ie
retrait complet des troupes et des fonotiannaires
soviCtiques soit effect& le 2 mars 1946.
Je suis persuade que, dans l’esprit de justice
qui anime la nouvelle Organisation
man&&,
et conformbment au principe posh a l’&&]e
2,
paragraphe 4, de la Charte des Nations
U&es,
le Conseil de s&~rit~ donnera satisfaction
h la
demande p&sent&e par l’Iran, tendant a ee qne,
en attendant le retrait des forces sovi&iqu~
qni
doit avoir lieu, le Gouvernement
iranien
ant
pleine libertg d’action sur son propre, territoire,
Je voudrais ajouter qu’en vous p&se
f&s, la d&gation iranienne est anim&
de maintenir de bonnes relations avcac
sovietique. Je me suis efforce d’expfoscr
faGon courtoise et objective cette rep
situation qui (c’est I’espoir t&s sincere de la d&l& 3
gation iranienne) sera tirte au clair da,ns ]‘in@&
du maintien de relations amicales dur+~~es mme’
1’Union sovi&ique et l’Iran, et gr&ce i~ux ret
mandations du Conseil de s&urid.

The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to make
such oral statements as might be wished in supplementation of, or in clarification of, the written

Le PRESIDENT
(traduit de l’qc$:lais
donne maintenant la parole au reprCse
1’Union des RCpubliques socialistes a
pour qu’il fasse telle ddclaration orale clu”a

responsible for the absence of officials in those
provinces, since the presence of those officials
would only be useful if Iranian security forces
were placed at their disposal.

As explained in my letter of 26 January to the
Security Council, the note of 1 December was in
no sense a concluded negotiation. On the contrary, it maintained a request of the Iranian
Government that the forces should be allowed
to proceed to northern Iran.
On 15 December 1945, the eve of the conference of the three Foreign Ministers in Moscow, the Iranian Government addressed a note
to Great Britain, the United States of America
and the Soviet Union, asking for the complete
and immediate evacuation of the territory by
the Allied troops. Pending the fulfilment of this
request, the Iranian Government asked that foreign military forces stationed in Iran should
abstain from interfering with the free movement
of Iranian security forces so that security might
be re-established.
In the circumstances, the request of Iran,
therefore, is that Soviet authorities should cease
interfering in the internal affairs of Iran, and
that Iranian forces and officials should not be
prevented from proceeding freely in and through
territory in which Soviet forces are stationed or
from the full exercise of their duties, and more
particularly that no hindrance should be put in
the way of the Iranian security forces proceeding
to Azerbaijan or to any part of Iran to restore
law and order. In addition, the Iranian Government requests that the Soviet Government give
the necessary instructions to effect complete withdrawal of all Soviet’ troops and officials by 2
‘March 1946.
’

Iq??
,,<;z
,
I~“-,>B
.dp$

’ 1:_
y

’

39
note which has already been communicated
this Council.
.

to

necessaire pour expliquer ou compl&er les notes
qu’il a deja remises par tcrit ?I ce Conseil.

Mr. VYSHINSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) :

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Republiques
cialistes soviCtiques) (traduit du. russe) :

NOTE: The statement reproduced below is the
translation of a text supplied by Mr. Vyshinsky
after the meeting.
I think it necessary to make the following
statement,
As I have already stated, I will leave aside
the questions of substance raised by the Iranian
delegation and I will deal only with the procedural aspect. I will endeavour to bring proofs
to refute the facts put forward by that Iranian
Government which is no longer in power and
whose claims are entirely without foundation,

NOTE: La dkclaration reproduite ci-dessous est
la traduction d’un texte fourni par M. Vychinsky
aprds la skance,
J’estime indispensable de faire la dtclaration
suivante,
Comme je l’ai d&j& dit, je h&se de c&6 les
questions soulevees par la delegation iranienne
quant au fond de l’affaire et je me bornerai a
ce qui a trait a la procedure. Je m’efforcerai de
produire des preuves afin de refuter les faits
avances par ce Gouvernement iranien qui n’est
plus au pouvoir et dont les prttentions sont entierement dCnutes de fondement.
Les questions soulevees par le Gouvernement
iranien ont CtC exposees dans deux dCc1aration.s.
Toutefois le Conseil de stcuritd ne peut examiner
ces questions, car elles ne correspondent pas aux
conditions prevues par la Charte ~3 cet Cgard.
Cependant, je devrai relever en passant certains
faits que la delegation iranienne a present& de
faGon inexacte et tendancieuse. Pour le moment,
il faut decider si le Conseil de sCcuritC doit ou
non s’occuper de la question soulevte par l’ancien
Gouvernement
iranien de M. Hakimi,
qui
semble-t-il, avait pour t&he d’aggraver les relations entre l’lran et 1’Union sovittique.

The questions raised by the Iranian Government are set forth in two Iranian statements,
but since they do not meet the conditions specified in the Charter these questions cannot be
discussed by the Security Council. I shall also,
however, have to touch on some questions of
fact which have’been put in an incorrect and
tendentious light by the Iranian delegation. It is
necessary to decide immediately
whether the
Security Council should or should not deal with
the question raised by the former Iran+
Government of Hakimi, which obviously armed at
aggravating the relations existing between Iran
and the Soviet Union.
I will pass to the procedural aspect of the
question. Here there are two main points. In the
first place, it must be established whether or not
negotiations took place between the Iranian and
Soviet Governments. In the second place, the
results of such negotiations must be considered.
In its first declaration, made to the S&&y
Council on 1.9 January, the Iranian delegation
stated that the Iranian Government had repeatedly’ tried to open negotiations with the
Soviet Government but had met with no success.
At present and in its second document, the
Iranian delegation admits that the Iranian Government not only endeavoured to negotiate with
the Soviet Government but that such negotiations actually took place. The Iranian delegation
itself thus refutes its first statement.
There remains the second question, namely:
What were the results of these negotiations?
In its statement of 24 January addressed to
the Security Council, the Soviet delegation
pointed out that the Iranian Government, in its
note of 1 December, expressed its satisfaction at
the Soviet Government’s statement contained in
its note of 26 November. The Iranian delegation
states that the translation of the Iranian note
is inaccurate, and endeavours to present the
whole matter as if it were dissatisfied with the
results of the exchange of notes between the
Soviet Government and the Iranian Government
in November of last year. I am not going to
start a philological
discussion, and in general
I do not intend to argue the correctness or incorrectness of the translation of the particular

so-

J’en arrive a l’aspect “procedure” de la question. ‘11 y a ici deux points fondarnentaux. En
premier lieu, il faut Ctablir s’il y a eu ou non des
pourparlers entre le Gouvernernent iranien et le
Gouvernement sovietique. En second lieu, il faut
examiner les resultats de ces pourparlers, Dans sa
premiere declaration, faite le 19 janvier devant
le Conseil de sCcuritC, la delegation iranienne a
declare que le Gouvernement iranien avait tent6
B plusieurs reprises d’entrer en pourparlers avec
le Gouvernement soviktiquc, mais qu’il n’y avait
pas reussi. Maintenant, comme deja dam son
deuxieme document, la delegation iranienne
admet, non seulement que le Gouvernement iranien a tent6 d’entrer en pourparlers avec le
Gouvernement sovietique, mais aussi que ces
pourparlers ont effectivement eu lieu, Aiii,
la
delegation iranienne a dCmenti elle-m&e sa premiere affirmation.
Reste la deuxieme question, a savoir: quels
ont CtC les resultats de ces pourparlers?
Dans sa declaration faite le 24 janvier devant
le Conseil de sCcuritt, la delegation sovietique a
indiqut que le Gouvernement iranien, dans sa
note
ler dCcembre, avait exprimr? sa satisfacI 1:bon audu sujet
de la diclaration du Gouvernement
sovietique en date du 26 novembre, La dUgabon de 1’Iran fait observer que la traduction de
ia note iranienne est inexacte; elle tente de prCsenter la situation coxnme si le Gouvemement
iranien n’avait pas Ctt sat&fait des resultats de
Y&change de notes avec le Gouvernement so&
tique en novembre de I’armCe de&&e. Je ne
vais pas soulever un d&bat de philologic ni disr
cuter de* l’exactitude ou de J’inexactitude des
mats auxquels la delegation iranierme se r&f&e,

,,

_
‘YL:
L: /,;
‘:/C
_I .I
‘I ‘:J
,,,

40
words referred to by the Iranian delegation. I
will use the text of the Iranian Government’s
note of 1 December, which the Iranian delegation has sent to the members of the Security
Council. This text shows, no matter how desirable it may be for the Iranian delegation to deny
it, that the Iranian Government through its Ministry of Foreign Affairs pointed with satisfaction
to the contents of the statement mentioned in
the Soviet note of 26 November. In order to
decide the nature of these statements, it is obviously necessary to refer to them, that is to the
Soviet Government’s note of 26 November. It is
evident, on referring to this note, that the Soviet
statement pointed out that the allegation of interference by Soviet employees in the internal affairs
of Iran in the northern district was not in accordance with the facts and that, on the contrary,
the Soviet note of 26 November contained no
statement to the effect that “the incidents will
not be repeated”, as now asserted by the Iranian
delegation. Indeed, how could the note of the
Iranian Government, dated 1 December, express
satisfaction at the statement of the Soviet Government that “the incidents will not be repeated” if the Soviet note with which the Iranian Government
expressed its satisfaction did
not state that “the incidents will not be repeated”? Moreover, there are other passages in
the Iranian note of 1 December which prove
that the Iranian Government was at that time
satisfied.
I am quoting from the text submitted by Mr.
Taqizadeh :
“Your assurance [that is, the assurance of
the Soviet Government
contained in the note
of 26 November] that the officials of the Soviet
Union fully respect the provisions of the Tripartite Treaty and of the Declaration signed
in Tehran by the three great Powers (which
are the Allies of Iran), is also a source of
gratification.“’
Thus, it is quite evident that the Iranian
Government was satisfied with the results of the
negotiations of November
1945 between the
Soviet and Iranian Governments, on the question
which the Iranian Government is now endeavouring to bring before the Security Council for
consideration.
I must also point out that at that time, that
is in December 1945, the Iranian Government
did not show any desire to continue the negotiations on this question. In proof of this, the following passage of the same note of the Iranian
Governm.ent of 1 December may be quoted:
“In answer to the communication
in which
you reply that the charges made concerning
the interference of Soviet officials in our internal affairs, in the Northern Provinces, are
unfounded, the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs
does not wish at this time to give further explanations in this matter and to throw more
light on the antecedents of the case.“’
‘See

ol%al

Records

of

Year, First Series, Supplement
f
‘Ibid.,
page 59,

the

Sscurity

Council,

First

No. 1; pages 58 and 59,

J’utiliserai le ‘texte de la note iranienn’e en date
du ler dkembre, qui a &t distribute par la dtltgation de 1’Iran aux membres du Conseil de
:
5CcuritC. Ce texte montre, quel que soit l’inttr&t
que puisse avoir la dkltgation
iranienne a le
contester, que le Gouvernement iranien, par l’intermtdiaire
de son Ministre des Affaires &ran-,
g&es, a notC avec satisfaction le contenu des ‘I,,;~~
dCclarations expostes dans le mkmorandum
sovi&
ti
‘,)j
tique du 26 novembre.
Pour dCterminer la
nature de ces dklarations,
il faut tvidemment s’y ‘);;i;$”
1
‘7;;‘
&firer, c’est-k-dire consulter la note du Gou,‘i‘
+,,,
vernement soviktique en date du 26 novembre.
Si l’on se reporte ?Lcette note, on peut se:convaincre qu’elle rCfutait les alEgations selon 1esquelIes
des employ& SoviCtiques s’immisceraient
dans les
affaires interieures des regions du nord de 1’Iran
et qu’au contraire la note sovittique du 26 novembre ne dit pas que “dCsormais de pareils incidents
ne se reproduiront plus”, comme l’affirme maintenant la dCltgation iranienne. Comment la note
du Gouvernement iranien en date du ler decembre a-t-elle pu exprimer la satisfaction de ce
Gouvernement
au sujet d’une dklaration
du
Gouvernement sovikique qui aurait dir: que “les
incidents ne se reproduiront
plus”, alors que la ;
note sovittique a la suite de laquelle le Gouver- ”
nement iranien a exprimb sa satisfaction, ne
contenait nullement cette dklaration?
Mais il 3
a dam la note iranienne du ler d&mbre
un
autre passage prouvant que le Gouvernement
iranien &ait satisfait a cette Cpoque.
Je cite ce passage d’aprhs le texte transmis
par M. Taqizadeh :
“Nous accueillons aussi avec plakir l’assurance que vous nous donnez et d’aprks IaqueIIe
1’Union soviCtique respecte entikrement
les
clauses du TraittC tripartite
et les termes de
la DCclaration signte B T&h&an par les trois
grandes Puissances, lesquelles sont lies allites
de l’kan’.”

Ainsi, il est tout & fait evident que: le Gouvernement iranien a &Z satisfait des rtsultats des
pourparlers qui ont eu lieu en novembre 1945
entre le Gouvernement
sovittique
et le Gouvernement iranien, au sujet de la question que ce
dernier s’efforce actuellement
de soumettre B y‘ys#’
’,,@
&
Iq~
l’examen du Conseil de sCcuritC.
‘;*r:,,b*’
Je dois Cgalement faire remarquer qu’a cette +$:Q
Epoque, c’est-&dire en decembre 1945; le GOU- :‘fj~p$,
KX~
,i&l,_I,
vernement iranien ne manifestait pas le d6ir de : ‘, ::s.
continuer les pourparlers a ce sujet. Pour le x,$&,:
prouver, je citerai le passage suivant de la m&me ‘,$#‘;
note du Gouvernement
iranien, en date du :$?$”
&$,y,
1 er dkembre :
@-f$)
8;.#
“En rt$ponse & la communication
dans $‘$&;-,
,$p&I’
laquelle vous rCpondez que les cha:rges con-‘,T,;8g:,
#’~~~&~;#;~
cernant l’interveqticn
de fonctionnaires sovik ‘L@&&:
tiques dans nos aflaires dans ],a- proy&ces du~,$$$$
~iIc&a&ir‘,

*‘%J*:
nord ne sont pas fond&es, le Minis&e
desrtd$;Zti(’
Affaires &rang&es ne d&ire pas, & 1’:heure ac- ‘+@T”
~,l?g~~~
;<
tueue, dormer de pIus amply explic&ions sur’@f$

ce point, ni jeter plus de lumi&re sur les dC~,~~~~li
veloppements ant&ieurs de la question”‘.
j:~~*‘fg$>
&. <ZdF
‘Voir Prods-ueybaux
oficiels
du Conrail
de SkCUr
?remi&re AnnCe, Premib
S&e, Supplkment No
pa!es >8 et 59.
Ibzd.; page 59.

41
How can the Iranian delegation now contend
that the attempts of the Iranian Government to
start negotiations with the Soviet Government
had no results?
From all that I have said, it is obvious that
such results have been achieved. It will also be
seen that the negotiations were not continued
after 1 December because the Iranian Government did not desire it and obviously did not see
the necessity for it. Indeed, in view of the facts
referred to above, can it be said that the negotiations between the Soviet Government and the
Iranian Government
were unsuccessful? The
Soviet Government answers: No, this cannot be
said. As a matter of fact, results were achieved,
and these results were such that the Iranian
Government did not think it necessary to continue the negotiations.
The Iranian delegation also referred here to
the notes bearing later dates in December, the
13th and 15th. These references of the Iranian
delegation to the notes in question aim at showing that even after 1 December the Iranian
Government approached the Soviet Government
with similar claims which, allegedly, were not
granted. But on referring to these notes, it would
appear that they did not deal with the claims
presented at an earlier date by the Iranian Government to the Soviet Government, but raised an
entirely new question, that is, that the Moscow
Conference of Three Ministers should discuss
the wishes of the Iranian Government regarding
the withdrawal of foreign troops from Iran, and
that no decisions should be taken at the Moscow
Conference without previous consultation with
the Iranian Government. It may therefore be
asserted that after 1 December the Iranian Government did not repeat its claims against the
Soviet Union, and that the reference to the notes
of 13 and 15 December has no relation whatever
to the question presented by the Iranian Government to the Security Council. As to the substance
of these December notes, in which the question
of the withdrawal of foreign troops from Iran is
discussed, this matter was covered in the Treaty
of 1942, which, as is known, laid down a definite
time limit for this purpose. It is also known that
the Moscow Conference of three Ministers of
Foreign Affairs did not discuss Iranian questions,
and therefore the claim of Mr. Hakimi at this
time in connexion with the fact that he was not
invited to the Moscow Conference is quite unfounded.
I will summarize this part of my statement. I
consider it to be proved that, in November 1945,
negotiations
on the claims presented by the
Iranian Government did take place between the
Soviet Government
and the Iranian Government, and that these negotiations had satisfactory
results. Now the Iranian delegation, acting on
the instructions of the Iranian Government,
which, as is known, has now been replaced by
another Government, states that it does not consider these negotiations satisfactory. In this case,
the Iranian delegation has every possibility of
again addressing the Soviet Government in order
to clarify the questions in which it is interested.

Des lors, comment la delegation iranienne
peut-elle dCclarer que les tentatives du Gouvernemerit iranien d’entrer en pourparlers avec le
Gouvernement sovittique n’ont pas abouti?
Tout ce que je viens de diremontre
qu’il y a
eu des r&sultats. On voit Cgalement que s’il n’y
a pas eu de pourparlers apres le ler decembre,
c’est parce que le Gouvernement iranien luimCme ne les desirait pas, ne les considkrant apparemment pas necessaires. En effet, peut-on,
&ant dorm6 les faits ci-dessus mentionn&, maintenir que les pourparlers entre le Gouvernement
sovietique et le Gouvernement iranien n’ont pas
abouti? Le Gouvernement sovietique &pond:
Non, on ne peut pas le maintenir. En r&&C, on
a obtenu des resultats, et ils &aient tels que le
Gouvernement iranien a jug& qu’il n’&ait pas
necessaire de poursuivre ces pourparlers.
La d&gation iranienne s’est’egalement rCf6r6e
aux notes plus recentes, en date du 13 et du
15 dCcembre. En s’y &f&ant, la dtlCgation iranienne veut dimontrer qu’aprb le ler decembre,
le Gouvernement iranien s’est adress au Gouvernement sovietique avec des exigences du m&me
ordre, mais qu’on ne lui aurait pas donnt satisfaction. Mais si l’on se reporte a ces notes, on
voit qu’il n’y est pas question des exigences que
le Gouvernement iranien avait prCddemment
prCsent6es au Gouvernement sovietique, mais
qu’on y suggere quelque chose d’entierement
nouveau, L savoir que la Conftrence des trois
Ministres a Moscou examine la demande du
Gouvernement iranien relative au retrait des
troupes Ctranghes de l’Iran, et qu’elle ne prenne
aucune dtcision sans consulter au prhlable le
Gouvernement iranien. On peut done afiirmer
que le Gouvernement iranien n’a pas renouvelC
sesexigences a I’tgard de l’Union soviCtique apr&s
le ler dhembre, et la rtftrence aux notes des
13 et 15 dtcembre n’a rien & voir avec la question soumise au Conseil de sCcuritt par la d&S
gation iranienne. Quant au fond de ces deux
notes, qui ont trait au retrait des troupes &rang&es de I’Iran, ceci est p&vu par le Trait6 de
1942 qui, on le sait, fixe un certain dClai pour
ce retrait. Comme on le sait &galement, la ConfCrence des trois Ministres B Moscou n’a pas
abordC les questions iraniennes et, par condquent, la prCtention formulCe a l’dpoque par
M. Hakimi de n’avoir pas &b invid SLla ConfCrence de Moscou Ctait dinuCe de tout fondement.
Je rtsume cette partie de mon expost. J’estime
qu’il est dCmontrt que des pourparlers ont eu
lieu, en novembre 1945, entre le Gouvernement
sovietique et le Gouvernement iranien, au sujet
des exigences formulltes par le Gouvernement
iranien, et que ces pourparlers ont abouti a des
rCsultats satisfaisants. Aujourd’hui, la d&legation
iranienne, en vertu des instructions resues du
Gouvernement iranien, qui, on le sait, a Et6 remplac6 depuis par un autre Gouvernement, dCclare qu’elle ne considere pas ces pourparlers
comme satisfaisants. Dans ce cas, la d&legation
iranienne a toute latitude de s’adresser h nouveau
au Gouvernement sovietique pour lui demander
des eclaircissements sur les questions qui l’interessent.

42
In its statement to the Security Council, the
Soviet delegation wrote that the Soviet Government could not fail to point out that there had
been a recent increase in propaganda hostile to
the Soviet Union in Iran, which WAS 0-1~
connived at by the Government of Haklml.
The Soviet delegation wrote that this propaganda was in no way different from the fascist
propaganda that formerly took place against the
Soviet Union under Riza. Shah. This statement
continued :
“The anti-democratic and pogrom activity,
hostile to the Soviet Union, on the part of
the reactionary forces in Iran which are supported by certain influential Iranian groups
drawn from the ruling circles and the police
authorities, creates for the Azerbaijan Soviet
Socialist Republic a danger of organized hostile actions, diversions and so forth. . , . The
Soviet Government considers, however, that
questions of this kind, which affect the relations between two neighbouring
States, the
USSR and Iran, can and should be settled
by means of bilateral negotiations between
the Soviet Government and the Iranian Government. The Soviet Government did not and
does not refuse to accept this method of settling such questions arising between Allied
Govermnents.“1
I now ask the Security Council if there is any
foundation for consideration by the Security
Council of the question brought before it by the
Iranian Government of Hakimi and the Iranian
delegation? I answer : No. There is no such
foundation.
This is the actual state of.afIairs. I should like,
however, to consider’ to what extent the Iranian
statement to the Security Council is justified from
the legal point of view, from the point of view of
the conformity of this statement of the Iranian
delegation with the Charter of the United
Nations.
I must analyse the circumstances of this question in connexion with Articles 33, 34, 36 and
37 of the Charter. Article 33 says:
“The parties to any dispute, the continuance
of which is.likely to endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security, shall, first
of all, seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry
etc.”
Consequently, the Charter of the United
Nations requires the Members of the Organization to attempt to settle disputes by means of
negotiation, et cetera, and it is even stated in the
second part of this Article that the Council may
call upon the parties to settle their dispute by the
means indicated in Article 33.
On comparing the contents of Article 33 with
all the circumstances mentioned
here by the
Iranian delegation, it will become quite obvious
that, in the present case, the Security Council,
cannot call upon the Union of Soviet, Socialist
Republics to take any steps provided for by
Article 33.
‘See ~Oficial. Records of thi Security Council, First
yp;;V;t
Sews, Supplement No. 1; Annex 2A, pages
,

Dans sa declaration au Conseil de skourit& la
deltgation sovietique ecrivait que le Gotrvernement soviCtiquc ne pouvait rester indiffdirent
a
la recrudescence de la propagande hostile
a
YUnion

Sovittique,

qui

S’CSt

man&St&

IYkXll~

ment en Iran, avec la connivence Cvidente du
Gouvernement de Hakimi.
La delegation sovietique Ccrivait que o&to
propagande ne se distinguait en rien de la ProPagande fasciste dirigte centre 1’Union sovlgtrque
a l’epoque de Riza Chah. La dtclaration. so&tique continuait en ces termes :
“Les men&s antidemocratiques
in&ant
aux pogroms, ainsi que les violences per+
trees par les forces reactionnaires de I’Iran
hostiles a I’Union sovietique, sous la Protection de la police iranienne et de certain:3 groupes influents appartenant aux milieux
dir.+geants iraniens, risqueraient
de permettre
l’organisation d’actes de sabotage et autres a@
tivitts dirigies centre la Rtpublique
so&?.Iiste
sovietique d’Azerbaidjan ou la ville de :Bakou.
“Le Gouvernement
sovietique estime toutefois que ces questions qui interessent 5% rap
ports de 1’URSS et de I’Iran, pays voisins,
peuvent et doivent &tre r&glees par voie de
negotiations directes entre les Gouvernlcments
sovietique et iranien. Le Gouvernement
sotittique n’a jamais refuse et ne refuse Pas de
rtgler decette fagon les differends de cot ordre
qui surgissent entre Gouvernements alli&ss”.”
Je demande maintenant au Conseil de s&urite: Y a-t-i1 une raison quelconque pour qu’il
examine la question dont il a CtC saisi par le
Gouvernement iranien de M. Hakimi et Par la
delegation iranienne? Je &ponds: non, ill n”y a
aucune raison,
Tels sont les faits. Je voudrais maintenant
examiner le bien-fondi: de la declaration
iranienne devant le Conseil de s&nit&, tant du
point de vue juridique que du point de svue de
la conformit& de cette declaration avec les dispositions de la Charte des Nations Unies.
Je vais analyser les elements de cette question
2. la lumiere des Articles 33, 34, 36 et 37 de la
Charte. L’Article 33 de la Charte dispose:
“Les parties a tout differend dont la prolongation est susceptible de menacer lo maintien de la paix et de la sCcuritC internationales,
doivent en rechercher la solution, avant tout,
par voie de nCgociation, d’enqu&te, etc.”
Done, la Charte oblige les Membres & 130~~
ganisation a tenter de regler leurs difl&ert&
pa
voie de ntgociation, etc., et peut m&me, oonnne
il est sptcifii: plus loin dans le m&me &&le,
inviter les parties i regler leurs diff&ends Par 1~ ,’
moyens indiques dans l’Article 33.
Si l’on rapproche le texte de I’ArticIe
33 de
toutes l&9 circonstances mentionnees ioi Par la
dClCgation iranienne, on verra nettement que le
Conseil de securite ne saurait, dans le CELSPr& I
sent, adresser a 1’Union sovietique une inv+-ation
telle que celle qui est prevue par l’Ar$cle 33,
‘Vpir

Prods-verbaux

ofiicials du Conrail ds ,r&‘dGYtit&

Premlbre Ann&e, Premitre Shie,
Annexe ZA, pages 18 et 19.

Supplkmcnt

~~

1:

43
The next Article pertaining to this question,
Article 34, says:
“The Security Council may investigate any
dispute, or any situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute,
in order to, determine whether the continuance
of the dispute or situation is likely to endanger
the maintenance of, international
peace and
security.”
It suffices to compare the cirrcumstances mentioned here by the Iranian delegation with
Article 34 in order to eliminate any doubt that
this Article is absolutely inapplicable to the question under consideration, since it relates to a
dispute or situation of quite a different order. I
shall further quote Article 36, paragraph 1 of
the Charter :
“The Security Council may, at any stage of
a dispute of the nature referred to in Article 33
or of a situation of like nature, recommend
appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment.”
This Article is inapplicable in this case since
this is not the place for such recommendations,
the Soviet Government having expressly stated
that it considers the only acceptable means of
settling such questions between neighbouring
countries to be by bilateral negotiation.
Finally Article 37, paragraph 1:
“Should the parties to a dispute of the
nature referred to in Article 33 fail to settle
it by the means indicated in that Article, they
shall refer it to the Security Council.”
This Article envisages a’situation in which the
parties have found themselves unable to come to
an agreement. It is quite obvious that, at present,
such a situation does not exist in the relations
between the USSR and Iran, and consequently,
there is no foundation for the application of
Article 37 of the Charter.
The analysis of the above-mentioned Articles
of the Charter undoubtedly proves that the Security Council has no grounds for considering the
substance of the Iranian delegation’s statement.
The Soviet delegation suggests that the Soviet
Union and Iran should be given the opportunity
to settle this matter.
In submitting this ‘proposal, the Soviet delegation has in view the interest of good-neighbourly relations among Members of the Organization, the interest of strengthening international
confidence and mutual goodwill, and an endeavour to strengthen unity and friendship
within the Organization of the United Nations.
The PRESIDENT
: Does the Iranian representative desire to speak at this stage? I was going to
propose that this might be a’suitable moment
for an adjournment of the debate until the next
meeting of the Security Council. If the Iranian
representative feels it imperative for him to speak,
I shall have to ask the Council.
Very well; do I take it, then, that it is desired
that we shall adjourn the proceedings of this
debate until the next meeting?

L’Article suivant, qui se rapportc a la presente
situation, I’Article 34, dCclare :
“Le Conseil de stcurite peut enquCter sur
tout diffCrend ou toute situation qui pourrait
entrainer un d&accord entre nations ou engendrer un differend, afln de determiner si la
prolongation de ce differend ou de cette situation semble devoir menacer le maintien de
la paix et de la s&uritt internationales.”
I1 suffit de rapprocher les circonstances, mention&es ici par la delegation iranienne, du texte
de 1’Article 34, pour ‘qu’il n’y ait aucun doute
que cet Article ne s’applique absolumcnt pas a
la question qui nous occupe, car i.l concerne des
differends ou des situations d’un tout autre genre,
Je vous citerai encore 1’Article 36, paragraphe 1,
de la Charte:
“Le Conseil de stcurit& peut, a tout momen_t
de l’evolution d’un diff &rend de la nature mention&e a 1’Article 33 ou d’une situation
analogue, recommander les procedures ou
methodes d’ajustement appropriees.”
Cet Article ne peut s’apphquer ici, car il n’y
a pas lieu, dans le cas p&sent, de formuler une
telle recommandation, &ant don& la declaration
expresse du Gouvernement
sovi&ique,
qui
consider-e les negotiations bilaterales comme le
seul moyen admissible pour rCgler ces questions
entre deux pays.
Enfin, 1’Article 37, paragraphe 1, declare:
“Si les parties & un diffCrend de la nature
mentionnee 21.I’Article 33 ne rCussissent pas a
le rtgler par les moyens indiqds audit Article,
elles le soumettent au Conseil de securitt.”
Cet Article se rapporte Zt une situation dans
laquelle les parties n’ont pas su ou n’ont pas pu
rCgler leur differend. 11 est tout a fait evident
que les relations entre 1’Union soviCtique et 1’Iran
n’en sont pas la actuellement et, par conskquent,
il n’y a pas lieu d’appliquer I’Article 37 de la
Charte.
L’analyse des Articles de la Charte citks plus
haut dtmontre, sans aucun doute possible, que
le Conseil de &curitC n’a aucune raison d’examiner la diclaration iranienne quant au fond.
La d&gation sovietique propose de donner a
l’Union soviCtique et a 1’Iran la possibilitt de
regler cette affaire entre eux.
En soumettant cette proposition, la dClCgation
sovittique a en vue les reIations de bon voisinage
entre Membres de l’organisation;
elle se preoccupe de consolider la confiance internationale et
la bonne entente entre les nations, et de renforcer I’unite et I’amitie au sein des Nations
Unies.
Le PRESIDENT(traduit de Z’angZaz’s): Le
representant de 1’Iran d&ire-t-i1 prendre la parole
en ce moment; j’ttais sur le point dc suggtrer
qu’il serait peut-&re opportun de renvoyer le
d&bat ?I la prochaine seance du Conseil de s&%ritb, mercredi ii, 15 heures. Si le reprbentant de
1’Iran estime ntcessaire de prendre la parole, il
faudra que je cons&e le Conseil.
T&s bien; puis-je done consid6rer que tout le
monde est d’accord pour renvoyer la suite de ces
debats a notre prochaine s&.nce?

44
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : I shou?d
like to suggest that the completion of this dlscussion should not be carried over to the next
meeting, because it would not be expedient to
divide this question into two parts.

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Rkpubliques
So”
cialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Je PFOpose de ne pas reporter la fin de cette discussron
a la seance suivante, car il n’est pas opporton de
scinder en deux cette question.

The PRESIDENT:
Does any other representative wish to speak regarding the question of the
adjournment of the proceedings at this stage?,
Then I will ask the Council to vote. All in
favour of the proceedings in this discussion being
adjourned until the meeting of the Council at
3 p.m. on Wednesday indicate by raising the
right hand.
II

Le &&DENT
(traduit de Z’anglais) : D’aotres
representants dtsirent-ils prendre la parole sur Ia
question de l’ajournement
des d&bats au point
oh nous en sommes? Je demanderai done au
Cons&l de passer au vote. Ceux qui sont en faveur
de l’ajournement de la seance du Conseil 3 Mercredi 15 heures, sont pries de lever la main droite.

Mr.

V~SHINSKY

Les reprbsentants en faveur de Pajournement
ldvent la main.

Show of hands.

Centre?,

Against?

Les
reprksentants
ldvent la main.

Show of hands.
The
PRESIDENT
: As seven representatives
have voted in favour of the adjournment,
I
declare that it has been carried.

Le PR~SJDENT
(traduit de Panglais) : %pt
reprtsentants ayant vote en faveur de l’ajournement, celui-ci est decide.

May I indicate at this stage to the representative of the USSR delegation that, in view of the
statement which has been made to the Council
and the text of the written statement as well as
the oral statement made by the Iranian representative today, there is a question whether a
dispute exists. If the Council should accept the
view that there is a dispute, then under the terms
of paragraph 3 of Article 27, since the Soviet
Union is named as the other party to this dispute, it will not be possible for the representative
from the Soviet Union to exercise a vote during
the consideration of this particular debate, in
any of the decisions referred to in that paragraph. This does not apply, of course, to decisions on procedure or matters under paragraph 2
of Article 27.

Puis-je indiquer d&s maintenant au reprCsentant de la delegation de I’URSS qu’ttant donnh
la declaration qui a tte adressee au Conseil, le
texte de la declaration &rite de la deldgation
iranienne, et l’expod oral qu’elle a fait aujourd’hui, il s’agit de savoir s’il existe un diffdrend.
Si le Conseil se pronon9ait pour l’affirmative,
le
reprtsentant de l’URSS, du fait que son pays
est design6 comme partie adverse dam ce diff&end, ne pourrait, aux termes du paragraphe 3
de 1’Article 27 de la Charte, exercer son droit de
vote, au tours de ce debat particulier, & propos
des d&&ions prCvues a ce paragraphe. Ceci ne
s’applique pas, naturellement,
aux decisions Zt
prendre sur les questions de procedure ou autre,
prkues au paragraphe 2 de l’Article 27.

The Council stands adjourned
Wednesday afternoon.

Le Conseil s’ajourne jusqu’a mercredi
midi B 15 heures.

until 3 p.m. on

The meeting rose at 6.08 p.m.
FOURTH

MEETING

QUATRIEME

1

The President of the Security Council, Mr.
is communicating
urgently
with Mr. Lie in order to ascertain whether he
would be prepared to accept this nomination.

MAKIN (Australia),

.” ‘-

‘See .o$icial Records
of the Security Council,
Year, hst Series, Supplement
No. 1; Annex
6.

apr&+

La skance est levke d 1% h. 08.

Communiquh
The Security Council held a private meeting
on 29 January 1946, at which it was unanimously agreed to recommend to the General
Assembly the name of Mr. Trygve LIE, Foreign
lVV;t;
of Norway, for the post of Secretary-

’

opposks d Pajournement

First

SEANCE

Communiqd
Le Conseil de sCcuritC a tenu une seance privie, le 29 janvier 1946, au tours de laquelle iI
a dCcidC g l’unanimite de recommander a l,Assemblee generale, pour le poste de Secr&aire
general’, le nom de M. Trygve LIE, Ministre dea
Aff aires Ctrangkres de Norvege.
Le President du Conseil de s&mitt?, M. MAKIN
(Australie) , s’est mis immediatement
en rapport
avec Al. Lie afin de savoir si ce dernier seralt
dispose a accepter ce poste.
’ v?ir

~~~~~~-~erbaux

.oficiels

du

~~~e~~6 Ann&e, Premihre SBrie,

Conseil
de &curitd,
Suppliment
No
1;
