General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

124

Agricultural Development and the United Nations Children's Fund-to maintain and expand their programmes of
assistance to Benin, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme
of assistance and to report periodically to him on the measures they have taken and the resources they have made
available to help that country;
10. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international development and financial institutions, to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance to Benin or, where
one is already in existence, to the expansion of that
programme;
11. Urges Member States and appropriate United
Nations agencies-in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the World Food Programme and the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities-to provide
all possible assistance to help the Government of Benin to
meet the critical humanitarian needs of the population, and
to provide to that Government, as appropriate, food, medicines and equipment for hospitals and schools;
12. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development to bring to the attention of their governing
bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of Benin
and to report the decisions of those bodies to the SecretaryGeneral by 15 July 1983;
13. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Benin;
(b) To ensure that the necessary financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of the
international programme of assistance to Benin and the mobilization of that assistance;
(c) To keep the situation in Benin under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agenci~s,. regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the internatfonal financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council
at its second regular session of 1983, of the status of th~
special programme of economic assistance for Benin;
(d) To report on the progress made in the economic
sit~ation of Benin and in the organization and implementation of the special programme of economic assistance for
that country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Asssembly not Jater than at its thirty-ninth session.

109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/1S2.

As.1istance to Cape Verde

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/211 of 17 December 1981 in
which the international community was called upon to t~e
adequate measures to support the realization of the FiveYear Plan of Cape Verde,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/99 of 13 December 1977
33/127 of 19 December 1978, 34/119 of 14 December 1979
and 35/104 of 5 December 1980, in which the international
..:ommunity was requested to provide an appropriate level
of resources for the implementation of the programme of

assistance to Cape Verde as envisaged in the reports of the
Secretary-General, 56
Recalling further its resolution 36/ 194 of 17 December
1981, endorsing the Substantial New Programme of Action
for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 57
Acknowledging the difficulties inherent in the fragile
economy of Cape Verde, aggravated by a permadent and
severe drought situation,
Noting that Cape Verde is a least developed country, a
small archipelago and a member of the Permanent InterState Committee in Drought Control in the Sabel,
Recognizing that increased substantial and continuous assistance from the international community, both in the short
term and in the long term, will contribute to the effective
development of Cape Verde,
Taking into account that a round table of Cape Verde's
partners in development was organized jointly by Cape Verde
and the United Nations Development Programme at Praia,
Cape Verde, from 21 to 24 June 1982, which undertook a
concrete and detailed analysis of the priorities of Cape Verde
and the level of resources needed for the implementation of
the Five-Year Plan,
Gravely concerned that the expected harvest for 1983 has
been lost as a result of the failure of the seasonal rains and
the recurrence of drought,
Noting that, according to a joint report of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World
Food Programme of January 1982, the food situation of
Cape Verde will remain very critical in the short term and
the medium term,
Recognizing the strenuous efforts deployed by the Government and the people of Cape Verde in the process of the
~io-econ?mic development of the country, despite existmg constramts,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of
14 June 198258 on assistance to Cape Verde,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the efforts deployed in the process of mobilizing resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
2. Expresses its gratitude to States, and to international,
regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations for their contribution to the programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments and
international organizations and non-governmental organizations "'.hich participated in the round table of Cape Verde's
partners m development, and urges them to take appropriate
measures to implement the conclusions of that meeting;
4. Calls the attention of the international community to
tab~e 6 of the annex to the report of the Secretary-General, 58
which enumerates the projects to which the Government
attaches priority;
5. Urges Governments and international, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental org!1Jlizations to extend and intensify substantially their ass1sl!1Jlce with a view to implementing the programme of
assistance to Cape Verde as soon as possible;
6. Invites the international community, in particular donor countries, to take appropriate and urgent measures to
"'A/33/167 and Corr. I. A/34/372 and Corr. I, A/35/332 and Corr. I.
A/36/265.
"Re!'°rt of_the United Nations Conference on the least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 September /981 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one, sect. A.
,. A/37/124.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

support the realization of the Five-Year Plan of Cape Verde,
in accordance with the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries;
7. Requests the organizations, organs and bodies of the
United Nations system to continue and to increase their
assistance to Cape Verde, to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in his efforts to mobilize resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance and to report
periodically to him on the measures they have taken and
the resources they have made available to help that country;
8. Calls upon the international community to continue
to contribute generously to all appeals for food and fodder
assistance, made by the Government of Cape Verde or on
its behalf by the specialized agencies and other competent
organizations of the United Nations system to help it cope
with the critical situation in the country;
9. Draws once again the attention of the international
community to the special account which was established ~t
United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, m
accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/99. for the
purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to
Cape Verde;
10. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to continue to consider, through their governing
bodies, the special needs of Cape Verde and to report the
decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15
July 1983;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the programme of development
assistance to Cape Verde;
(b) To keep the situation in Cape Verde under constant
review and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at
its second regular session of 1983, on the progress made in
the implementation of the present resolution, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
in Cape Verde and to make a substantive report on further
progress in organizing and implementing the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for
the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session.
109th plenary meeting
17 December /982

37/153.

Assi!itance to Djibouti5 9

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/216 of 17 December 1981 and
its previous resolutions on the same subject in which it drew
the attention of the international community to the critical
economic situation confronting Djibouti and to the country's
urgent need for assistance,
Recalling also its resolution 36/ 156 of 16 December 1981
in which it called upon the international community to continue to support the efforts made by the Government of
Djibouti to cope with the needs of the refugee population,
Recalling further its resolution 36/221 of 17 December
I 981 in which it appealed to the international community
59 See also resolution 37/147 above.

125

to contribute generously towards the projects and programmes to help the drought-affected populations,
Aware of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/
41 of 27 July 1982 in which the Council recommended the
inclusion of Djibouti in the list of least developed countries, 60
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 61
to which was annexed the report of the review mission which
he sent to Djibouti in 1982,
Taking note of the critical economic situation of Djibouti
and the list of urgent and priority projects, formulated by
the Government, that require international assistance,
Noting further that the Government of Djibouti will convene a donor's conference early in 1983 in order to seek
international support for the country's economic and social
development,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to organize an international programme of economic assistance for Djibouti;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral;61
3. Notes with appreciation the assistance already provided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other organizations;
4. Again draws the attention of the international community to the difficult economic situation confronting Djibouti and to the severe structural constraints to its
development;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system, regional and international organizations and
other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial institutions,
to provide assistance bilaterally and multilaterally, as appropriate, to Djibouti in order to enable it to cope with its
difficult economic situation and to implement its development strategies;
6. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to maintain
and increase their current and future programmes of assistance to Djibouti, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme
of assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available
to help that country;
7. Appeals to those States and organizations invited to
the donors' conference to be held in Djibouti early in 1983
to respond generously to the programme of assistance that
will be presented by the Government of Djibouti at that
time;
8. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Djibouti;
(b) To continue to ensure that adequate financial and
budgetary arrangements are made to mobilize resources and
to co-ordinate international assistance to Djibouti;
(c) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of I 983, of the current status
of the special programme of economic assistance for Djibouti;
"'' See resolution 37 / 133 above.
hi A/37/136.
