United Nations

A/RES/60/266

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 August 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 136

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 30 June 2006
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/916)]

60/266. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations:
cross-cutting issues
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, 49/233 B of
31 March 1995, 51/218 E of 17 June 1997, 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, 58/315 of
1 July 2004 and 59/296 of 22 June 2005,
Having considered the interim report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the administrative and budgetary
aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, 1
I
1.
Reaffirms its resolution 59/296, and requests full implementation of its
relevant provisions;
2.
Appreciates the efforts of all peacekeeping personnel in the field and at
Headquarters;
3.
Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the overview
of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations 2 and other relevant
reports on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations at the main part of its sixty-first session;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
4.
sixty-first session on progress in training in peacekeeping;

_______________
1
2

05-50356

A/60/880.
A/60/696.

A/RES/60/266

II
Budget presentation
1.
Recalls the unique nature and mandate of each operation, and stresses
that the resource requirements should respond to the mandates and circumstances of
each operation;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to undertake the review of
2.
staffing requirements, function and level of posts that would reflect evolving
mandates, changing operational requirements, actual responsibilities and functions
performed, with a view to ensuring the most cost-effective use of resources;
Recalls section I, paragraph 6, of its resolution 49/233 A, and requests
3.
the Secretary-General to include in all performance reports in respect of
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and
the support account, details of monthly expenditure patterns, as well as to provide,
in the context of the consideration of the budget submission, to the extent possible,
supplementary information on the most up-to-date financial data available on actual
expenditures for the current period;
Regrets the late issuance and receipt of budgets of some peacekeeping
4.
operations, which has placed some considerable strain on the ability of the General
Assembly to engage in a detailed consideration of the requirements, and requests the
Secretary-General to make every effort to improve the timely submission of
peacekeeping budgets;
Notes the practice of allowing peacekeeping staff to take up temporary
5.
duty positions in other peacekeeping missions, and requests the Secretary-General
to review this practice, including for staff currently seconded on temporary duty, to
consider ways to limit the length of temporary duty secondments as well as to
elaborate on the exceptions and ensure that such secondments do not impact
adversely on the operational activities of the parent mission, in particular when the
parent mission has existing vacancies;
III
Use of consultants
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full utilization of synergies
present in the United Nations system and to develop an effective evaluation
mechanism for the use of outside expertise;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the commissioning of
2.
external consultants in the Organization by senior management and programme
managers is conducted according to established administrative procedures and
financial regulations and rules, with full respect for the mandates of internal and
external oversight bodies and the oversight role of the General Assembly, and to
report thereon;
IV
High vacancy rates
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his ongoing efforts, including
through innovative approaches, to ensure the expeditious filling of all vacant posts;
2.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure greater use of
national staff in peacekeeping operations;
2

A/RES/60/266

3.
Further requests the Secretary-General, cognizant of the continuously
high international staff vacancy rates in many missions, to consider, when
formulating budget submissions, greater utilization of national staff, as appropriate,
commensurate with the requirements of the mission and its mandate;
Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen coordination between the
4.
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and the United Nations
Volunteers programme for the use of volunteers in peacekeeping operations and to
evaluate the contribution of United Nations Volunteers as a component of
peacekeeping operations;
V
Accountability, fraud, corruption, mismanagement, misconduct
and conflict of interest
1.
Notes with concern the observations contained in the reports of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,1 the Board of
Auditors 3 and the Office of Internal Oversight Services, 4 concerning instances of
non-compliance with established guidelines, rules, regulations and procedures;
2.
Regrets any incidence of fraud, corruption, mismanagement and
misconduct;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General, within his purview, to address all cases
of fraud, corruption, mismanagement and misconduct and to ensure that United
Nations staff are held accountable for any proven wrongdoings;
Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal
4.
Oversight Services with ensuring that all current and future investigations by the
Office are conducted impartially, thoroughly, expeditiously, taking into account
current capacity, and with full respect for due process, and that they are not subject
to any unnecessary delays;
Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to
5.
recover financial and other losses and to take appropriate measures to prevent fraud,
corruption, mismanagement and misconduct;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the application and
6.
enforcement of accountability in the United Nations system is carried out
impartially at all levels and without exception;
Notes with concern the increase in the level of fraud and presumptive
7.
fraud in respect of fuel abuse within some peacekeeping operations, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that lessons learned from addressing these cases are
shared systematically with all missions;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
8.
sixty-first session on the implementation of paragraphs 1 to 7 above;
9.
Reiterates paragraph 28 of its resolution 52/226 A of 31 March 1998 and
paragraph 30 of its resolution 54/14 of 29 October 1999, related to the issue of
conflict of interest, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their expeditious
_______________
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 5 and corrigendum (A/60/5
and A/60/5 (Vol. II)/Corr.1), vol. II.
4
A/60/717.

3

A/RES/60/266

implementation and to submit the proposals requested in the aforementioned
paragraphs to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-first session;
VI
Integrated missions
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to refine the concept and
functioning of integrated missions, strengthening the mission planning process, and
to clearly detail lines of responsibility and accountability within integrated missions
as well as the interaction between such missions and the different partners;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the utilization of
2.
mission assets by United Nations agencies is fully justified and reimbursed and that
such utilization is duly recorded and reported properly;
VII
Procurement opportunities
1.
Requests the Secretary-General, taking fully into account the
observations of the Board of Auditors, in paragraphs 71 to 74 of its report,3 to
increase efforts to improve procurement opportunities for vendors from developing
countries and countries with economies in transition, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly at its
sixty-first session on the implementation thereof;
Recalls section XVI, paragraph 4, of its resolution 59/296, and requests
2.
the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that information on procurement
opportunities in peacekeeping operations is made available to business
communities, in particular in developing countries and countries with economies in
transition, through, inter alia, continued cooperation between the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat and the Procurement Service of the
Department of Management of the Secretariat, utilizing the United Nations
information centres and offices, as appropriate;
Requests the Secretary-General to make the United Nations Procurement
3.
Manual available to Member States through the website of the Procurement Service
no later than August 2006;
VIII
Quick-impact projects
1.
Welcomes the inclusion of quick-impact projects in the budgets of
peacekeeping operations, and recognizes the important contribution that they make
towards the successful implementation of the mandates of peacekeeping operations;
Stresses that quick-impact projects are an integral part of mission
2.
planning and development, as well as of the implementation of comprehensive
strategies to meet the challenges facing complex peacekeeping operations;
Emphasizes the need for a comprehensive policy, including on resource
3.
allocations, for quick-impact projects, and, bearing in mind the unique nature and
mandate of each operation, requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session, addressing, inter alia: the definition of
quick-impact projects and the selection processes; the duration of such projects;
how, and if, quick-impact projects complement the activities of other United
4

A/RES/60/266

Nations bodies on the ground; the role of the Mission, other United Nations bodies
and implementing partners in managing and implementing quick-impact projects in
the short and longer term; and how administrative costs can be minimized;
IX
Regional cooperation
1.
Welcomes the efforts to increase collaboration between missions, in
particular those in the same region, and emphasizes the importance of further
enhancing collaboration, to the extent possible, with a view to achieving greater
synergy in the effective and efficient use of the resources of the United Nations and
the implementation of missions’ mandates, bearing in mind that individual missions
bear a responsibility for the preparation and for overseeing their own budgets and
for controlling their own assets and logistical operations;
Requests the Secretary-General to develop and implement regional
2.
coordination plans aligned to the missions’ objectives, while mindful of the specific
mandate of each mission, and to report on the progress achieved in the context of
his next overview report;
X
Fuel management
Requests the Secretary-General to review all aspects of fuel management,
including the preparation of a comprehensive fuel management manual,
implementation of the electronic fuel accounting system, development of standard
operating procedures on fuel management and preparation of an annual fuel
procurement plan, and to report on the status of implementation;
XI
Costing structure for air operations
1.
Welcomes the efforts to enhance the optimal use of air assets, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that operations share best practices in order
to increase utilization of air assets;
Requests the Secretary-General to undertake an analysis of the impact of
2.
the new costing structure relating to air operations, bearing in mind the relevant
observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions1 and the Board of Auditors,3 to determine whether the
application of the new costing structure for air operations contracts has resulted in
savings or brought about other benefits and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at the sixty-second session in the context of his overview report;
Also requests the Secretary-General, mindful of the importance of air
3.
services to the effective operational activities of peacekeeping operations, to review,
in all peacekeeping operations, the ongoing necessity and current frequency of
flights, to ensure the optimal use of air assets, to reconfigure them to respond to
changing circumstances, to increase the utilization of air assets, inter alia, by
continuing to review flight schedules to accommodate more passengers and cargo
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore ways to
4.
increase regional management of air assets and further strengthen the coordination

5

A/RES/60/266

between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and relevant United Nations
departments and entities, with a view to sharing air assets, when feasible;
XII
Spare parts
1.
Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to limit the
acquisition of new spare parts in the light of the current high level of holdings,
requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session on optimal levels for spare parts in all missions, and also requests that the
budget proposals for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008 not exceed those
levels;
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
2.
sixty-first session on the possible establishment of a mechanism for global
management of spare parts at United Nations Headquarters, including the ongoing
identification of spare parts requirements, the capacity to redeploy them from other
missions and any efficiencies to be achieved from such a mechanism;
XIII
Better use of technology
Requests the Secretary-General to make greater use of videoconferencing
facilities and e-learning programmes for training and other purposes and to report to
the General Assembly at its sixty-first session on improvements and efficiencies
made through greater utilization of those tools;
XIV
Staffing of field missions, including the use of 300-series
and 100-series appointments
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the staffing of field
missions, including the use of 300-series and 100-series appointments 5 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, 6
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the staffing of field
missions, including the use of 300-series and 100-series appointments;5
2.

Recalls section VIII of its resolution 59/296;

3.
Decides to continue to suspend the application of the four-year maximum
limit for appointments of limited duration until 31 December 2006;
4.
Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in mind paragraph 3 above, to
reappoint, under the 100 series of the Staff Rules, those mission staff whose service
under 300-series contracts has reached the four-year limit by 31 December 2006,
provided that their functions have been reviewed and found necessary and their
performance has been confirmed as fully satisfactory, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;

_______________
5
6

6

A/60/698 and Corr.1 and 2.
A/60/851 and Corr.1.

A/RES/60/266

5.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue the practice of using
300-series contracts as the primary instrument for the appointment of new staff;
XV
Disaster recovery
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
resumed sixty-first session a comprehensive report on the proposed establishment of
and justification for mission onsite, mission in theatre and off site, and off site and
out-of-theatre redundant data centres for disaster recovery and business continuity
in peacekeeping missions, as well as on a secondary active communications facility
and a disaster recovery and business continuity centre for information technology;
XVI
Strategic deployment stocks
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixtyfirst session a comprehensive report on the implementation of strategic deployment
stocks and the use of logistics base and installations, as well as all mechanisms for
rapid deployment, including on the evolving concepts used in this regard, taking
fully into account the surge in peacekeeping operations, the location, operational
and strategic requirements of peacekeeping operations and the need to ensure the
utmost efficiencies in the use of resources.
92nd plenary meeting
30 June 2006

7
