A/RES/55/285

United Nations

Distr.: General
10 September 2001

General Assembly
Fifty-fifth session
Agenda items 61 and 62

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/55/L.93)]

55/285. Revitalization of the General Assembly; improving the efficiency
of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/233 of 17 August 1993, 48/264 of 29 July 1994
and 51/241 of 31 July 1997 and other relevant resolutions,
1.
Decides to adopt the text contained in the annex to the present
implementing resolution;
2.
Decides also to continue its consideration of the items entitled
“Strengthening of the United Nations system” and “Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly” at its fifty-sixth session.
111th plenary meeting
7 September 2001
Annex
I.

Purpose

1.
The process of revitalizing the General Assembly and improving its efficiency
focuses on the implementation of existing Assembly resolutions and decisions, in
particular resolution 51/241 of 31 July 1997, and also taking into account other
resolutions such as resolutions 47/233 of 17 August 1993 and 48/264 of 29 July
1994. Improvement of the procedures and working methods of the Assembly is only
a first step towards more substantive improvements in and revitalization of the
Assembly. The goal of this ongoing process is to enable the Assembly to play its
role effectively as the chief deliberative, policy-making and representative body of
the United Nations.
II.

The agenda of the General Assembly

2.
The rationalization and streamlining of the agenda of the General Assembly
should continue in order to enable the Assembly to focus its work on priority issues.
Any change or suggestion concerning the agenda is made with the understanding
that Member States may at any time propose any issue or item for the attention and
consideration of the Assembly.

00 57625

A/RES/55/285

A.

Clustering and biennialization of items

Cooperation item
3.
All cooperation items shall be clustered under an item entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other organizations” and individual
cooperation items shall become sub-items of that item.
4.
Practical measures to implement the clustering shall be taken in September
2001 by the General Assembly in conjunction with the adoption of the agenda of its
fifty-sixth session.
5.
The cooperation item shall be biennialized, starting at the fifty-seventh
session, and shall appear in the agenda of the General Assembly thereafter at oddnumbered sessions.
6.
Pursuant to the above decision, the biennialization shall be reflected in each
related resolution, starting at the fifty-sixth session, as appropriate.
7.
A joint debate shall be held on the cooperation item, during which all or some
aspects of cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations may be addressed.
8.

Any resolution under individual sub-items shall remain separate.

9.

The cooperation item and its sub-items shall read as follows:
“Cooperation between
organizations:

the

United

Nations

and

regional

and

other

“(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity;
“(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference;
“(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization;
“(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and the League of Arab States;
“(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Latin American
Economic System;
“(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of
American States;
“(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe;
“(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Caribbean Community;
“(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Economic Cooperation
Organization;
“(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union;
“(k) Cooperation between the United
Organization of la Francophonie;

2

Nations

and

the

International

A/RES/55/285

“(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization;
“(m) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Council of Europe;
“(n) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Economic Community
of Central African States;
“(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons;
“(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization.”
B.

Biennialization of items

10. The following items shall be considered by the General Assembly at its fiftysixth session and thereafter biennially:
(a)

“Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic”;

(b)

“Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies”;

(c)

“United Nations reform: measures and proposals”;

(d)

“The situation of democracy and human rights in Haiti”;

(e)

“Restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations in the economic,
social and related fields”.

11. The following item shall continue to be considered biennially, at evennumbered sessions: “Elimination of coercive measures as a means of political and
economic compulsion”.
C.

Items for consideration by a Main Committee

12. The following item shall be considered by the Third Committee, starting at the
fifty-sixth session: “Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly”.
III. General Assembly consideration of reports
A.

Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization

13. The General Assembly stresses the importance of fulfilling the mandates given
by it to the Secretary-General, pursuant to section II of the annex to resolution
51/241, in particular paragraphs 5, 6 and 9 thereof.
14. As regards implementation of paragraph 7 of the annex to resolution 51/241,
the President of the General Assembly, after consideration by the Assembly of the
report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization, shall inform the
Assembly of his assessment of the debate on the report in order for the Assembly to
determine the need for further action.

3

A/RES/55/285

B.

Efforts towards more concise reports, issued and submitted on time

15. Member States need to take concrete action to implement paragraph 32 of the
annex to resolution 51/241, including by requesting more integrated reports.
16. In preparing the annual memorandum concerning the implementation of the
resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly, the secretariat of the Assembly,
in consultation with the substantive departments of the Secretariat, should look for
synergies and integration of reports.
17. Member States and entities of the United Nations system should make a
serious effort to submit their replies and inputs to requests for information or views
pursuant to resolutions of the General Assembly within the prescribed deadlines.
18. The Secretary-General is requested to make further suggestions as to how to
speed up the preparation of reports and to rationalize the scheduling of meetings.
The Secretary-General shall keep the President of the General Assembly and the
General Committee informed on this issue on a regular basis throughout the sessions
of the Assembly.
IV.

Organization of work

19. In order to implement fully paragraph 28 of the annex to resolution 51/241, the
President of the General Assembly is encouraged to make greater use of facilitators,
where appropriate.
V.

The General Committee

20. In order to enhance the capacity of the General Committee to assist the
President of the General Assembly in the conduct of the business of the Assembly
and to improve continuity between its different sessions, at the outset of each
session, each Vice-President of the Assembly shall designate a liaison person for the
duration of the session. This designation may be made informally, without any
amendment to rule 39 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, by means of a letter
to its President.
VI. Role of the President of the General Assembly
A.

Consultations

21. In order to make more use of the regular consultations provided for in
paragraph 43 of the annex to resolution 51/241, including between the President of
the General Assembly and the Presidents of the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council, the Secretary-General should provide these meetings with
secretarial support, as appropriate, including written information to Member States
through the chairmen of the regional groups.
B.

Strengthening the office of the President of the General Assembly

22. Additional measures are required to implement paragraph 44 of the annex to
resolution 51/241, in particular in the area of substantive support for the President of
the General Assembly. Therefore, adequate support should be made available to the
office of the President in the substantive areas of its work. To this end, the
Secretary-General is requested to take appropriate measures and to submit proposals
to the relevant committees for their consideration during the fifty-sixth session of
the Assembly.

4

A/RES/55/285

VII. Enhancing the use of modern technology
23. There is a need to enhance the use of modern technology and information
technology within the United Nations, including in the process of negotiation within
the Organization.
24. Taking into account the general support in this regard, the Secretary-General is
requested to submit proposals to the General Assembly for its consideration:
(a) Introduction of a system to read ballot papers electronically, taking due
account of the security requirements in this regard;
(b) Wiring of the main conference rooms at Headquarters to provide
members of delegations and the Secretariat with access to the Official Document
System and other databases of the Organization, as well as to the Internet, together
with electronic access to texts of statements and reports and, in the case of reports,
simultaneous access to texts in all official languages;
(c) Other areas of the work of the Assembly in which the use of modern
technology and information technology would contribute to enhancing efficiency in
its working methods.

5
