A/64/PV.60

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

60

th plenary meeting
Monday, 7 December 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Christian
(Ghana), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda items 70 and 71 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/336)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/64/84,
A/64/327 and A/64/331)
Draft resolutions (A/64/L.19*, A/64/L.31,
A/64/L.32 and A/64/L.33)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/78)
Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of
sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/313)
Mr. Al Mansour (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is pleased to take part in the discussion of
an important item on the General Assembly’s agenda:
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance”.

We share the grave concern that His Excellency
the Secretary-General expressed in his report
(A/64/336) regarding the increase in the number and
frequency of natural disasters over the past few years.
These disasters have caused thousands of deaths and
billions of dollars in economic losses, exacerbating the
economic and financial crises and climate change. The
economies most affected were those of the developing
countries, whose efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals were negatively affected.
The State of Kuwait is convinced of the
importance of providing humanitarian assistance and is
thus pleased to be at the forefront of the countries that
provide all forms of humanitarian assistance to help
those afflicted by natural disasters and to alleviate their
suffering, especially in developing countries. On the
basis of my country’s belief in the need for a rapid
response and because of its sense of responsibility in
this regard, it provides direct bilateral assistance in this
area.
Since independence, the State of Kuwait has
provided financial assistance to a number of countries
and regions on all continents without discrimination. In
this respect, I recall that the State of Kuwait has
supported the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF) since its establishment. It is seventh on the list
of the 10 countries contributing the most to this Fund.
It is eager to continue this support on an annual basis
and in an impartial manner in order to respond to
immediate and urgent needs. At the same time, we call
upon members of the international community to
increase its contributions to the Fund so that it

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-63702 (E)

*0963702*

A/64/PV.60

continues to achieve its annual goals, as specified by
the General Assembly.

agreed objective of 0.7 per cent for developed
countries set by the United Nations.

The
State
of
Kuwait
commends
the
accomplishments of the United Nations over the past
few years. The Organization has played a prominent
role through its specialized agencies and programmes
in responding to emergencies and facilitating the
transfer and provision of urgent humanitarian
assistance. My country appreciates the efforts of all
United Nations staff members in providing
humanitarian assistance and all the sacrifices they have
made. It expresses its concern over any attacks
targeting them or threats against them, in particular in
situations of conflict or natural disaster.

Assisting the Palestinian people and alleviating
their suffering is an obligation incumbent upon the
entire international community. In this context, I
commend the United Nations, its specialized agencies
and non-governmental organizations for all their efforts
in providing assistance in emergency situations and in
supporting humanitarian, development and economic
needs.

My country calls upon host Governments to fulfil
their role in guaranteeing the security of all those
working in the humanitarian field. It reiterates the call
of the Secretary-General urging all parties concerned to
take part in the response to emergencies and natural
disasters and to encourage respect for humanitarian
principles in an impartial, neutral and independent
manner.
Allow me to briefly give the Assembly an idea of
the humanitarian assistance provided by the State of
Kuwait aimed at mitigating the impact of disasters and
tragedies that have taken place all over the world. For
example, His Highness the Emir, Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, at the Arab Economic,
Social and Development Summit held in early 2009,
established a fund of $2 billion, to which Kuwait
contributed $500 million. Our brotherly nation, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, also contributed $500
million in order to support small and medium-sized
enterprises, to encourage new job opportunities and
improve the standard of living of Arab people and to
combat poverty.
The State of Kuwait also established in 2008 the
Decent Living Fund in order to finance research in the
agricultural sector and to provide urgent assistance to
the most severely affected countries; it contributed
$100 million to that Fund. The Cabinet of the State of
Kuwait issued a decree in 2007 allocating 10 per cent
of the value of any contribution made by the State of
Kuwait to any afflicted State to organizations and
specialized agencies active on the ground.
The State of Kuwait allocates 1.31 per cent of its
gross domestic product to development assistance to
developing countries, which is more than double the

2

I should like to highlight the State of Kuwait’s
continued provision of assistance in various forms to
the Palestinian people, either directly to the Palestinian
Authority or through the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). Last year, the State of Kuwait contributed
$35.5 million to support the Agency, which provides
relief and humanitarian assistance to Palestinian
refugees. Kuwait’s contribution to UNRWA is the fifth
largest of any country.
The State of Kuwait calls on Israel to put an end
to its inhumane practices aimed against the Palestinian
people, to expedite the removal of all restrictions on
movement and border crossing in the Gaza Strip, the
West Bank and Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to stop all
settlement activities and to halt the construction of the
apartheid wall. These practices have caused the
Palestinian economy to deteriorate and have impeded
the delivery of the international humanitarian and
medical assistance and foodstuffs that are vital to the
survival and development of the Palestinian people.
In response to United Nations calls for
emergency assistance following the 2004 tsunami, my
country finished building the village of Jaber
Al-Ahmad in Indonesia. Through the rapid response of
the Kuwaiti Red Crescent Society, the State of Kuwait
also provided urgent assistance to the friendly State of
the Philippines, which had recently been subjected to
storms and typhoons that displaced thousands of its
people. Our Red Crescent Society paid a visit to the
afflicted regions and supervised the delivery of
assistance to those in need.
In conclusion, I should like to point out that the
State of Kuwait will continue to provide assistance at
the bilateral level and through the specialized United
Nations agencies in all fields in response to the natural
disasters, other challenges and international global
crises that impede the achievement of the Millennium

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

Development Goals. We will do so through both our
governmental and non-governmental organizations,
such as the Kuwaiti Fund for Arab Economic
Development,
civil
society
and
charitable
organizations, in the hope of achieving a world in
which everyone lives in security, stability and
prosperity.
Mr. Tawana (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
giving me the floor on this important issue. My
delegation recognizes the important role played by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in
further strengthening the coordination of the
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations.
The United Nations humanitarian system faces
the reality of increasing demands amid declining
resources. It faces rising food prices, increased input
costs and the impact of climate change. The financial
and economic crisis has compounded the challenge for
all Member States, in particular the developing world.
Despite these challenges, the international
community needs to provide adequate, timely and
predictable resources to address these humanitarian
emergencies. Member States need to demonstrate
commitment to the United Nations humanitarian
community and to ensure effective humanitarian relief
during these difficult times.
Although the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF) has only been in operation for the past few
years, various successes have already been registered.
One of its major achievements has been its ability to
achieve its goal of providing assistance in a timely
manner to reduce the loss of life, which is a critical
element in the provision of humanitarian assistance.
Another important element for my delegation is the
ability of CERF to contribute to the so-called forgotten
emergencies, many of which take place on the African
continent.
However, we recognize that challenges within
CERF still remain and need to be addressed to ensure
that the Fund can contribute more effectively to the
work of the United Nations humanitarian system. My
delegation would therefore also support the principle
that continued efforts are needed to improve the
humanitarian response to natural and man-made
disasters and complex emergencies at all levels. This
includes the continued strengthening of the
coordination of humanitarian assistance in the field.

09-63702

Respect for the leading role of national Governments
in these endeavours remains paramount.
My delegation condemns acts of violence
directed against humanitarian personnel. We believe
that humanitarian workers should provide assistance
based on the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence, as enshrined in
resolution 46/182 and other related General Assembly
resolutions.
Humanitarian personnel need to have safe and
unhindered humanitarian access in their areas of
operation within the framework created by General
Assembly resolutions. Humanitarian personnel often
work in difficult situations in their endeavour to assist
vulnerable communities. We need to allow them to
improve the lives of those who need assistance the
most. In this regard, I wish to express my deepest
condolences to the families of all United Nations and
humanitarian personnel who have lost their lives in the
line of duty, and I highly commend those who continue
to serve affected communities.
It is also important that States that have not yet
done so adopt preventive measures and effective
responses to acts of violence committed against
civilian populations, as the protection of civilians
during armed conflict remains of serious concern to my
delegation.
The sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions highlights the reality of how the zeal of
one man, Mr. Henry Dunant, could make a difference
to the lives of millions of people throughout the world.
It is incumbent upon the international humanitarian
community to ensure that the ideals of better protecting
the vulnerable are upheld and expanded, thus
contributing to a better world for all of us.
The current financial and humanitarian crisis
highlights the critical need for effective partnerships
among Member States, the United Nations
humanitarian
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations that work together to ensure a
coordinated approach to providing lifesaving
humanitarian assistance to affected communities
around the world. Under the leadership of national
Governments, these partnerships could also include the
engagement of regional organizations in helping to
improve humanitarian responses and standby
capacities.

3

A/64/PV.60

The increased frequency and scale of natural
disasters in recent years, which have resulted in
massive loss of life and long-term negative social,
economic and environmental consequences for
countries, is of serious concern to my delegation. Many
developing countries do not have the capacity to deal
with the consequences of these disasters. The
increasing impact of climate change-related disasters
also needs our concerted attention.
It is therefore important for developed countries
and relevant international organizations to increase
their assistance to the affected States. This assistance
should include supporting efforts to enhance national
and regional capacities to implement plans and
strategies for preparedness, rapid response, recovery
and development. Furthermore, we wish to highlight
the importance of delivering emergency humanitarian
assistance in a way that would support early recovery
and sustainable rehabilitation and reconstruction
efforts.
It is also important for the international
community to support such efforts through, inter alia,
the transfer of technology and expertise to developing
countries, and to support programmes aimed at
enhancing the coordination capacities of affected
States. We further wish to encourage efforts made by
donor communities to adhere to the principles of the
Good Humanitarian Donorship initiative.
My delegation wishes to welcome the
commitment made by Member States during the
recently concluded World Summit on Food Security,
held in Rome last month, which sought in particular to
re-energize efforts to halve the number of people who
live in hunger and face malnutrition by 2015, and to
work towards achieving food security and access to
food for all. It is critical that the commitments made at
the Summit be implemented in the shortest possible
time. It is unacceptable that more than a billion people
should live in hunger today. South Africa would like to
reiterate its commitment to contributing to the effective
working of the humanitarian system.
With regard to item 71, “Assistance to survivors
of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans,
widows and victims of sexual violence”, my delegation
has noted with interest the progress made in the
provision of aid to the survivors of the genocide. It is
our wish that this progress be intensified to the benefit
of all the people of Rwanda. However, we have also

4

noted that several challenges remain, as noted in the
report of the Secretary-General (A/64/313). We
therefore appeal to the international community to
continue to support the people of Rwanda as they
overcome these highlighted challenges in an effort to
help them improve their quality of life.
South Africa is already engaged in several
endeavours aimed at assisting and improving the
quality of life for the people of Rwanda. We intend to
continue to do so, with the aim of contributing to the
international efforts to assist that country. We believe
that, together, we can do more to provide humanitarian
assistance in a manner that is faster, more predictable
and coordinated.
Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French): If
there has been one constant in the work undertaken by
humanitarian actors, it is that it occurs in an evershifting operating environment. Indeed, looking back
not even 20 years to the adoption of our humanitarian
framework resolution 46/182, we see that this
landscape has altered significantly. We do not need a
crystal ball to see that the humanitarian landscape will
continue to change rapidly and generate new needs in
non-traditional contexts. Trends, such as increasing
migration, population growth, urbanization and
environmental changes will impact the future of
humanitarian assistance and coordination.
States and societies already struggling with the
implementation of basic governance functions will find
themselves further taxed by all these changes. The
most vulnerable will, unfortunately, continue to feel
the brunt disproportionately, but the interconnectedness
of these issues means that no country and no people is
likely to be spared.
Canada believes strongly that we have made
progress in addressing the changing humanitarian
landscape and the challenges that have emerged.
Enormous strides have been made to improve our
ability to respond swiftly, effectively, predictably and
coherently across the entire spectrum of natural
disasters and complex emergency situations. And yet,
we continue to struggle to find strategies to overcome
the obstacles to humanitarian access and threats to the
safety and security of aid workers.
Humanitarian access is at the heart of our ability
to assist populations at risk. Despite the General
Assembly’s repeatedly stated commitment to
humanitarian principles — including access — our

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

implementation
has
faltered;
some
countries
deliberately flout that consensus. Moreover, we are all
too aware that attacks against aid workers have
increased sharply in recent years.
Such attacks, the majority of which are directed
against national staff, are unacceptable. This Assembly
must therefore support improvements to security
management,
training
and
resourcing,
better
cooperation among all concerned, and the recognition
of security as a cost of doing business. For the
humanitarian community operating in the most
dangerous contexts, the challenge is to identify new
options tailored to each circumstance. Finally, when
attacks do occur, those responsible must be held to
account.
(spoke in English)
There are three key areas on which I would like
to focus our work if we are to address the challenges at
hand and that loom before us: streamlining our work,
supporting a strengthened evidence base and enhancing
dialogue.
First, we are making positive gains in
streamlining our work to avoid duplication and to
stretch finite resources. Critical to that is ensuring that
we are not operating in isolation and that we move past
rivalries, share information, and bring together the
increasing diversity of actors involved in humanitarian
assistance. For example, in the context of natural
disasters, by integrating disaster risk reduction and
climate change adaptation into long-term development
planning, we can enhance resilience and reduce
vulnerability.
Moreover, the cluster approach was created to
strengthen overall humanitarian responses, including
response capacity and effectiveness. We also need to
continue our efforts to address issues such as
accountability within that system.
We need to be skilful in our approaches. Natural
disasters and conflict environments are multifaceted
and ever-changing. That relies on having a solid
framework, tools and mechanisms at our disposal, but
also allowing enough flexibility to account for the fact
that there is no one-size-fits-all model.
Here, the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF), and an increasing number of pooled funds
contribute to our ability to respond swiftly to a
humanitarian crisis or crises that are overlooked. But

09-63702

the CERF must categorically be complemented by
other efforts. We have repeatedly called for
improvements in the knowledge and capacity of its
humanitarian and resident coordinators, as well as the
strengthening of the consolidated appeals process and
the needs assessments that underpin them.
Secondly, our work relies on ensuring a strong
evidence base. At the heart of this is the urgent need to
improve needs assessments so that there is a credible,
objective and evidence basis for the allocation of
resources. Canada also believes that we must continue
working together to make progress towards better
common or joint needs assessments. Further, we
welcome the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to better monitor
access constraints.
Finally, the Government of Canada feels strongly
that we need to continue to enhance dialogue across a
range of actors, particularly at local levels. We need to
work more closely with local communities and ensure
a participatory process in which they are actively
involved in planning and decision-making. We are
greatly supportive of OCHA’s outreach efforts in that
respect. Outreach sessions build partnerships among
recipients, local communities, donors, the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations. They
provide opportunities to share different approaches,
roles and perspectives and deepen knowledge on key
aspects of the humanitarian system.
But we must also include in our discussions those
in the development, scientific, financial and private
sector communities who have expertise and capacity
that could be leveraged. Each set of actors brings its
own added value to operations, and we must capitalize
on that to ensure the greatest impact.
In conclusion, while we cannot avoid the
challenges before us, should we not be daunted by our
task. Large challenges disguise large opportunities.
Collectively, we have a wealth of knowledge, resources
and networks to draw upon. Let us continue to be
strategic in our plans, innovative in our delivery, and
synchronized in our approach.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): The unprecedented
demands on the international humanitarian system over
the past year have consequences for all of us —
Governments, the United Nations, international
humanitarian
organizations,
non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and civil society. 2009 has seen

5

A/64/PV.60

the emergence of new conflicts as well as a range of
natural disasters, while the large number of protracted
emergencies that necessitated response in 2008 still
require the attention of the international community.
The magnitude of those emergencies is illustrated
by the scale of the United Nations consolidated and
flash appeals, with funding requirements for 2008
totalling $7.1 billion and a staggering $10 billion for
2009. But those figures only give us a glimpse of the
immense destruction and human suffering caused by
those emergencies, and even that snapshot is
incomplete. In 2009, various natural disasters not
covered by appeals still required a comprehensive
international response in support of national-led
efforts.
Our own Asia-Pacific region has not been
immune from the impact of protracted crises and
sudden, onset disasters. The past few months alone saw
the tsunami that struck Samoa, American Samoa and
Tonga; the earthquake in West Sumatra, Indonesia;
several typhoons and storms in South-East Asia,
particularly the Philippines; and floods in Nepal. And
even that list is by no means complete. There is a
compelling need to reduce the impact of future
calamities by investing more in disaster risk reduction
and in disaster preparedness.
The international community needs to do much
more — and to do it urgently — in the area of
mitigation and adaptation to deal with the effects of
climate change. The small island nations of the Pacific
are among the world’s most vulnerable to the effects of
that change and to the potential impact of disasters.
And, collectively, we must invest more in the early
recovery process to bridge effectively the gap between
life-saving humanitarian work and longer-term
sustainable development.
New Zealand supports the United Nations in its
leadership
and
coordination
of
international
humanitarian action, both in preparedness and
response. More specifically, we endorse and value the
particular role of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), with which we closely
engage, particularly through our membership of the
Donor Support Group, of which we will take up the
Chair in July of next year.
New Zealand supports the Good Humanitarian
Donorship principles. We will continue to provide
unearmarked core funding to United Nations and other

6

international agencies to enable them to prioritize
effectively on the basis of their strategic priorities and
needs. We will continue to support the Central
Emergency Response Fund to assist early, effective and
equitable responses. We will also be as responsive as
possible in the allocation of funding to specific appeals
of the United Nations and other international agencies.
Much has been and is being done to strengthen
the quality of United Nations in-country humanitarian
leadership and coordination, the rigour, robustness and
consistency of needs assessments, and the quality of
humanitarian appeals and reporting. We urge that those
efforts continue with national Governments as full,
active partners. With the international humanitarian
system facing immense pressures and demands, it is
absolutely essential that the work of the United Nations
be based on maximum efficiency, relevance and
effectiveness, and that it can demonstrate clear results
and impact.
New Zealand stresses the need for United Nations
humanitarian interventions to be undertaken in close
partnership with local civil society, national and
international NGOs, the Red Cross and the private
sector, all of which have much to offer and must be
treated as equal partners.
It is also essential that the work of the United
Nations, national Governments and other agencies
address in full the importance of gender equality and
the needs and rights of women and girls. We also urge
all Governments and other relevant parties to ensure
that the United Nations and other organizations
involved in the delivery of humanitarian assistance
enjoy full, unrestricted and timely access to the victims
of emergencies and disasters and to those in need of
humanitarian assistance.
It is extremely disturbing that the past year has
seen an escalation in bombings and other attacks on
United Nations facilities and personnel engaged in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, and that there have
also been many attacks on personnel of the Red Cross
Movement and of non-governmental organizations
engaged in humanitarian work. It is hard to imagine a
more obvious manifestation of evil than attacks clearly
intended to kill or injure humanitarian workers and to
impede their efforts. New Zealand abhors such
atrocities and calls on all parties to all conflicts to
respect international humanitarian law and the related
conventions.

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

In every situation where humanitarian assistance
is provided, our collective and individual purpose is to
prevent and alleviate human suffering, regardless of
location — a purpose that deserves our full support.
New Zealand stands ready to provide for that purpose,
and is therefore unequivocal in its support for the
international humanitarian system.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Governments of India and Sweden. At the outset, we
would like to thank the Secretary-General for the
reports that have been prepared for discussion under
the agenda items being debated today.
As brought out in the Secretary-General’s reports,
the global demand for humanitarian assistance
continues to show a rising trend. The year 2008, in
particular, witnessed enormous loss of human life and
widespread destruction caused by natural hazards,
ranging from the deadly cyclone Nargis in Myanmar
and the Sichuan earthquake in China to Hurricane Ike
in the United States. While there has been an increase
in the severity of natural hazards, vulnerabilities
caused by the financial and economic crisis and the
rising prices of food and energy have further
accentuated the challenges on the humanitarian front.
Complex emergencies continue to affect millions of
people. The necessity for the coordination and effective
delivery of humanitarian assistance can thus hardly be
overemphasized.
India and Sweden reaffirm their respect for and
adherence to the humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence that guide the
framework for humanitarian assistance. It is important
that the letter and spirit of these principles be
scrupulously respected, since they are essential for
preserving the space and integrity needed for
delivering humanitarian assistance to all people in
need. We are gravely concerned about recent security
incidents, and firmly and resolutely condemn the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian and United
Nations personnel.
Member States have the primary responsibility of
protecting and meeting the needs of people in need of
humanitarian assistance. At the same time, there are
situations in which Member States find it difficult to
manage emergencies on their own. The role of the
United Nations and other humanitarian actors thus

09-63702

becomes important for carrying out humanitarian
efforts in coordination with the host Government.
India and Sweden deeply value the critical role of
the United Nations in coordinating emergency
humanitarian assistance. There is an imperative need to
continue to work to develop ways and means by which
the capabilities of the United Nations in delivering
international humanitarian assistance, and its role in
coordination, can be further enhanced and
strengthened. This would imply an augmentation of the
operational coordination capacities of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, an enhanced
synergy of efforts within the United Nations system,
and the improved delivery of humanitarian assistance
by relevant United Nations entities, as well as greater
transparency and accountability to stakeholders.
We must give greater attention and resources to
disaster risk reduction and disaster preparedness. At the
same time, efforts should be focused on building local,
national and regional capabilities. We are happy that
there is growing recognition that timely and effective
emergency assistance can increasingly be undertaken at
the local, national and regional levels. We need to
consider adopting a more proactive strategy of building
partnerships with disaster-prone countries at both the
national and regional levels, focusing on disaster
preparedness as part of a comprehensive disaster risk
management approach. Greater coherence, exploiting
synergies, and complementarities at the country level
are critically important in ensuring an effective,
coordinated and efficient response.
In its brief history of four years of operation, the
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) has been a
success. It has strengthened its operations and is
playing an important role in supporting relief
operations. India and Sweden are happy to note that
CERF is emerging as a useful tool for jumpstarting
relief operations following sudden disasters and filling
gaps in time-critical emergencies. It is heartening to
note that CERF has been able to surpass the target of
$450 million set by the General Assembly for its
annual funding, with contributions from 109 Member
States. Nevertheless, this does not leave any room for
complacency, as the United Nations system still only
channelize a minuscule proportion of global
humanitarian assistance.
All Member States share a common goal: the
effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. We must

7

A/64/PV.60

continue to work to strengthen this consensus, based on
our shared interests, through constructive and informed
dialogue. This would be helpful in bridging differences
among Member States and ensuring a well-targeted,
timely, predictable and need-based humanitarian
response.
Mr. Webb (United States of America): I would
like to open my remarks by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report on the
strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
(A/64/84). His analysis of current trends and
challenges facing the humanitarian community serves
Member States by highlighting the devastating impact
that man-made and natural disasters have on
communities in countries throughout the world and by
bringing to our attention ways that we can collectively
improve efforts to save lives, reduce suffering, protect
the vulnerable and initiate recovery from humanitarian
crises.
In order to deliver critical assistance to
populations in need, humanitarian agencies must be
present. Even in the best of times, that is dangerous
work that is undertaken by dedicated and often heroic
people. However, the United States is deeply
concerned about increasing violence targeting
humanitarian workers, which is intended to limit the
presence of humanitarian actors, including United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and the components of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement. Recent attacks against the World
Food Programme Office in Islamabad and the United
Nations staff house in Afghanistan reflect a deliberate
strategy by armed groups to disrupt and disable the
operations upon which vulnerable people depend most.
The United States urges the United Nations and
Member States to take comprehensive and far-reaching
measures to improve the safety and security of
humanitarian workers, including national staff, so that
humanitarian operations may continue to serve those in
need. We reaffirm our commitment to the humanity,
neutrality,
impartiality
and
independence
of
humanitarian assistance, and encourage all parties to
conflict to do the same.
Aside from security considerations, the
Secretary-General cites overly bureaucratic procedures
as a major impediment to the timely mobilization of
humanitarian operations. A number of Governments
erect deliberate barriers between humanitarian aid

8

agencies and communities in crisis based upon
calculations that put politics ahead of people in need.
They delay issuing visas, restrict travel permits and
hold up vital equipment in customs for months or
longer. Those campaigns to limit the presence of
humanitarian actors in zones of crisis cause needless
suffering, and they cost lives. Those unacceptable
measures should be rejected by the overwhelming
majority of United Nations Member States, which
share a commitment to prompt and effective
humanitarian action.
To the degree that distrust of humanitarian
agencies feeds into those obstructions, that mistrust is
baseless. The assistance provided by United Nations
agencies, NGOs and the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement — including food, water, sanitation, shelter
and protection — does not present a threat, but rather
an opportunity to work collaboratively with the
international community in meeting the needs of those
whose lives have been up-ended by conflict or natural
disaster.
We applaud the high-level attention that the
United Nations has given recently to the protection of
civilians and to violence against women in conflict.
The recent adoptions of Security Council resolutions
1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1894 (2009) reaffirm
both the ongoing need to vigorously address protection
challenges in conflict and post-conflict environments
and the will of the international community to develop
robust responses to avoid and deter violence against
innocent civilians, as well as to impose accountability
measures when violations of international humanitarian
law have taken place. We encourage the effort of the
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other United Nations
humanitarian agencies to work in a constructive yet
vigorous manner with Member States to address
protection concerns.
The United States remains committed to
continuing its leadership role in the field of emergency
humanitarian assistance. We are determined to meet
current and upcoming humanitarian challenges with
appropriate resources and engagement, so that the
international disaster response system functions in an
effective and timely fashion. We strongly support the
continuing collective efforts at humanitarian reform in
order to improve the impact of humanitarian response
by ensuring greater leadership, predictability,
accountability and partnership.

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

Finally, the United States would like to recognize
the indispensable contribution of humanitarian workers
in delivering assistance to refugees, internally
displaced persons and other disaster-affected groups
around the world. The international and national staff
of aid agencies put their lives at risk on a daily basis to
reach millions touched by conflict and natural
disasters. We pay special tribute to humanitarian aid
workers who have lost their lives in the course of their
duties over the past year. As a matter of urgency, we
must come together to show our support for the work
of United Nations and other humanitarian actors who
make the difference between life and death in disastertorn communities.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank UnderSecretary-General John Holmes for his introduction. I
should now like to make a few comments under this
agenda item.
According to the Secretary-General’s report,
there was a declining trend in the frequency of natural
disasters in the past two years. However, the impact
and gravity of those disasters have remained severe.
Owing to the global financial and economic crisis, the
vast number of developing countries are suffering the
multiple impacts of economic reversal, increased
vulnerability and insufficient assistance. Their efforts
at disaster relief, reduction and preparedness have been
seriously challenged by the lack of funds and
technology. The current global humanitarian relief
situation has become more difficult. The common task
and challenge facing the international humanitarian
community now includes how to further enhance trust
and cooperation among all relevant partners, how to
cope with the tension between the increase in demand
for global humanitarian assistance and the decrease in
resources, how to genuinely help developing countries
build their capacities for disaster relief and risk
reduction and how to realize the goal of speedy postdisaster recovery and long-term development.
China believes that the Guiding Principles on
Humanitarian Assistance, set out in the annex to
resolution 46/182, constitute both the prerequisite and
foundation for effective humanitarian assistance.
Partners in humanitarian relief in particular, including
humanitarian agencies and personnel of the United
Nations, must abide by the principles of humanity,
neutrality and impartiality, respect the sovereignty and
the territorial integrity of affected countries, comply

09-63702

with international humanitarian law and the laws of the
host country and respect local culture and traditions, so
as to ensure the credibility and smooth implementation
of United Nations humanitarian relief work. China
supports the relevant United Nations entities in
intensifying training for their personnel and enforcing
a stricter and more effective accountability system, so
as to ensure full respect for and implementation of the
Guiding Principles.
Since the forty-sixth session of the General
Assembly, relevant United Nations resolutions have
reiterated the importance of helping developing
countries to strengthen their capacity in disaster
reduction, preparedness and relief. However, affected
countries have received very limited support for their
capacity-building efforts at the national and local
levels. Facts have shown that the lack of capacity has
become one of the major constraints hampering
effective response to humanitarian crises by affected
countries.
China calls upon the international community to
make it a priority in humanitarian assistance work to
help countries stricken by disasters to strengthen their
capacity for disaster reduction and relief. The United
Nations system should endeavour to enhance existing
humanitarian response capacity, knowledge and
institutions. It should also urge the parties concerned to
earnestly fulfil their commitment to transfer disaster
relief and reduction technology and expertise to
developing countries and to help affected countries
achieve a smooth transition from relief to development.
China looks forward to the report to be submitted by
the Secretary-General next year, which will fully
reflect the progress made in the area of capacitybuilding.
Under the guidance of Under-Secretary-General
Holmes, the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has
played a unique coordinating and guiding role in the
area of humanitarian assistance, for which the Chinese
delegation expresses its appreciation and support.
China believes that with the deepening of the reform of
the United Nations humanitarian assistance system, the
coordinating role of OCHA should be constantly
strengthened. China hopes OCHA will make further
efforts in following areas.

9

A/64/PV.60

First, it should endeavour to obtain timely,
adequate, flexible and predictable resources for
humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, it should conduct in-depth studies and
make guiding recommendations on ways to help
disaster-affected countries enhance their disaster
response capacity.
Thirdly, it should take concrete measures to keep
United Nations humanitarian decision-making and
operations free from the influence of media visibility
concerns and from deviation from relevant
humanitarian principles and mandates.
Fourthly, it should maintain both its policy focus
on and resource input into non-climate-related natural
disasters.
Finally, it should improve staff recruitment so as
to ensure full representation and help promote
communication and mutual trust between OCHA and
the developing Member States.
The Group of 77 and China has submitted to the
current session of the General Assembly a draft
resolution
on
international
cooperation
on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development. The Chinese delegation
calls upon all Member States to actively engage in the
consultations and reach a consensus as soon as
possible.
China is a disaster-prone developing country.
Disaster reduction, preparedness and emergency relief
are perennial and arduous tasks facing its governments
at all levels. While coping with the enormous
challenges posed by natural disasters, the Chinese
Government attaches great importance to international
cooperation in the field of humanitarian assistance. At
the request of the Governments of the affected
countries and upon the appeal of the international
community, China is taking an active part in
international relief efforts and widely sharing its
experience in disaster relief and disaster reduction. As
always, China will continue to support the efforts of
the United Nations system and the international
community in the field of disaster risk reduction,
preparedness and relief, and do its part in helping
affected countries and their people overcome disasters
and rebuild their homes.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to join
others in thanking the Secretary-General for his

10

reports. Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Sweden, who spoke on behalf
of the European Union, addressing all aspects of
humanitarian issues under agenda item 70. However, in
my national capacity, I would like to make some
remarks that are of particular interest to Ukraine.
United Nations humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance has been acquiring growing importance in
the light of the increased number of humanitarian
threats and challenges in the world today. It is
necessary, in our view, to ensure that responses to
humanitarian situations are comprehensive and
coordinated and that they preserve the fundamental
principles of humanitarian assistance: neutrality,
humanity, impartiality, respect for sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of States.
Ukraine attaches the utmost importance to the
role of the United Nations, and particularly that of the
United Nations Development Programme, in the
strengthening of international cooperation in mitigating
and minimizing the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster.
During the current session of the General
Assembly, States Members of the United Nations will
review the implementation of resolution 62/9 on
Chernobyl issues and the realization of the United
Nations action plan for Chernobyl recovery to 2016
aimed at implementing the Decade of Recovery and
Sustainable Development of the Affected Regions,
which seeks to maximize limited resources, avoid
duplication of efforts and build on recognized agency
mandates and competencies.
We are looking forward to adopting a new
comprehensive and ambitious resolution on Chernobyl
issues in the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, bearing in mind that next year we will be
half way through the third decade following the
Chernobyl disaster. In April 2011, we will
commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Chernobyl tragedy. That should be reflected in a new
resolution. We find it essential to once again remind
the international community of the consequences of
that tragedy in order to avoid such disasters in the
future, on the one hand, and to address issues of secure
and environmentally friendly nuclear energy for the
benefit of humanity, on the other hand. Accordingly,
under the auspices of the United Nations, Ukraine is
planning to organize an international conference in

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

Kyiv in April 2010. We hope that the General
Assembly will support this idea.
Ukraine strongly believes that, given the scope
and magnitude of the Chernobyl catastrophe and its
severe long-standing consequences, the Chernobyl
issue should remain on the agenda of the General
Assembly and be considered in future plenary sessions
as part of the humanitarian cluster with a special focus
on economic assistance.
I cannot but emphasize the importance of the
efforts of the international community to complete
construction of the shelter facility and related nuclear
safety projects at Chernobyl in accordance with
international standards, in order to transform the site
into a stable and environmentally safe place. We
appreciate the contribution made by all Member States
and agencies of the United Nations system, as well as
representatives of civil society, the private sector and
donor community, to the development of cooperation
to mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster.
As the Chernobyl disaster has affected many
parts of the world it is important that we continue to
study its consequences so as to enable mankind to
never forget the bitter lessons of the past.
The Government of Ukraine remains fully
committed to cooperate with the other two affected
States, as well as with all international partners, to
mitigate the legacy of the Chernobyl tragedy. Ukraine
is also cooperating with other Member States within
the humanitarian cluster and we support and have
co-sponsored the four draft resolutions under this
agenda item to be adopted today by the General
Assembly
(A/64/L.19,
A/64/L.31,
A/64/L.32,
A/64/L.33).
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Rwanda welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on assistance to
survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly
orphans, widows and victims of sexual violence
(A/64/313). Since the first adoption of a resolution on
the subject, at the fifty-ninth session of the General
Assembly (resolution 59/137), progress on its
implementation has been slow. However, significant
inroads have been made towards ensuring that the
provision of assistance and support to survivors in the
future will be possible.

09-63702

The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
progress my Government has registered in the 15 years
since the genocide. Today, we can say that our present
dispensation is based on a political culture that values
diversity, consensus-building and power-sharing
towards a common purpose. For the first time,
Rwandans are at the centre of planning processes and
are active participants in the implementation of
programmes that impact their lives. Examples include
the development of Rwanda’s Vision 2020 campaign,
the design and execution of our national unity and
reconciliation strategy, the delivery of the gacaca
system of justice, and the drafting of a new
Constitution that encapsulates the values we have
adopted.
We now have a system of laws and institutions
that guarantees justice for all and creates an
environment that gives Rwandans the confidence to
pursue their potential unhindered. By investing heavily
in socio-economic development, we are encouraging a
mindset shift away from a passive attitude of
dependency to one of self-sufficiency, innovation and
an entrepreneurial spirit.
The Secretary-General’s report identifies a
number of key actions and initiatives that have been
undertaken by the United Nations system. Those
include the comprehensive programme aimed at
addressing access to economic and social rights by
genocide survivors and at enhancing their political
participation at the national and local levels. They also
include institutional support to such key institutions as
the justice sector, the National Unity and
Reconciliation Commission, the National Police and
the Prosecutor’s office.
The actions and initiatives described in the report,
however, point to wider United Nations support in
Rwanda under the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework. It is therefore imperative that
the United Nations system, in collaboration with my
Government, identify and develop specific programmes
aimed at providing assistance to survivors of the
Rwandan genocide.
The report also points out that numerous
challenges remain. Ensuring the participation of
children, young people and women in the democratic
process; providing alternative and complementary
education for out-of-school children; enhancing the
retention rates at the primary, secondary and tertiary

11

A/64/PV.60

levels; and enhancing housing and associated amenities
for vulnerable groups such as orphans, widows,
returnees and the internally displaced are some of the
challenges facing survivors in Rwanda today.
Rwanda has undertaken initiatives to address
those challenges through such home-grown approaches
as the gacaca courts; Itorero, a culture-based platform
through which people solve their problems and which
promotes national unity and executes all Government
development programmes at all levels; and Igando, a
tool to build coexistence within communities. This
year, the Rwandan diaspora, in collaboration with the
Government and local civil society organizations,
launched the One Dollar Campaign for Genocide
Survivors, which aims to ensure that every orphan in
Rwanda has a decent home and that the social welfare
of all genocide survivors is catered to.
In conclusion, it is crucial that the conclusions
and recommendations contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report be implemented so as to ensure that
survivors are offered the assistance they need and
deserve. Rwanda remains resolutely committed to
addressing those challenges with the active
participation, of course, of the United Nations system
and our development partners.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 45/6 of 16 October 1990,
I now call on the Permanent Observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

complexity of such situations makes it particularly
difficult to determine an appropriate humanitarian
response.
Humanitarian agencies face steadily growing
needs as a result of those multiple risks. At the same
time, their operating environment has become ever
more diverse and challenging. Limited access to the
people in need — for political or security reasons, or
owing to a lack of acceptance — remains a frequent
problem. Repeated attacks against humanitarian
workers show how hard it is to ensure adequate safety
for beneficiaries and humanitarian personnel alike.
ICRC operations have not been spared these
security challenges. We have experienced several
serious incidents lately. While several host
Governments have been duly shouldering their primary
responsibility for coordinating humanitarian aid, they
have in some cases been subjecting the work of
humanitarian organizations to strict conditions, to the
point of sometimes impeding sorely needed and purely
humanitarian services.
In many situations, a growing number and variety
of actors — political, military, development,
humanitarian — coexist with distinct objectives and
different approaches. We also observe that armed
forces, be they national or international, tend to
become increasingly involved in humanitarian action,
which is sometimes exploited for political purposes.

Mr. Füllemann (International Committee of the
Red Cross): The International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) appreciates the opportunity once again to
address the General Assembly on strengthening
coordination of humanitarian action, in particular in the
context of armed conflict and other situations of
violence.

United Nations peace support operations
increasingly combine widely different activities. That
is problematic in situations of conflict, when these
operations appear to support only one party to the
conflict. All of that has sometimes blurred the lines
between roles and objectives, reducing the acceptance
of humanitarian action by the warring parties and
potential beneficiaries.

Throughout 2009, armed violence and political
instability have continued to torment far too many
people across the globe. As ICRC representatives
observe day in and day out, one of the main features of
current conflict situations is the coexistence of a range
of risks with combined effects on the populations
affected. A weak State, a debilitated economy,
collapsing infrastructure and armed hostilities carried
out by a variety of politically driven actors and
criminal groups, as well as environmental degradation,
drought, floods or pandemics, increase the
vulnerability of entire populations. The inherent

Each entity — political, economic, military,
humanitarian — has an important role to play.
Nevertheless, the ICRC feels that it is essential that in
all circumstances, especially armed conflict, a clear
and visible distinction be preserved between the
different roles and activities of political, economic,
military and development actors and humanitarian
organizations. Humanitarian action, in particular, must
be kept clearly separate from political and military
agendas, including those of international actors. That is
equally important for comprehensive or integrated
approaches to crisis management.

12

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

On the basis of the role assigned to it by the
States, the ICRC has continued to strive to help people
where the needs are most pressing. Working with the
consent and acceptance of host States, it has tried hard
during 2009 to maintain and, where possible, enhance
its operational coverage in difficult contexts such as
those in Afghanistan, Iraq, the Sudan and Darfur,
Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and,
more recently, Yemen and Pakistan. At the same time,
it has also continued to work tirelessly in those
countries to enhance compliance with international
humanitarian law by all parties to conflict. It will strive
to continue demonstrating in practice both the value of
its neutral, impartial, independent and exclusively
humanitarian approach and the relevance of
humanitarian law.
Critical to that endeavour is proximity to the
people we seek to help. We understand proximity as
both physical closeness and a genuine understanding of
realities and vulnerabilities. ICRC protection and
assistance work can be carried out only with direct
access to the people in distress. Such direct access
enables our staff to identify the most urgent needs and
to respond to them in a meaningful way.
However, access to conflict zones often depends
on the safety risks involved, as well as on a positive
acceptance of our staff’s presence by the people we
seek to help and by other parties concerned.
Demonstrating the neutrality, independence and
impartiality of its work and its ability to deliver
relevant and purely humanitarian aid and services is
how the ICRC goes about seeking that acceptance. Our
many years of experience have taught us that achieving
that aim in armed conflict and other situations of
violence requires engaging in a sustained confidential
dialogue with all actors.
For the ICRC today, as in the past, engaging not
only with the host State, but with all parties involved in
a given situation is an essential and established
practice. Those include State authorities — military
and civilian — and non-State actors, whether or not
they are recognized by the community of States, be
they formal authorities or informal groups, and no
matter how they are described by others.
That inclusiveness enables our organization to
conduct its humanitarian activities in a transparent and
predictable manner. Building relations and sustained
dialogue with all concerned, including other

09-63702

international actors, is intended to generate
understanding of and thus acceptance for the ICRC
mission so that we may obtain access to people on all
sides who are in need of protection and assistance,
including detainees and wounded people on both sides
of the front line. It is also the best way of promoting
compliance with humanitarian law and principles by all
parties, including non-State armed groups, which are
also bound by that law. Acceptance of the ICRC’s
mission and presence is also important for the safety of
its staff.
Developing a substantial, constructive and
cooperative dialogue with relevant authorities and
parties has also helped us to better understand the
values, customs and sociocultural rules prevailing in
the contexts in which we operate. That dialogue has
ultimately enabled us to benefit from the support of
those entities in resolving often sensitive matters of
humanitarian concern and coordinating protection and
relief activities.
Coordination is vital in order to avoid gaps and
duplication, and thus to optimize the response to everincreasing needs. The ICRC therefore remains fully
committed to coordinating with all relevant entities,
including other humanitarian actors, in particular those
with major operational capacity, and to doing so in a
spirit of complementarity.
The ICRC’s approach to coordination is driven by
its operational requirements and the need to preserve
its independence. In the field, other components of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement,
in particular the national societies of countries where
we conduct operations, are our primary operational
partners.
Our focus on operational needs and on realitybased action, as well as on preserving our neutral,
independent and strictly humanitarian approach, is also
essential to how we coordinate with United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations. That is
why we favour interaction with operational agencies in
our field work and have always refrained from being
associated with any approach that combines objectives
of a different nature. That approach has proved
particularly useful in situations where the United
Nations plays a strong political role or is engaged in
peace operations along with its humanitarian work, and
particularly where there is an integrated United Nations
presence.

13

A/64/PV.60

The ICRC has continued to actively participate as
an observer in inter-agency coordination mechanisms
at both the global and field levels. Within those
mechanisms, it has never hesitated to share, to the
extent compatible with its independent status, its
experience and technical expertise. It remains strongly
committed to continuing to do so, helping in that way
to further strengthen humanitarian response.
This year, the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement has remembered two important
dates: the Battle of Solferino, which was fought 150
years ago, and the 60 years since the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions.
The principles that prompted Henry Dunant to act
when faced with the horrors of the Battle of Solferino
and that eventually led to the Geneva Conventions are
that all those who suffer in wartime — whether friend
or foe — must be aided without distinction. We call
those principles “humanity” and “impartiality”, and
they remain the bedrock of humanitarian action. Since
then, we have identified neutrality and independence as
additional and particularly valuable principles for
guiding our work in conflicts and other situations of
violence and forming ICRC’s identity.
Warfare has evolved enormously over the past
150 years. Historians say that 40,000 soldiers were
wounded or killed at Solferino, but that only one
civilian died. Today, civilians have become the main
victims of hostilities, even though they are clearly
protected by the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols.
To better understand the most pressing concerns
of people directly affected by armed conflict, the ICRC
carried out a worldwide opinion poll entitled “Our
world. Views from the field”. It revealed that millions
of people live in constant fear that they or someone
they love will be killed or wounded or disappear, and
that millions are struggling to provide for their children
or simply to survive. On average, half of those
interviewed had experienced war first hand, and many
said they had been displaced or had lost contact with a
close relative.
Wounds, humiliation, ill-treatment, and limited
access to essential goods and services such as water,
electricity and health care also emerged as widespread
problems. Displacement ranked as the most traumatic
experience, just behind losing a loved one and
economic hardship. Significantly, the poll also showed

14

that people most often turn for help to those closest to
home — in other words their families, neighbours and
broader communities.
The Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols have proved essential to saving lives,
allowing thousands of separated families to be reunited
and bringing comfort to large numbers of prisoners of
war. If the rules were better complied with, much
suffering could be avoided. The ICRC therefore
appeals to all States and all parties to armed conflict to
renew their efforts and to take all the measures needed
to make those legal provisions a reality on the ground.
The present operational environment for
humanitarian organizations is challenging and the
humanitarian needs are often immense. The ICRC
strongly believes that respecting complementarity
between different humanitarian organizations and the
distinction that must be drawn between different types
of approaches and interventions by various types of
actors is the best way to guarantee an adequate overall
response that makes a real difference in the lives of the
men, women and children whom we strive to assist and
for whose protection and dignity we work.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 49/2 of 19 October 1994,
I call on the Permanent Observer for the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Jilani (International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies): I am grateful for the
opportunity, on behalf of the International Federation
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, to
address the General Assembly on the strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations.
Today, as the Asia-Pacific region reels from one
devastating disaster to another, more than 12 million
people have been affected. Typhoons, earthquakes,
tsunamis and flooding have uprooted millions, left
them homeless and stripped them of their livelihoods.
The national Red Cross or Red Crescent societies, with
their staff and volunteers as first responders, have
sprung into action with massive emergency assistance.
The impact of an emergency or a disaster in terms
of the level of human loss and suffering, as well as the
economic cost, depends on the preparedness and
resilience of the affected communities. That is why the
International
Federation
invests
heavily
in

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

preparedness and in strengthening the capacities of the
local communities. The training of community-based
volunteers as first responders has clearly contributed to
minimizing the loss of life across disaster areas.
Nevertheless, much needs to be done in the field
of disaster preparedness and risk reduction. As
indicated in the Secretary-General’s report (A/64/84),
we need to strengthen preparedness, with greater
emphasis on risk reduction and, particularly, on
strengthening response capacities at the local, national
and regional levels.
One other critical element in the efforts to
minimize the impact of disasters and maximize the
effectiveness of international response efforts is legal
preparedness. In that context, we are pleased to note
that over a dozen States have already adopted new
regulations, using the Guidelines for the Domestic
Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster
Relief and Initial Recovery Assistance, known as the
IDRL Guidelines, which were adopted by the thirtieth
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent. We would like to encourage all Member
States to use the IDRL Guidelines in their discussion
and adoption of national and regional legal agreements
and instruments in order to facilitate and regulate
international disaster relief and recovery.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The International Federation works on the basis
of the principles of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement to inspire, to facilitate and to promote all
humanitarian activities carried out by its member
national societies to improve the situation of the most
vulnerable people. We are guided by our seven
fundamental
principles:
humanity,
impartiality,
neutrality, independence, voluntary service, unity and
universality. Those principles are at the heart of our
approach to humanitarian work under the theme
“Saving lives, changing minds” as part of our Strategy
2020, adopted by our General Assembly in Nairobi two
weeks ago.
Humanity,
impartiality,
neutrality
and
independence have become synonymous with the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.
We believe that our strict adherence to those principles
has allowed us to operate in quite difficult and complex
situations. That reflects the unique character of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement,

09-63702

ensuring access and acceptance by all when it really
matters for the most vulnerable people.
The safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and volunteers are of great concern to the International
Federation. Our ability to reach the most vulnerable in
difficult circumstances and in all corners of the world
depends on the level of safety of our staff and
volunteers, expatriate as well as local. As highlighted
by the recommendations of the Secretary-General in
his report, safe, timely and unhindered access to
vulnerable populations is a prerequisite for the
effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. Member
States and non-State actors are urged to take all
necessary steps to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, facilities and supplies within
their areas of control.
In a recently published opinion piece, our
Secretary General, Mr. Bekele Geleta, and United
Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John
Holmes, highlighted that the increasing threat to life
and livelihood posed by climate change is already
palpable and that the need for effective action to be
agreed in Copenhagen is increasingly urgent. That is a
unique opportunity to put in place a comprehensive
global approach to climate change mitigation and
adaptation.
The International Federation is in constant
dialogue with a number of partners, including within
the United Nations system and the non-governmental
organization community, in order to influence the
outcome of the Copenhagen Conference. We will be
represented at the Conference by a delegation that
includes a number of national society leaders from
around the world.
Finally, we would like to reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call upon Member States to maintain a
diversity of humanitarian funding channels and to
provide consistent and predictable support to those
channels in order to meet existing and growing
humanitarian needs. We would like to take this
opportunity to express our thanks and gratitude to all
those Member States that have been providing
generous support to the International Federation’s
Disaster Relief Emergency Fund, to our emergency
appeals and to the development plans of national
societies, either directly or though their national Red
Cross or Red Crescent societies.

15

A/64/PV.60

The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 47/4 of 16 October 1992,
I now call on the Permanent Observer for the
International Organization for Migration.
Mr. Dall’Oglio (International Organization for
Migration): The International Organization for
Migration (IOM) is pleased to take the floor today with
reference to the report of the Secretary-General on the
strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
(A/64/84).
Strengthening the coordination of humanitarian
assistance is a topic intrinsically characterized by
collaboration and partnership with a broad range of
humanitarian actors, particularly in the areas most
relevant to IOM’s operational work: responding to
situations of population displacement and sudden
population movements. In this context, IOM would like
to welcome the first ever Convention for the Protection
and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in
Africa, adopted by the African Union in Kampala in
October. The Convention will be the first legal
framework of its kind, and its adoption will help
promote and strengthen regional and national measures
to prevent or mitigate internal displacement, and
provide for durable solutions.
The report of the Secretary-General offers a
valuable opportunity to take stock of progress made in
implementing the humanitarian reform agenda and to
draw lessons for the future with respect to new
modalities of acting together. The provision of
humanitarian assistance is becoming increasing
complex, as, more than ever before, the various crises
have an interdependent impact. Unfortunately, trends
for 2009 do not seem to indicate substantial
improvements. As the Secretary-General points out,
“Humanitarian stakeholders are increasingly
concerned about the combined impacts of current
global challenges such as climate change,
extreme poverty, the food crisis, the financial
crisis, water and energy scarcity, migration,
population growth, urbanization, terrorism and
health pandemics” (A/64/84, para 37).
This complexity makes coordination and cooperation
all the more relevant and important to ensure that gaps
can be identified and vulnerable populations protected
in an adequate and timely manner.

16

Climate change, migration and displacement are
among the most pressing issues on the contemporary
global agenda, and they have been the focus of major
international attention since the release of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report in
2007. As a member of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee (IASC), IOM has joined forces with other
humanitarian actors to raise awareness of the
humanitarian impact of climate change and to call for
urgent adaptive action to climate change.
As a result of these combined efforts in pursuance
of the successor agreement to the Kyoto Protocol, it is
hoped that the humanitarian consequences of climate
change, including provisions for protecting and
assisting those who may move, migrate or otherwise
relocate as a result, will receive adequate attention. In
this regard and in preparation for the United Nations
Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen this
month, IOM has been devoting particular attention to
the link between climate change and population
mobility by analyzing the available data, and will
release tomorrow a volume entitled Migration,
Environment and Climate Change: Addressing the
Evidence.
Furthermore, as the Secretary-General points out,
“extreme weather events — such as floods,
cyclones and droughts — continued to trigger
humanitarian emergencies, causing over 235,000
deaths and affecting more than 211 million
people [this year]” (ibid., para. 3).
Indeed, humanitarian agencies are already seeing
increased food insecurity, public health threats,
migration and displacement, and other related
consequences. In this operational context, IOM will
continue working to develop a comprehensive,
coordinated and proactive approach to addressing the
migration-related consequences of climate change from
a humanitarian and human security perspective,
including in conjunction with its assigned
responsibilities under the cluster approach in natural
disaster situations. In this regard, we need to recognize
migration as a possible element of broader adaptation
strategies, while seeking to increase the resilience of
vulnerable populations in the face of climate change
and environmental degradation.
To conclude, IOM is committed to those most
vulnerable in times of crisis and remains dedicated to
working resourcefully and effectively with its IASC

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

partners. We express here our deep appreciation to our
donors and partners, in particular to Emergency Relief
Coordinator John Holmes and the leadership of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for their unwavering commitment to the improvement
of humanitarian response capacities.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 48/265 of 24 August
1994, I now call upon the Permanent Observer of the
Sovereign Military Order of Malta.
Mr. Shafer (Sovereign Military Order of Malta):
First, allow me to express my sincere thanks, on behalf
of the Sovereign Military Hospitaller Order of Malta,
for the opportunity to take the floor and present the
views of the Order on the strengthening of the
coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations.
The Order of Malta, as an international sovereign
with full diplomatic relations at the ambassadorial
level with 104 Member States, concentrates its
activities on humanitarian policies and programmes
throughout the world. The Order’s 80,000 dedicated
volunteers and 20,000 employees carry out this
important work in 120 countries, always in accordance
with the Order’s principles of political and religious
impartiality.
There is no question that effective coordination in
the area of rapid response to large-scale natural
disasters and other tragedies is vital to the shared
humanitarian mission of the Order of Malta and the
United Nations. The Order fully recognizes the
pre-eminent role that mechanisms such as the Central
Emergency Respond Fund (CERF) and United Nations
agencies can play in this respect. The Order is at the
fore of numerous emergency relief and long-term
development projects in many of the countries
receiving CERF support — the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Sudan, Sri Lanka and Palestine, to name
just some — and we are encouraged that CERF
continues to make progress towards its objectives. I am
pleased to say that the Order will be announcing on
Wednesday, at the High-Level Conference on CERF,
that it will be contributing to the Fund in 2010. The
Order encourages all Member States to join it in this
support.
The Order of Malta works actively in partnership
with United Nations agencies, States and local and
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)

09-63702

to further strengthen the synchronized response to
humanitarian challenges.
In Kenya, alternating severe drought and flooding
mean that one third of the population is suffering from
hunger and disease related to malnutrition and lack of
potable water. The Order works in the most severely
affected northern part of the country, along with the
World Food Programme and the local diocese. We are
building six health centres, two hospitals and one
hospital dispensary, with drugs and medical
consumables for the treatment of malaria and bacterial
infections. The Order provides further relief for nearly
20,000 people through supplementary food consisting
of oil, beans and maize, especially for vulnerable
groups such as pregnant and breast-feeding women,
children under five and the elderly. Additionally,
mosquito nets and water-purification tablets are
distributed.
The earthquakes and typhoons that struck
Indonesia, Viet Nam and the Philippines in October
killed and injured thousands and directly affected the
livelihoods of tens of millions. The Order joined
United Nations agencies and international NGOs in
reacting quickly to this event. In all three areas, the
Order immediately acted to provide desperately needed
items: food, blankets, sleeping mats, hygiene kits, tool
kits, cooking sets and temporary building materials.
Furthermore, the Order is rehabilitating schools and
infrastructure in the field of basic health care, and will
be
implementing
community-based
disaster
preparedness projects.
Like the Secretary-General, the Order of Malta is
deeply disturbed by the trend of politically or
criminally motivated targeting of humanitarian
workers, which is most evident in Somalia, the Sudan
and Haiti. Tragically, several volunteers and doctors of
the Order have lost their lives in these types of
directed, malicious attacks. The Order agrees that steps
must be taken at the highest level, as well as on the
ground, to prevent such incidents from occurring and,
when that fails, to punish those responsible.
Allow me to affirm that the Order of Malta will
continue in its historic mission to help the sick, the
needy and the most disadvantaged in society. Through
our national associations and our worldwide relief
agency, Malteser International, we respond daily to the
challenges that humanitarian work presents, and we

17

A/64/PV.60

will continue to closely follow the leadership and
initiatives of the United Nations and its agencies.

the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations”.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 70 and its
sub-items (a) and (b), as well as agenda item 71.

I give the floor to the representative of Sweden,
on a point of order.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/64/L.19* and A/64/L.31 to A/64/L.33.
The Assembly shall turn first to draft resolution
A/64/L.19*,
entitled
“Humanitarian
assistance,
emergency relief and rehabilitation for El Salvador as a
result of the devastating effects of Hurricane Ida”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution A/64/L.19*, the
following countries have become sponsors: Albania,
Australia, Barbados, Belarus, Cambodia, Canada,
Costa Rica, Croatia, France, Gabon, Georgia, Greece,
Grenada, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica,
Monaco, Poland, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Slovenia, Trinidad and Tobago, the United
States of America and Uruguay.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.19*?
Draft resolution
(resolution 64/74).

A/64/L.19*

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/64/L.31 is entitled “Participation of volunteers,
‘White Helmets’, in the activities of the United Nations
in the field of humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and
technical cooperation for development”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution A/64/L.31, the
following countries have become co-sponsors: Albania,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Canada, China,
Croatia, Cuba, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Grenada, Haiti,
India, Italy, Mexico, Monaco, Nicaragua, the
Philippines, Poland, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, Togo and Turkey.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.31?
Draft resolution
(resolution 64/75).

A/64/L.31

was

adopted

Mr. Skau (Sweden): I wish to make the
following oral technical correction to the twelfth
preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/64/L.32.
The reference to “protection of civilian persons in time
of war” should be given initial capital letters.
The Acting President: The Secretariat has taken
note of that correction.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since it was
introduced, the following countries have become
co-sponsors: Albania, Armenia, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Gabon, Grenada, Israel, Kazakhstan, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Montenegro, the
Republic of Korea, Senegal, Thailand and Zambia.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.32, as orally
corrected?
Draft resolution A/64/L.32, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 64/76).
The Acting President: Draft resolution
A/64/L.33 is entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since its
introduction, the following countries have become
co-sponsors: Albania, Armenia, Brazil, Colombia,
Grenada, Mali, the Federated States of Micronesia, the
Republic of Korea, Senegal and Trinidad and Tobago.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.33?
Draft resolution
(resolution 64/77).

A/64/L.33

was

adopted

The Acting President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Lucas, Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg, for undertaking the
task of coordinating consultations and negotiations on
the resolutions adopted under agenda item 70.

The Acting President: We shall now move on to
draft resolution A/64/L.32, entitled “Strengthening of

18

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

I call on the representative of Colombia on a
point of order.
Mr. Suárez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to recall that we had informed the
Secretariat that the Group of 77 and China wishes to
keep this agenda item open, since consultations
continue on a draft resolution on international
cooperation in humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters and the provision of development aid.
We hope to submit this draft resolution in a few days,
and need therefore to keep this item open so that the
Assembly can take action on it. We would be grateful,
therefore, if that item could be kept open for that
purpose.
The Acting President: I now call on those
representatives who wish to explain their positions on
the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Ali (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation
would like to explain its vote on resolution 64/77, on
safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel. We
participated in the consultations leading to the
unanimous adoption of this resolution.
We would like to register in the record of this
meeting our reservations regarding the twentieth
preambular paragraph of this resolution. The fact that
we supported this resolution does not mean that we
recognize the International Criminal Court. My
delegation would like to emphasize that the provisions
regarding the Court relate, in part, to the Rome Statute.
Under the provisions and norms of international law,
only countries that are parties to the Statute are subject
to the rules of the Court.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I am taking the floor to
explain Pakistan’s vote on resolution 64/77, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”. We had
informed the Secretariat that we wanted to make an
explanation of position before the vote. However, I
believe, owing to some confusion, we could not do so.
Therefore, since the agenda item is still open, we are
making our explanation of position after the consensus
adoption.
The Government of Pakistan allotted an
adequately sized piece of land to the United Nations in
Islamabad about nine years ago. In our discussions
with Secretariat officials, we have been emphasizing

09-63702

the need to consolidate the different United Nations
offices currently scattered all over Islamabad in one
secure location.
We have been given to understand that the United
Nations Task Force on Common Premises has yet to
allocate resources for this purpose. It goes without
saying that security considerations should not be
secondary to procedural and financial considerations.
The adoption of this resolution emphasizes the
need for a pro-active role to be played by both
Governments and the United Nations itself in ensuring
the safety, security and protection of humanitarian and
United Nations personnel. We would like to place on
record the fact that the Government of Pakistan is
taking all possible measures in this regard and expects
the concerned agencies of the United Nations to
expedite the matter.
Mr. Al-Musawi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is pleased to make a statement on behalf of
the Arab Group on the resolution entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”
(resolution 64/76), which the General Assembly has
just adopted. The resolution contains important
humanitarian goals and enumerates the positive
measures undertaken by the peoples of the world to
deal with natural disasters and complex humanitarian
emergencies that have catastrophic humanitarian
effects.
We would like to thank the facilitator of the
resolution, the representative of Sweden, for his
strenuous efforts to meet the concerns of the Arab
Group. We also welcome the new positive trends
reflected in the resolution.
However, a very important topic highlighted by
the Arab Group — namely, allowing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to peoples chafing under the
yoke of foreign occupation — has not been agreed to.
The objective of the Arab Group in presenting this
demand is to address the humanitarian disaster and the
grave deterioration in the living conditions of peoples
of all walks of life that have resulted from the inhuman
blockade imposed by Israel on the Palestinian people
as well as the policy of collective punishment pursued
by Israeli occupation authorities against the
defenceless Palestinian people after its aggression at
the end of 2008.

19

A/64/PV.60

We will continue to pursue this request in all
United Nations forums. We hope to cooperate with all
Member States, particularly those of the European
Union, which have always defended the importance of
respecting human rights. Our delegations are only
asking that the Charter’s principles and purposes be
fulfilled. This Organization must shoulder its
responsibilities in terms of immediately halting these
Israeli practices, which constitute blatant violations of
international law and the principles of the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention. Their deliberate obstruction of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the occupied
Palestinian territories confirms our fears, which we
have voiced over and over, regarding the application by
some of double standards when it comes to human
rights issues in various parts of the world.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): With respect to resolution 64/74, on behalf
of the Government and people of El Salvador, I would
like to thank the sponsors and all States members of
the General Assembly for having ensured its adoption.
It is well known that the Central American region
has been painfully exposed in recent years to a series
of natural disasters that have caused us major
difficulties, the negative of impact of which, in
conjunction with the effects of climate change and the
impact of the financial and economic crises, has given
rise to serious concern about our region’s ability to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
In this context, I would add that the human,
economic, social and cultural consequences of
Hurricane Ida in El Salvador have exacerbated the
difficult situation of the most vulnerable populations,
particularly women, children and older persons, as was
emphasized at the time by the President of the
Republic, Mr. Mauricio Funes Cartagena, when he
evaluated the impact of that natural phenomenon. His
assessment has been confirmed by the various
humanitarian and development entities of the United
Nations working on the ground. The national
authorities and the United Nations team on the ground
reported that El Salvador had suffered 199 deaths and
that some 80 persons remained unaccounted for. Some
52 municipalities were affected, requiring humanitarian
assistance for approximately 75,000 individuals.
We are confident that the international
community will continue to provide its valuable
support and to offer its generous cooperation to help in

20

the rehabilitation and reconstruction we will face in the
coming months, complementing the efforts of the
national
Government
to
achieve
sustainable
development in the affected areas.
Lastly, we would like to reiterate our thanks for
the solidarity and development support we have
received in response to the urgent appeal by the United
Nations. We invite those Member States that have not
yet done so and that wish to do so to join in this shared
effort.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-items
(a) and (b) of agenda item 70 and of agenda item 71.
Agenda item 43 (continued)
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Draft resolution (A/64/L.17/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on agenda item
43 at the 47th plenary meeting, on 16 November.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/64/L.17/Rev.1. Before proceeding to take
action on the draft resolution, I should like to announce
that the following countries have become co-sponsors
of A/64/L.17/Rev.1 since its publication: Angola,
Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Cape Verde, the
Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Grenada, Hungary, Kuwait, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Republic of Korea,
Samoa, Spain, the Sudan, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.17/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/64/L.17/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 64/78).
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of Greece to make a statement on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr.
Yeroulanos
(Greece):
This
great
Organization was built on the unique and powerful
ideas that we should not inflict pain on one another for

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

any reason; that no child should go to bed hungry at
night in any part of the world; that knowledge and
health are rights and not privileges; and that we should
keep ourselves in balance by keeping the environment
in balance. We share these ideas as human beings, for
we tend to each other far more than we harm each
other, we celebrate each other’s uniqueness far more
than we seek to destroy it, and we exchange ideas and
knowledge far more than we protect them.
To reach a common ground of understanding, this
Organization conducts a dialogue — a global dialogue
of cultures — with profound respect for the distinct
identities that each culture brings to the table. It is to
its credit that, in this dawn of a new century, we seem
steadfast in our commitment to save ourselves from
destruction, to finally deal with global problems
globally and to create through our dialogue and
cooperation a safe and more complete world far larger
than the sum of its parts.
In our decision to protect our heritage, tangible or
otherwise, we reach the pinnacle of this Organization’s
mission. In recognition of their commitment to this
cause, I would like to congratulate and thank the
departing
Director-General
of
UNESCO,
Mr. Matsuura, for his good services, and to offer my
warm
wishes
for
productive
and
inspired
accomplishments to the new Director-General,
Mrs. Bokova.
Heritage is the source of our identity and hence
the foundation of our global dialogue. In order to build
a better and more complete world larger than the sum
of its parts, we need strong parts, we need strong
identities, and although we need to deal with our local
problems globally, we cannot create a sustainable
global culture unless we recognize and respect the
power and uniqueness of our localities. Together in a
dialogue of equals, we can enrich one another and
together ensure a creative environment for the
generations to come.
Identities torn apart by war, destruction, theft or
pillage tend to be traumatized and, as such, find it hard
to participate in a larger dialogue. They usually
abstain, and when they do participate they tend to be
far more protective than creative. Therefore, in
protecting the heritage of peoples around the world, the
Organization has made a commitment to keeping
identities unique, complete, creative and engaged. The
resolution we adopted unanimously today is a

09-63702

testament to our commitment to working together
towards that cause. I wish to express my Government’s
sincere appreciation to all the sponsors and Member
States for their support.
But heritage needs more then protection. Often,
heritage needs healing. Healing is the process of
making something whole, making it again complete. In
the same context that we seek to heal identities, we
must also seek to heal great symbols of heritage,
especially when those symbols are an integral part of
our dialogue of cultures. A symbol that is so unique
that it represents the values of several cultures becomes
a global symbol meant to inspire the values it
represents and to bring us together in understanding.
Tearing it apart is immoral. Keeping its pieces apart is
unethical.
In the Parthenon, several cultures, if not the
world as a whole, recognize the symbol of
humanism — the fundamental idea that people, if
inspired to use self-restraint, are good, and that they
can cooperate and create incredible things if they are
free to think, speak, exercise their reason and,
ultimately, govern themselves. Those ideas are the very
essence on which the United Nations was founded.
With its foundation in human nature, the Parthenon is a
symbol so unique that it stands as a beacon, not only
for the achievements we have managed, but ultimately
for those we are about to create.
To us Greeks, the Parthenon is all those things
and also part of who we are — a fundamental part of
our heritage. We can only rejoice that several parts of
the monument have been voluntarily returned or
returned through loans from Heidelberg, Palermo and
the Vatican. We look forward to cooperating with other
museums and to finding ways of returning the
Parthenon marbles that will enrich rather than deprive
their magnificent collections.
We are firmly on the path of making our world a
better place. We have done so by respecting and
celebrating each other, by finding in each other that
which is unique. The integrity of a monument, a
masterpiece or a work of art should be a right as sacred
as any right the Organization defends. For the integrity
of a global symbol of heritage can be as important as
heritage itself.
The Acting President: I now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.

21

A/64/PV.60

Mr. Suárez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia attaches great importance to the subject at
hand and co-sponsored the important resolution 64/78,
as it has similar resolutions in the past.
Colombia notes that it interprets the language
incorporated in paragraph 5 of the resolution in the
context of the sovereign rights of each State to decide
on the international instruments to which it will
become party without affecting the rights of States over
their national heritage, pursuant to international law.
We would like to draw attention to the work of
the delegation of Greece in coordinating the resolution.
Ms. Phipps (United States of America): Having
joined in the consensus adoption of resolution 64/78,
the United State wishes to clarify its understanding that
the recommendations referenced in its paragraph 2 are
the
recommendations
of
UNESCO-sponsored
meetings, including the 2008 Extraordinary Session of
the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin
or its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation, held
in Seoul, Republic of Korea. The recommendations
referenced in paragraph 2 do not include the
recommendations of the separate and distinct 2008
meeting on non-governmental experts, which was also
held in Seoul and sponsored by the Government of the
Republic of Korea.
The Acting President: There are no further
speakers on my list. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 43?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 47 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/64/L.28)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 47
jointly with agenda item 63 and its sub-items (a) and
(b) at the 22nd to 24th plenary meetings, on 20 and
21 October 2009.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Tanzania to introduce draft resolution
A/64/L.28.

22

Mrs. Kafanabo (United Republic of Tanzania): I
have the honour to introduce, on behalf of the African
Group, the draft resolution entitled, “2001-2010:
Decade to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries,
Particularly in Africa”, contained in document
A/64/L.28.
Malaria is one of the biggest health challenges to
Africa. An estimated 74 per cent of the population in
Africa lives in areas that are malaria-endemic, and
about 95 per cent of the global 2 to 3 million deaths
attributed to malaria occur in Africa. Malaria is also a
major killer of children in Africa, where 24 per cent of
all deaths of children under five years old are from
malaria and malaria-related illness.
Malaria is a major economic burden in Africa,
where it accounts for 30 to 40 per cent of outpatient
visits and 10 to 15 per cent of all disease admissions in
hospitals, private clinics and health-care systems.
Malaria accounts for as much as 40 per cent of healthcare spending in endemic African countries and costs
the continent $12 billion a year. Consequently, malaria
has slowed economic growth by up to 1.3 per cent per
year through death and lost hours of economic
productivity, as well as public funds and family
income. Malaria is thus said to be a disease of poverty
and a cause of poverty.
The statistics on malaria are a cause of concern to
the international community and to Africa in particular.
We recognize that malaria-related ill health and deaths
throughout the world can be substantially reduced with
political commitment and commensurate resources if
the public is educated and sensitized about malaria and
appropriate health services are made available,
particularly in countries where the disease is endemic.
Yet each year we allow nearly one million deaths to
occur that could have been prevented with the
universal application of existing tools.
This year’s draft resolution has been updated
from last year’s resolution 63/234. While the draft
resolution has retained last year’s language, it has been
technically updated and new developments have
recognized.
The
new
elements
include
acknowledgement that progress has been made in parts
of Africa in reversing malaria epidemics through
political engagement and sustainable national malariacontrol programmes; an emphasis on the importance of
strengthening health systems to effectively support
malaria control and elimination; and a welcome of the

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

launch, on 23 September 2009, of the African Leaders
Malaria Alliance to provide political leadership at the
highest level in the fight against malaria in Africa.
The new elements also welcome the United
Against Malaria Campaign, which, ahead of the
International Federation of Association Football World
Cup event in South Africa, unites football stars and
teams, Governments, non-governmental organizations,
foundations and corporations in the fight against
malaria; urge the international community, the United
Nations and other stakeholders to participate in the
funding and implementation of the Global Malaria
Action Plan; and call for scaling up malaria prevention,
control and treatment in order to meet the
internationally agreed malaria goals.
The year 2010 marks the end of the Decade to
Roll Back Malaria, and in this regard the draft
resolution requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session a report
on progress towards achieving the internationally
agreed targets for 2010 and an evaluation of the
implementation of the first Decade to Roll Back
Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in
Africa, including recommendations for further actions.
The consultations on this draft resolution have
been carried out in an open and transparent manner. We
thank the delegations that have participated in the
consultations for their constructive engagement, which
has enabled consensus to be reached. We further thank
all the delegations that have sponsored the draft
resolution and ask others to join the sponsorship.
It is our expectation that, as in previous years,
this draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: Before proceeding to take
action on draft resolution A/64/L.28, I should like to
announce that since its introduction, the following
countries have become co-sponsors: Albania, Austria,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, France, Grenada,
Guyana, India, Jamaica, Latvia, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Slovenia, Suriname,
Thailand and Trinidad and Tobago.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.28?
Draft resolution
(resolution 64/79).

09-63702

A/64/L.28

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 47?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 49 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolutions (A/64/L.5 and
A/64/L.15/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on agenda item
49 at the 41st and 42nd plenary meetings, on 9 and
10 November 2009, and took action on draft
resolutions A/64/L.13 and A/64/L.14 at the 42nd
plenary meeting.
The Assembly will first take action on draft
resolution A/64/L.5, entitled “International Decade for
a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children
of the World, 2001-2010”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I would like to announce that since its
introduction, the following countries have become cosponsors: Antigua and Barbuda, Botswana, Burkina
Faso, Chad, China, Colombia, the Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, the Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, the Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho, Mali, Mexico,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Oman, Rwanda, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Suriname, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan and Uganda.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.5?
Draft resolution A/64/L.5 was adopted (resolution
64/80)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/64/L.15/Rev.1,
entitled “Promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”.
Before proceeding to take action on draft
resolution A/64/L.15/Rev.1, I should like to announce
that since its introduction, the following countries have
become co-sponsors: Albania, the Bahamas, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, the Democratic People’s

23

A/64/PV.60

Republic of Korea, Grenada, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Panama, the Sudan, Togo, Uruguay and Turkey.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.15/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/64/L.15/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 64/81).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolutions just adopted, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Schlyter (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) on
resolution 64/81, entitled “Promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace”.
The following countries align themselves with
this statement: the candidate countries Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area; and Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova.
The European Union would like to extend its
thanks to the delegations of the Philippines and
Pakistan for the constructive spirit in which they led
the consultation process on this resolution.
This year again, the EU has decided to join
consensus on the resolution. We do so, however, with
serious reservations regarding a number of elements in
the resolution. The EU is convinced that intercultural
dialogue can make a significant contribution to mutual
understanding among persons with different cultural,
religious and other identities, as well as deepen
understanding, promote tolerance and improve overall
relations at the local, national and international levels
among individuals with different backgrounds.
The EU is, however, increasingly concerned
about initiatives seeking to establish religion and
religious values as cornerstones of the work of the
United Nations. Interreligious dialogue is only one of
the various dimensions of intercultural dialogue, and
interreligious dialogue, including intrareligious

24

dialogue, takes place among individuals and religious
organizations and leaders, and not among States or
religions.
Religions or faiths can never be acting parties in
dialogue. The United Nations system, as well as
Member States, can possibly play facilitating roles,
promoting the necessary conditions for that dialogue to
take place, but should neither organize this dialogue
nor endorse its outcome. Religion should consequently
not be institutionalized in the framework of the United
Nations. We are, in this regard, concerned by the
phrasing of paragraphs 9 and 12 of this resolution and
insist that these paragraphs cannot be read as giving
States a mandate to influence the manner in which
individuals relate to their faith or beliefs.
To engage in a successful dialogue, parties must
be prepared to face contrasting views and even
criticism. Recognizing the right to express an opinion
and accepting differing opinions are also an essential
part of dialogue. The EU is also convinced that a
fruitful and genuine dialogue cannot be guided by
Government authorities. It needs to be rooted in free
and spontaneous participation in public debate
reflecting a variety of opinions.
The EU is further concerned that individuals are
categorized exclusively on the basis of their religion or
faith. Religion or faith may indeed constitute part of
the multiple identities of an individual, but it is
important that the diversity of identities be reflected in
the global dialogue efforts as a whole. The EU regrets
that the sponsors of this initiative were unwilling to
integrate all these basic foundations for a genuine
dialogue in the text, and was only able to join
consensus with the understanding that they are implied.
The EU was further disappointed that the
resolution once again refers to the possibility of
proclaiming a United Nations decade for interreligious
and intercultural dialogue. As is made clear in the
report of the Secretary-General on interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace (A/64/325), responses received from Member
States have revealed a lack of broad and consensual
support for the initiative. As just stated, the EU
questions whether the United Nations as such should
have a role to play in the field of interreligious
dialogue. Moreover, the EU does not believe that such
a decade would contribute significantly to genuine
dialogue. In principle, the EU is opposed to the

09-63702

A/64/PV.60

proliferation of new international days, years or
decades since, in many cases, their effectiveness has
been low. We believe that it is more important to focus
on implementing existing and concrete initiatives if
their impact is to be seen on the ground.
To conclude, let me reiterate that the EU attaches
great importance to the promotion of intercultural
dialogue, in particular the work done by UNESCO,
which is the lead United Nations agency in the
promotion of intercultural dialogue, as well as other
initiatives for enhancing dialogue and mutual
understanding, such as the Alliance of Civilizations.
Ms. Phipps (United States of America): As in
past years, the text of the resolution just adopted
contains many worthwhile elements. It promotes
respect among people with different cultural and
religious backgrounds and affirms that mutual
understanding and dialogue are crucial for achieving a
true and lasting peace. We were pleased to join
consensus on resolution 64/81, and we would like to
thank the delegations of the Philippines and Pakistan,
the main co-sponsors, for the flexibility shown during
informal consultations.
The United States is committed to building a
more peaceful world and encourages individuals from
different religious and cultural communities to engage
in practical action, such as interfaith service, to help
foster respect and encourage reconciliation. We remain
committed to expanding programmes that promote
reconciliation among religious groups and actively
partner with other Governments and with civil society
actors around the world to forge new bonds among
people of all religions and beliefs. In addition, we
acknowledge that faith is a powerful and mobilizing
force and that faith leaders play a critical role in
alleviating the most pressing global challenges. We
believe that interfaith efforts can be among the best
protections against intolerance and hatred.
In promoting diversity and dialogue, we are
guided by the Universal Declaration on Human Rights,
which clearly states in Article 19 that
“Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion
and expression; this right includes freedom to
hold opinions without interference and to seek,
receive and impart information and ideas through
any media and regardless of frontiers.”

09-63702

To that end, we do not believe that restricting peaceful
expression of opinion or belief can build respect or
tolerance. The United States believes unequivocally
that the freedoms of religion and expression are
precisely the antidote that is needed to combat
intolerance. For these reasons, the resolution we have
just adopted must not in any way be read to restrict
peaceful expression of opinion or belief. The United
States firmly believes in the right of all people to think
and express themselves freely and peacefully.
United Nations resolutions, such as this one, must
not be misused to justify imprisonment, torture and
even death sentences for those that express views that
are dissident or critical of the Government in power.
Members of society must be able to engage in the open
exchange of views without fear of recrimination if we
are to develop the understanding and trust necessary to
get along and live peaceably with one other.
Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): My delegation would
like to thank all Member States for adopting resolution
64/80 on the International Decade for a Culture of
Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World,
2001-2010, once again by consensus. Our special
thanks go to the 118 Member States that sponsored the
resolution this year and those that have sponsored the
resolution in the past nine years. Our thanks go to
UNESCO for successfully carrying out the Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace (resolution 53/243).
The adoption of the resolution is a testimonial to the
collective resolve to make a world free of violence,
especially for our future, the children of the world.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 49.
Agenda item 115
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
Draft resolution (A/64/L.27)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.27.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of a interregional group of countries made up of
Austria, Burkina Faso, Croatia, Pakistan and the
Argentine Republic, I have the honour to introduce the
draft resolution contained in document A/64/L.27,

25

A/64/PV.60

entitled “Institutionalization of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force”.
Far from decreasing, the number of terrorist acts
continues to increase in a great number of Member
States. Countless civilian victims suffer every day from
these horrifying acts of violence and barbarism that
threaten international peace and security. These acts
are contrary to human dignity and to peaceful and
civilized coexistence. Terrorist acts also inhibit the full
exercise of human rights and sustainable development
in our societies. United Nations personnel are also,
tragically, a target of this scourge.
Therefore, it is imperative not to falter in our
efforts to combat terrorism with all the legitimacy,
unity and strength offered by the multilateral system, in
which the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (resolution 60/288), adopted by the General
Assembly in 2006, is the central operational
framework. The Strategy is a general agreement
reached by consensus of the Assembly, and we must
continue to strive together to implement it effectively.
We must intensify our efforts and those of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force to implement the
four pillars of the Strategy in an integrated manner.
The introduction of this draft resolution by a
group of countries from every region represents a
natural step in the political and legal process of
institutionalizing the Task Force, whose central role is
to ensure the coordination and coherence of the efforts
of the United Nations system.
The draft resolution calls on the SecretaryGeneral to establish a functional, adequate and rational
structure for the effective implementation of the
Strategy and the provisions of resolution 62/272. As is
well known, existing staff and resources arrangements
are temporary and come from extrabudgetary sources.
The draft resolution proposes, in brief and
straightforward language, to institutionalize the Task

26

Force and to provide the necessary resources in the
regular budget of the Organization on a long-term basis
and in a manner that is fully independent of a limited
group of voluntary donors. This framework is essential
in order to achieve sustained and effective coordination
and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the
United Nations system.
The objective is to make the office of the Task
Force a catalyst, providing leadership and clear added
value in ensuring coordination and coherence in the
implementation of the Strategy by States and in its
interaction with international organizations and their
respective programmes related to the Strategy. This
approach also seeks to avoid confusion and the
duplication of efforts with other technical organs and
other entities of the system.
Over the past few weeks, our group of countries
has carried out informal consultations with Member
States from every region. We hope that these
discussions will continue, in accordance with the
Assembly’s procedures, in the debates of the Fifth
Committee and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in the coming
days.
The adoption of the Strategy by consensus in
2006 was a landmark event for our Organization. As
the President of Assembly for that year stated, the
Strategy represents a common commitment that we, the
United Nations, will face terrorism head-on. We are
fully confident that, with this draft resolution, we will
take a firm step towards that noble and crucial
objective.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this meeting. We will hear the remaining
speakers and take action on the draft resolution on
Friday, 11 December, in the morning.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

09-63702
