S/PV.8792

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8792nd meeting

Thursday, 10 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jürgenson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy/Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-14728 (E)
*2114728*

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

should just think of artificial intelligence, big data and
cloud computing or genetic engineering, autonomous
weapons and surveillance. One of the biggest questions
that we face is how to ensure that the rules that we
so need for those emerging technologies reflect the
values of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Otherwise, technology will be used against individuals
and communities in a nightmarish scenario.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
His Excellency Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Borrell Fontelles.
Mr. Borrell Fontelles: I am very pleased to speak
before the Security Council today about the role
of the European Union (EU) in the maintenance of
international peace and security. As Council members
know very well, we live in a world where the demand
for multilateral solutions is much greater than the
supply. There is a large imbalance, and we see more
divisions, more free-riding and more distrust than the
world can afford. Rules-based multilateralism is a term
that we understood well at the United Nations and in
Brussels. However, it is not a simple phrase, and our job
is to bring it alive for ordinary people.
We need global cooperation based on agreed rules
because the alternative is the law of the jungle, where
our problems do not get solved. Every day, we see the
cost of the absence of multilateral action on reduced
access to vaccines, insufficient climate action and the
peace and security crisis, which fester. The root cause
is the increasing power politics and ideological contest,
leading to the erosion of trust. We must address that
deficit in multilateralism and push back against selective
and self-serving approaches to multilateralism.
The European Union remains committed to the
United Nations and to rules-based multilateralism.
The core of our strategy is to protect, reform and
build a multilateralism that is fit for purpose. The
world’s greatest changes flow from new technologies,
which can be both disruptive and empowering. We
2/24

10/06/2021

We all know that conflict prevention and
peacebuilding are key. We must work with countries
at risk before conflict erupts and to build sustainable
peace after the signing ceremony. Peace has to be
sustainable, and sustainable peace compels us to be
inclusive, with a particular focus on women and youth.
We are in the second year of the pandemic, which
has served to underscore the fragility of our hyperglobalized and interdependent world. We need to learn
broader lessons about how human health and security
and planetary health and security are linked. Where
politics gave us stalemates and divisions, science
and cooperation gave us the exit strategy: vaccines.
We in the European Union are staunch promoters of
vaccine multilateralism, with the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access (COVAX) Facility at the centre. Team
Europe — the European Union and its member
States — has contributed more than €2.8 billion to
COVAX and exported more than 240 million doses of
vaccines to 90 countries, more than any other region.
The European Council decided to donate at least
100 million doses to low- and middle-income countries
before the end of the year. But even that will not be
enough. We therefore call on all players to lift export
restrictions on vaccines and their components. We must
recall that Africa imports 99 per cent of its vaccines.
That has to change. The European Union is partnering
with Africa and industry, backed by an initial €1 billion
in funding, to boost manufacturing capacity for
vaccines, medicines and health technologies.
Beyond the pandemic, we know that climate change
and biodiversity losses have reached existential levels.
Two major United Nations summits later this year, in
Kunming and in Glasgow, must deliver decisive action.
That will be a real test for the multilateral system. We
need those summits to produce real outcomes in line
the scale and urgency of the problem. The Security
Council has an important role to play on climate, health
and their links to peace and security. To give impetus to
the success of the two summits, I hope that the Security
Council will adopt a resolution on the link between
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

climate change and security, which is increasingly
evident, especially in some regions of the world.
Last year, I said: “At a time of global crisis, we
need a Council that can make critical decisions, not one
that is paralysed by vetoes and political infighting.”
(see S/2020/489, annex I). Unhappily, one year later, the
situation has not improved. In the past year we have seen
new conflicts erupting in Tigray, older ones restarting
in Myanmar and Nagorno-Karabakh and Israel and
Palestine, and also chronic violence continuing in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Yemen, just to
mention a few of them. In all those cases, we need the
Security Council to provide the necessary decisions.
This is about real people’s lives. The price of inaction
is going to be paid in conflicts not solved, humanitarian
aid not delivered and in lives lost.
Sitting on the Security Council is a serious
responsibility, politically and even morally. The Charter
of the United Nations gave the Council the supreme
say on matters of peace and security. For the European
Union, there is no acceptable alternative. There exists
today no other organization that we can turn to. The
Security Council must therefore provide the support and
protection that people in conflict zones depend upon.
We look to the Security Council to match its belated,
but unanimous, support for the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire with a full commitment to
its implementation, because implementation is the
important part.
The European Union has been and remains a
staunch supporter of the United Nations in all three
pillars. We have said it many times before, and we
mean it: our support is not just in what we say, although
that matters, but in financial terms, human terms
and political terms. We work with United Nations
missions in many theatres. We have 17 operations
and missions contributing to United Nations goals
with United Nations mandates; 13 of those missions
are operating alongside United Nations missions. In
addition, we are currently defining our next set of joint
EU-United Nations priorities on peace operations and
crisis management to strengthen our cooperation and
maximize our impact.
We are fully committed to the Sustainable
Development Goals; it goes without saying. And we
base ourselves on the conviction that real security
depends on people enjoying their rights and freedoms.
We will always be on the side of those calling for their

S/PV. 8792

universal rights to be respected, sometimes at grave
personal risk, in Hong Kong, Venezuela, Myanmar and
elsewhere. In many cases, given the refusal by those in
power to respect people’s fundamental rights, we have
had to impose sanctions. Sanctions are never an end
in themselves; they are a tool to push for respect for
universal rights. Our sanctions are targeted and do not
hinder the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Allow me to highlight a few concrete areas where
the European Union is deeply engaged and where we
need urgent results.
First of all, the most dramatic example is the
recent situation in Israel and Palestine. Last month,
we saw a dramatic escalation with enormous human
costs. Now we need to build on the ceasefire to resume
negotiations towards the two-State solution, which
has been mentioned so many times. Let us remember
that security is not the same as peace. Security can be
attained at a high price, but security alone will not bring
about peace. An untenable status quo may turn again
into another cycle of violence. Therefore, a negotiated
settlement is urgent, and indeed the only way to give
rights and security to both Israelis and Palestinians.
They both deserve it. And to support the parties, we
must revive the Quartet, as we have been trying to do.
With regard to Syria, this year we mark the tenth
anniversary of the war in that country. During these
10 years, the Syrian regime and its backers have left
the country in ruins. Given the dramatic humanitarian
situation, it is essential that the cross-border mechanism
remain open. I appeal to the Security Council members
to renew it in July, without decreasing the degree of
cross-border transit allowed.
With regard to Libya, there has been important
progress — a miracle maybe — with the Government
of National Unity. But the ceasefire is still fragile
and needs to be supported by a robust monitoring
mechanism, so that elections are able to take place in
optimal conditions in December as scheduled. We have
been offering support. We welcome the unanimous
renewal of the arms embargo, decided yesterday, and the
authorization of inspections and the seizure of illegal
cargo on the high seas. We are also contributing to the
arms embargo with the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI, which will continue
its work on the implementation of the embargo. But we
need greater focus on the issue of the withdrawal of

21-147283/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya, to avoid
the destabilization of the whole region.
In talking about the destabilization of the region
coming from Libya, the Sahel immediately comes
to mind. The Sahel and the Horn of Africa hold the key
to African security. Our revised strategy is built around
the need for more results and greater governmental
accountability. We must continue our engagement, but
also take firm actions against those who stand in the
way of a peaceful and inclusive transition process.
Another issue of capital importance today is
Iran. We are working non-stop to revise the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which we kept alive
during the past years in all of its aspects. Nuclear
activities and the lifting of sanctions go hand in hand.
I am actively engaged with all the main players, and
my team is leading the negotiations in Vienna. We are
making progress, but the negotiations are intense and
slow. There is still a lot of work to be done on a number
of issues, including the precise sequencing of steps.
Let me end with some cases closer to us, the
European Union. First, I want to talk about Belarus.
For months, we have seen massive repression of
peaceful protesters who took to the streets demanding
to elect their President freely and fairly. Recently, the
regime resorted to the scandalous forced landing of a
civilian plane travelling between two European Union
capitals in order to arrest a leading journalist and his
companion. This is a major attack on safety, and the
European response has been firm and principled. We
immediately closed our airspace to planes from Belarus
and are in the process of adopting a new package of
sanctions. This time, it will also be economic, sectoral
sanctions. We have also devised a €3 billion package
of economic support that we will make available to a
democratic Belarus.
Moving
on
to
a
country
in
that
neighbourhood — Ukraine. We regret that the situation
in the country tends to be instrumentalized for political
purposes here in the Security Council. To be clear,
six years after all members of the Security Council
unanimously supported the Minsk agreements, very
little has been done to implement them. Russia is a party
to the conflict, and we count on it to take a constructive
stance. In that connection, I welcome President
Zelenskyy’s initiative to convene the Crimean Platform
summit, to take place in the summer. Charles Michel,
President of the European Council, will take part in
4/24

10/06/2021

the meeting, which will enjoy the broad participation
of United Nations States Members and, of course,
European Union members.
In our neighbourhood, there is also the Western
Balkans. The European Union will not rest until
all countries of the region are part of the European
Union. To that end, we are fully mobilizing to support
reconciliation and reforms as the best antidote to
nationalist rhetoric. We will host the next iteration of
the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue in the coming days.
More broadly, in Europe we do not want geostrategic
competition. We want a peaceful, prosperous and stable
neighbourhood, free from so-called protracted conflicts
and zones of influence.
There are many other challenges that I could
mention, but then I would just talk endlessly. It is better
that I stop here in the interest of time and thank one and
all for their patience. I look forward to comments and
to our debate.
The President: I thank Mr. Borrell Fontelles for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Kenya thanks Estonia for
convening this important discussion. I welcome and
thank His Excellency Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles for
his briefing.
Europe is a bastion of values that Kenya holds
dear. We share in the view that Europe should find
its place in the conduct of relations among States and
between States and their citizens. Key among those
values are respect for human dignity, equality, the rule
of law and human rights, with a focus on the rights
of minorities. Kenya and Africa embrace those rights
as their own — not because they are being actively
promoted here today, but because they are at the root of
African civilizations. All these rights are compromised
and trampled upon by war. Maintaining international
peace and security is therefore key to the protection of
these most precious values. The increasing centrality
of regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security is what
makes this discussion here today so important.
Chapter VIII of Charter of the United Nations is
exceedingly relevant today, and we must do more to
ensure that it is effective and applied. Between the
United Nations and the European Union (EU) and
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), we must work harder to ensure that we build,
strengthen and protect a rules-based multilateralism,
as Mr. Borrell Fontelles spoke about. It bears repeating
that such a rules-based multilateralism must be rooted
in respect for the sovereignty of all States that are
members of the EU and the United Nations.
Kenya appreciates the EU’s strong investment
in multilateral partnerships for addressing the
contemporary threats to international peace and
security. We further appreciate that such investment is
supported by a framework for political communication
and collaboration, which is reflected here today. We
also appreciate the political dialogues between the
EU and Africa. I can confidently argue that the three
form an important triangle of collaboration that is key
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
It is in that spirit that I call for the EU to continue
deepening its cooperation and partnership with Africa
and its subregional mechanisms. We must build on
what the AU-EU-United Nations trilateral cooperation
is delivering today. I will mention just a few initiatives
in that regard.
First, the EU has deployed more than a dozen
missions in Africa under the Security Council’s
authorization, with several other EU missions and
operations being deployed in parallel.
Secondly, through the African Peace Facility,
EU funding spanning over a decade has enabled the
functioning and operations of the African Union
Mission in Somalia. We repeat the call by the African
Union for the United Nations to augment EU support
by providing adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding, including through assessed contributions. I
want to recognize how crucial EU support has been
in tackling Al-Shabaab, and can therefore say that EU
support has directly saved lives.
Thirdly, the EU has extended significant diplomatic,
technical and resource support to the peace process led
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), including the implementation mechanisms of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan. We urge the EU to remain
steadfast in those efforts, which are crucial to the
stability of the Horn of Africa region.
Fourthly, the EU Emergency Trust Fund for Africa
continues to offer benefits in capacity-building in the

S/PV. 8792

promotion of peace and stability in the Horn of Africa
within the IGAD framework.
Finally, in the African Union, the EU contributes to
multiple support programmes for the implementation of
the Silencing the Guns initiative and the pursuit of the
long-term goals of Agenda 2063.
More personally, as Director of Kenya’s National
Counter Terrorism Centre, I worked with colleagues in
the EU to design an ambitious programme to develop
our capabilities to counter violent extremism. Doing
so showed me just how much we can achieve together
in terms of innovating and being bold in pursuing
transformative initiatives.
As I conclude, I wish to underscore a few points
that should underpin EU-AU cooperation, which we
believe is a building block for wider EU-AU-United
Nations cooperation.
First, there is need to reinvigorate the dialogue
between the AU Peace and Security Council and the
EU Political and Security Committee, as envisaged by
the AU-EU partnership.
Secondly, Africa will take on the primary role of
designing solutions to African challenges that can be
supported by international partners.
Thirdly, there should be a renewed focus on
prevention and peacebuilding through support for
measures to address the root causes of conflict,
including development and economic empowerment.
We believe that the EU can support the Peacebuilding
Commission even further.
Fourthly, cooperation and collaboration on climate
change-related conflict should be scaled up from
studies and the development of response strategies to
the implementation of such strategies at the grass-roots
level.
Fifthly, to add to the very laudable points made by
Mr. Borrell Fontelles, the EU should continue to support
Africa in its COVID-19 response by mitigating the
challenges of vaccine access, including by supporting
efforts for local vaccine production and distribution.
Allow me to return briefly to the values with which
I began my remarks. To those values must be added
pragmatism and respect for the choices of peoples as
expressed in their sovereign States. In order for those
values to survive and thrive, it is critical that they lead
to no catastrophic harm, whether by virtue of their

21-147285/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

exploitation to advance narrow interests or in the zeal
that leads them to imperil the stability or even peace
of some regions. I urge that the EU, Africa and all
members of the Council take care to do no great harm,
even as we push to ensure that our values are alive in
the world.
Finally, Kenya is grateful for the contribution of
the EU to regional peace and security and development.
We will continue to work with the EU and its member
States, both at the bilateral level and within regional
and subregional frameworks, in that regard.
I thank Mr. Borrell Fontelles for his briefing, and
I thank the Estonian presidency for convening this
debate.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): We very much
welcome High Representative Borrell Fontelles’
attendance at the Security Council today and thank him
for his briefing. We agree entirely with his emphasis on
the importance of multilateralism.
The United Nations-centred, international rulesbased system provides a foundation for coordinated
and collective action, including through regional
organizations, in order to address our biggest challenges,
as exemplified so eloquently just now by Ambassador
Kimani. We welcome the role that the European Union
(EU) has played in upholding international norms
across a range of forums, from the Group of Seven (G7) to the United Nations, including through the special
session of the Human Rights Council on Myanmar that
we co-chaired earlier this year.
As High Representative Borrell Fontelles set out,
there is no greater global challenge than that posed
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). As Foreign
Secretary Raab emphasized in the Council in February
(see S/2021/157) and, as we subsequently agreed in
resolution 2565 (2021), combating and sustainably
recovering from COVID-19 requires greater national,
regional and international cooperation and solidarity.
We therefore welcome the EU’s staunch support, as
Mr. Borrell Fontelles said, for the Access to COVID-19
Tools Accelerator initiative and EU financial
contributions to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access Facility.
The United Kingdom was proud to host the Global
Vaccine Summit just over a year ago, which surpassed
its target and raised $8.8 billion. We have made some
progress but there is more to do. We look forward to
6/24

10/06/2021

continuing cooperation with the EU as we work to
recover from COVID-19 and better prepare ourselves
for future pandemics, including through our shared
support for a global pandemic treaty.
We look forward to welcoming the SecretaryGeneral and the Presidents of the European Council and
the European Commission to the United Kingdom later
this week for the G-7 leaders’ meeting. We are using
our G-7 presidency to promote global health objectives
and support the world’s poorest.
Our shared work will need to continue at pace after
the G-7 as we head towards the twenty-sixth session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Glasgow,
where we hope that the world can finally turn the tide
on the climate crisis. We are grateful for the steps
already taken by the European Union, including the
submission of an ambitious 2030 nationally determined
contribution. We count on the European Union’s
support for an ambitious outcome and a cleaner, greener
future for us all, but especially for those countries most
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change — the same
countries that Prime Minister Johnson and other world
leaders called on us to support in the Council back in
February (see S/2021/198). I want to thank Mr. Borrell
Fontelles for the important point he made about the link
between climate change and climate security and the
need for us to address that issue in the Council.
Multilateralism continues to be central to
addressing issues within the European sphere. Along
with the European Union and other international
partners, we have repeatedly called on Russia in the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to
cease its destabilizing actions in Ukraine. The United
Kingdom will continue to work with the European
Union and other partners in support of international
law and the wider rules-based international system to
defend Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its international recognized borders.
On Belarus, we share High Representative
Borrell Fontelles’ concern regarding the actions of the
Belarusian authorities, including the forced landing
of Ryanair Flight FR-4978 and the arrest of journalist
Roman Protasevich. We continue to urge the Belarusian
authorities to respect the will of the Belarusian people,
as well as their fundamental freedoms, human rights
and the rule of law.
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

On the Western Balkans, we strongly support the
EU-facilitated dialogue under Special Representative
Miroslav Lajčák on the normalization of relations
between Serbia and Kosovo. We continue to encourage
closer cooperation between the EU and NATO to
promote democratic values, prevent destabilization
and facilitate progress towards European and EuroAtlantic integration. The United Kingdom continues
to play a significant role in the NATO presence in the
Western Balkans, working with partners, including
the European Union-led peacekeeping force Operation
Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to support defence
reform and peace.
High Representative Borrell Fontelles underlined
the primary responsibility of the Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
we recognize the contribution of the EU towards
resolving issues on the Council’s agenda. That includes
the role of the EU in support of a diplomatic solution
to the revitalization and restoration of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. We continue to work
together to bring Iran back into compliance with its
commitments and restore the benefits of that deal for
all parties.
The EU and the United Kingdom continue to work
closely on Libya, including through engagement with
the Berlin process towards a sustainable, Libyan-owned
political settlement. We support continued efforts to
enforce the United Nations arms embargo through
the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI.
We welcome the EU’s continued focus on Africa,
as set out moments ago by Ambassador Kimani. In
Somalia, we have been united with the EU and other
international partners in calling for a consensus-based
way forward on elections. We welcome the recent
agreement between Somali leaders to that end. Of
course, we strongly support the work of the African
Union Mission in Somalia and hope that the EU will
be able to continue its essential financial support in
building Somali security.
As we have shown in our work in the G-7 and here in
New York at the United Nations across a range of shared
global challenges, the EU and the United Kingdom
share a resolve to tackle the common challenges we all
face. That includes supporting human rights, including,
as Mr. Borrell Fontelles said, for those in Hong Kong;
tackling conflict; coordinating on human rights

S/PV. 8792

sanctions and promoting the rights and prosperity of
women, including through girls’ education. I think you
will agree, Mr. President, that when we work together,
we are a force for good in the world.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, and we listened
very carefully to his assessments.
We are in favour of developing cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations on the basis of the United Nations
Charter, first and foremost its chapter VIII. Cooperation
with the European Union (EU) is no exception, which
should also be organized on this basis and within the
framework of General Assembly resolution 65/276 of
2011. We also believe that regional structures should
complement United Nations efforts in their areas of
responsibility and within their mandates. Therefore,
among the priorities for cooperation between the United
Nations and the EU, we see collective cooperation in
countering cross-border threats and challenges, as well
as fostering dialogue on counter-terrorism, to be of prime
importance. This kind of cooperation has significant
potential, and we fully support these approaches.
At the same time, however, it is vitally important
that cooperation between the United Nations and the
EU lead to strengthening multilateral approaches to
global affairs and not to erode or revise them. True
multilateralism entails consistent support of the central
role of the United Nations. Promoting such dubious
concepts as the “rules-based” order or imposing
block approaches and attempts to present one’s own
experience and achievements as a gold standard that
other countries should implement at home bears no
resemblance to multilateralism, and often leads to
blatant interference in the affairs of other States. We
would caution against the use of these approaches, for
example, in relation to Belarus.
Russia-EU relations at present are unfortunately at
their lowest ebb in history. This is a separate issue and not
the topic of today’s meeting. But I must say that, rather
than adopting a careful and patient collective approach
to seeking compromise and constructive solutions with
partners within the General Assembly and Security
Council, our European partners increasingly often
choose a destructive unilateral approach. This gives
rise to nothing but the gravest of concerns.

21-147287/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The most obvious example of the line that has
been taken by the EU is the actively development and
then arbitrary application of illegal, unilateral coercive
measures that have been approved in circumvention of
the Security Council and of international legal norms.
Contrary to the official statements on the targeted
nature of these mechanisms, their unlawful nature
substantially hinders the socioeconomic situation in
affected countries and leads to falling standards of
living for ordinary people. This has been confirmed by
relevant studies by United Nations officials.
Again, we would draw the attention of Brussels
to the fact that this practice does not lead to a change
in State policy. On the contrary, it leans towards
neocolonialism and causes affected States and all rightminded countries to unite to defend the interests of
their own peoples and the basic principles of inter-State
cooperation as enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
Even in the context of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the EU did not heed the call of United Nations
Secretary-General Guterres to suspend unilateral
coercive measures for humanitarian purposes. This
indifference to human suffering does nothing for the
EU’s reputation on the international stage.
The EU is an important regional player, and its
assistance to the United Nations is necessary. However,
the efforts of the EU should not go beyond the
frameworks set forth in Security Council mandates. in
this context, we still have questions about the European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, as
one of its objectives is to assist in the fulfilment of the
United Nations arms embargo on Libya. We called on
the EU to tread very carefully in this region, which is
still unable to recover from the forcible destruction of
the Libyan State 10 years ago. A series of EU members
were directly involved in that effort.
We have great expectations from the EU as a
mediator in the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue, even more
so given the fact that the General Assembly gave the
EU a special mandate to this end. We must state that, so
far, we have seen no significant results. In that regard,
we would recommend to our European colleagues
that, rather than playing up to Pristina, they should
ensure that Pristina fulfils already agreed parameters,
including finally creating a community of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo.
Once again, we called on the EU not to deviate from
the principle of impartiality during their mediation
8/24

10/06/2021

at these negotiations. The same wish also applies to
EU policy in the Balkans as a whole. We call on our
colleagues to be careful in their approach to decisions
of universal application reached within the United
Nations and to refrain from ignoring or selectively
reading them, which could run the risk of undermining
the legitimacy of a whole host of structures in the region.
Finally, we would note the ever more frequent
attempts of our colleagues from the EU to
promote — through various means, including through
United Nations instruments — their own approaches
on gender, human rights, climate and other topics,
presenting them as allegedly universal and benefiting
from consensus. There are an increasing number
of examples of this practice, and I would like to
immediately warn the Council that we intend to fight
against it more adamantly and uncompromisingly, as it
reflects efforts by the EU to replace international law
with the so-called rules-based order.
I would not want my statement to give the
impression that Russia has a negative attitude towards
the EU. That is not the case. We are neighbours on a
continent, and we are interested in cooperating on
ideology and on dialogue. However, dialogue should be
built on both parties having equal footing and mutual
respect for one another.
We have many questions that have accrued over
recent years, which we would like to put to the EU, but
we ask them while putting particular focus on specific
facts. I would also like the EU to take that approach
and refrain from promoting fake news or arbitrary
accusations along the lines of “highly likely”. The EU
can and should play a constructive role in Europe and
around the world. We see here significant potential. We
have highly valued, inter alia, the role that the EU has
played as a coordinator of the commission to monitor
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
There are also other areas where there has been
successful cooperation. The main point is that the EU
understands that in the modern world there is no place
for hegemony and dominance.
In the EU, there are many people who recognize
the counterproductive nature of the confrontational
approach adopted towards our country as well as the
erroneous line that has been held in regions in our
neighbourhood over recent years. The culmination of
that was seen in the anti-constitutional bloody coup in
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Ukraine and the nationalism, neo-Nazism, Russophobia
and antisemitism in that country.
We trust that at the end of the day common sense
will prevail and that we will be able to select a new
balanced model for our relationship, with a focus on
the principles of international law. This equal and
honest cooperation is something in which Russia has
already always been ready to engage. We trust that
our European colleagues will be able to make the right
choice and overcome the many unfortunate trends that
I have mentioned.
The EU stands to gain from this new approach as
would its international partners, including of course
Russia and the other States Members of the United
Nations that are interested in developing a constructive
and effective type of cooperation with the Union,
alongside other regional and subregional organizations.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Josep Borrell Fontelles, for
his briefing. Mr. Borrell Fontelles is a strong advocate
of the India-European Union Strategic Partnership. I
join others in extending a warm welcome to the Security
Council to him. The United Nations and the project of
the European Union (EU) have a common origin, both
having been founded after the Second World War. The
driving principles and values of both organizations
are similar. Today the EU is a natural partner of the
United Nations in addressing global peace and security
challenges, as well as advancing development efforts.
We therefore welcome today’s briefing.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
EU has addressed issues not only limited to Europe, but
also in many theatres of conflict across continents. In
the Balkans, the EU is at the forefront of efforts aimed at
promoting peace, reconciliation, stability, freedom and
economic prosperity. On several occasions, the EU has
brought together important stakeholders in situations
of conflict by strongly supporting donor conferences
and charting peace plans. The key role of the EU, as
a member of the Quartet, in the Middle East peace
process is acknowledged, as is its role in preserving the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran.
The role of the EU has been growing in Africa
as well. Its complementary efforts towards conflict
resolution and in addressing security challenges,
including terrorism, have contributed positively to the
efforts of the United Nations in Africa. The EU is also

S/PV. 8792

extending support to bilateral and regional initiatives,
including to the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
EU Military Training Missions in Central African
Republic and Mali. The EU should continue to augment
national efforts to address security-related challenges
and maintain a balance in priorities in the context of
recovery and peacebuilding in Africa. The EU-African
Union partnership should focus on finding African
solutions to African problems.
As the world continues to be confronted with peace
and security challenges, exacerbated by the ongoing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic situation,
there is merit in strengthening partnerships and
enhancing linkages between the United Nations and
regional organizations, such as the EU. In that context,
I have the following five observations to make.
First, the EU has broken new ground in developing
effective tools for conflict prevention, peacebuilding,
crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation. We
believe that the EU has an important role to play in
tackling global challenges, with the United Nations at
the core of multilateral efforts.
Secondly, the EU continues to have an important
role to play in a reformed United Nations-centred
multilateral system, and we expect the EU to firmly
support ongoing reform efforts.
Thirdly, in the current difficult circumstances
caused globally by the pandemic, the multilateral
mechanisms need to work with regional organizations
to ensure resilient medical supply chains, vaccines
and active pharmaceutical ingredients. The EU can
be an important player in that direction and help
global recovery.
Fourthly, the EU has an important role to play in
our continued fight against terrorism and other new and
emerging threats. In that regard, I would like the EU to
give due consideration to the eight-point action plan on
counter-terrorism proposed by India’s External Affairs
Minister on 11 January while addressing the Security
Council (S/2021/48, annex 5).
Fifthly, we note the significant financial contribution
of the EU member States to the United Nations
peacekeeping budget and voluntary contributions to
United Nations programmes. The contribution of the
EU to the progress of the global discourse on climate
change and the Sustainable Development Goals has

21-147289/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

been noteworthy, and we will continue to work closely
to find a balanced approach to implement such ends.
The India-EU strategic partnership is guided by our
shared interests, principles and values of democracy,
pluralism, freedom and respect for the rule of law
and human rights. India and the EU have a common
interest in ensuring security, prosperity and sustainable
development in a multipolar world. We believe that
India’s relations with Europe and the EU are a force for
good globally.
India and the EU share a common perspective on
many regional and global issues, including a shared
commitment to promoting an international rules-based
order based on reformed and effective multilateralism.
India’s desire to work constructively with the EU is
reflected in the newly-instituted dialogues on maritime
security as well as climate change. India welcomes the
EU’s recently-announced strategy for cooperation in the
Indo-Pacific and looks forward to greater cooperation
to ensure a free, open, inclusive and rules-based IndoPacific, premised upon respect for international law and
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States.
India and the EU recently concluded a successful
leaders’ meeting in May. We launched a connectivity
partnership to enhance connectivity in conformity with
international norms and rules of law and respect for
international commitments. We also agreed to intensify
our economic engagements, including by resuming
negotiations on trade and investment agreements and
working together on World Trade Organization reforms.
India’s partnership with the EU manifests itself in
cooperation towards tackling current global issues,
such as COVID-19, climate change and terrorism and
strengthening multilateral institutions. India remains
committed to working with the EU in that endeavour.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to warmly
welcome High Representative Borrell Fontelles today
and to thank him for his thought-provoking intervention.
We are very delighted to have him with us.
The steadfast belief of the European Union (EU)
in multilateralism and its strong commitment to the
United Nations are borne of its lived experience of
conflict and peacebuilding on the continent of Europe.
That is why respect for the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations is actually written into the Treaty on
European Union.
10/24

10/06/2021

Today the United Nations and the EU work in
lockstep as natural partners all around the world to
eradicate poverty, protect human rights and overcome
the global health crisis that we have all seen in the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
As a proud member of the EU, Ireland understands
the power of cooperation among nations in meeting our
common challenges. We believe in it. The harrowing
experience of the pandemic has surely taught us one
thing — that the power of coordinated action at the
international and regional levels greatly eclipses that of
any unilateral response.
The EU is the world’s leading development donor
and a key partner of the United Nations in crisis
management. In those roles, the EU demonstrates just
how complementary it is to the United Nations in the
way that it works and, I would say more importantly,
how it acts. That makes the EU and the United Nations
strong and influential natural partners.
The EU has enhanced its capacity to prevent
conflict, preserve peace and strengthen international
stability and security in support of the United
Nations. Two new instruments will deliver on that:
the Neighbourhood, Development and International
Cooperation Instrument and the European Peace
Facility. The strategic partnership with the United
Nations is a key element for the future orientation of
the EU’s action in security and defence.
From Kosovo to the Middle East and throughout
Africa, EU missions are deployed alongside United
Nations peacekeeping operations or special political
missions. Some of those EU missions, such as the
European Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta,
combating piracy off the coast of Somalia, play
a central role in responding to threats to peace.
Others, such as the training mission in Mali, which
complements the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, support
security sector reform. Irish experts are seconded to
EU missions in Europe, the Caucasus, the Middle East
and Africa, while members of the Irish Defence Forces
participate in missions and operations in Mali, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the Mediterranean.
We are proud to have supported, together with
our EU partners, mediation and peace processes in
Colombia, Afghanistan, Georgia, the Philippines and
Mozambique. As EU Special Envoy for the Peace
Process in Colombia, our former Deputy Prime
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Minister, Eamon Gilmore, has represented the EU,
while bringing the lessons learned from Ireland’s own
peace process to the table.
The EU works closely with many partners
around this table in the Security Council in support
of international peace and security. We work as a
member of the Middle East Quartet, as a facilitator of
the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue and as a coordinator
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. Ireland,
as facilitator for resolution 2231 (2015), will assist
the Security Council in upholding that important
key agreement.
I believe that the Security Council should encourage
and welcome such cooperation and utilize the EU’s
support for the United Nations where it can.
We welcome the trilateral cooperation between the
United Nations, the EU and the African Union, as well
as United Nations cooperation with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations. Those partnerships play
important roles in addressing issues that concern all
of us, encouraging dialogue, respect for human rights
and humanitarian assistance. The partnerships also
play a role in seeking peaceful solutions to the crises
in Myanmar and Ethiopia. They play roles in support
of peaceful, inclusive, democratic and time-bound
transitions in Mali and Chad.
Despite that good work, many challenges remain.
We need to continue to make real progress on delivering
on the women and peace and security agenda. We
strongly support the really valuable United Nations-EU
Spotlight Initiative on eliminating all forms of violence
against women and girls. We urge that women and
peace and security remain at the core and one of the
EU-United Nations priorities on peace operations and
crisis management as we move forward. We see that
as fundamental.
We are committed to ensuring that we address
climate-related security risks, where relevant, in our
prevention and peacebuilding work across the EU and
the United Nations.
Another area in which we see scope for greater
cooperation is in improving mission transitions.
Peacekeeping must be linked to peacebuilding in order
to disrupt cycles of violence, prevent conflict and
sustain the peace we are trying to instil. Cooperating
closely, we can ensure that mission transitions take

S/PV. 8792

place in a responsible, coordinated and graduated
manner, responsive to the specific needs on the ground.
We certainly believe that there is scope for enhanced
EU-United Nations coordination on peacebuilding and
the valuable Peacebuilding Fund.
Finally, the multilateral system must deliver in
response to COVID-19 by building back better. That
almost sounds like a cliché. What it means is debt relief.
It means equitable access to vaccines. It means access
to sustainable financing. It must include green recovery
to meet the existential challenge of climate change. On
that we are very clear.
The EU has a pivotal role to play on all those
issues and more. I know that it will continue to show
its trademark dedication, generosity and focus in
delivering on such critical goals.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to welcome
the participation of His Excellency Mr. Josep Borrell
Fontelles, High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, to this
meeting today, and to thank him very much for his
detailed briefing.
We live in a complex world faced with intersecting
and unprecedented challenges, from long-standing
issues, such as displacement, climate change, natural
disasters, poverty, hunger, inequality, violence and
conflicts to the recent coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. It is abundantly clear that those issues cannot
be tackled by any country alone. Multilateralism and
partnership are the undisputed means to address them.
While the United Nations plays the central role
in mobilizing and coordinating global efforts in that
regard, the importance of the contributions of regional
organizations are becoming more and more tangible to
both global goals and regional priorities. Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is essential to the promotion of international and
regional peace, security, stability and development.
Their complementarities enable greater opportunities
for dialogue, understanding, reconciliation and
confidence-building measures to prevent and
resolve conflicts.
We reiterate our support for the role of regional
organizations with regard to the work of the United
Nations, including the Security Council, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and the fundamental principles of international law.

21-1472811/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The high-level open debate on “Enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in enhancing confidence-building
and dialogue in conflict prevention and resolution”
(S/2021/394) and the following presidential statement
in April (S/PRST/2021/9) further strengthened our
commitment in that regard.
The strategic cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union (EU) has advanced
across various areas of peace and security, as well
as sustainable development and economic growth.
We commend the EU’s continued commitment to
multilateralism, as reaffirmed by Mr. Borrell Fontelles
today. We also recognize the work done by the EU
in connection to various issues on the agenda of the
Security Council.
With regard to peacekeeping, the EU’s significant
financial and personnel contributions remain vital
to the promotion of international peace and security.
We appreciate the ongoing collaboration between the
United Nations and EU peacekeeping missions to
enhance security and advance political solutions in
conflict areas, including through the implementation of
the United Nations-EU Strategic Partnership on Peace
Operations and Crisis Management for the period 20192021 and the signing of the Framework Agreement
Between the United Nations and the European Union
for the Provision of Mutual Support in the context of
their respective missions and operations in the field
last September. We encourage even closer cooperation
among the two organizations in the future, for instance
in the areas of mediation, confidence-building and the
promotion of multilateralism.
In South-East Asia, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) has been playing a
constructive role in strengthening solidarity and
building a region of peace, stability and development.
To that end, ASEAN attaches great importance to
nurturing close cooperation with external partners,
including the EU. In December last year, the relations
between ASEAN and the EU were elevated to strategic
partnership. That is an important milestone that builds
on existing achievements and enhances efforts to
effectively implement the ASEAN-EU Plan of Action
2018-2022. We are also pleased that the long-standing
comprehensive partnership between ASEAN and the
United Nations has continued to develop positively.
12/24

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations can also benefit from
strengthened partnership and experience sharing
among regional organizations themselves or within
innovative plurilateral modalities. There are countless
opportunities and areas for cooperation, such as
confidence-building measures, mediation, the women
and peace and security agenda, climate change and
peacekeeping training, to name just a few.
Before concluding, I would like to reaffirm Viet
Nam’s readiness and commitment to enhancing the
role and contributions of regional organizations to
the work of the United Nations and foster relations
between ASEAN and the United Nations, as well as
other partners.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I welcome
Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles and thank him for his
valuable briefing.
The European Union (EU) is an important partner
to the United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security. According to Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, the cooperation between the two
organizations provides important support and makes an
effective contribution to addressing joint challenges,
whether they are conventional or emerging, similar to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its
various implications.
My country’s delegation welcomes the active
contribution of the EU to the comprehensive COVID-19
response plan and its important support to the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility to ensure
fair access to vaccines.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the EU is particularly visible in Africa, where the EU
is actively contributing at the political, technical and
financial levels to supporting many conflict-resolution
and peacebuilding initiatives and tracks. In that context,
we recall the EU’s contribution to training security
forces and providing technical assistance with a view
to reforming the security sector in the Central African
Republic, Mali and Somalia. We also recall its active
contribution, alongside the League of Arab States and
the African Union, to supporting the political process
in Libya and its important role, through the European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI,
to addressing violations of the arms embargo imposed
on Libya.
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

My country also commends the constructive role of
the EU in the Middle East in supporting international
efforts to resume the peace process towards achieving
a two-State solution based on the agreed international
parameters, particularly Security Council resolutions.
My country also commends the continuous support of
the EU to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on
Iran’s nuclear programme and its efforts to guarantee
the continuity of that important framework for
non-proliferation and disarmament.
We believe in the close links between peace,
security and human rights, on the one hand, and
sustainable development, on the other hand. My
country’s delegation commends the role of the EU in
supporting efforts to enhance development cooperation
and strengthening and protecting human rights and
basic freedoms.
We reiterate our support for the efforts of the
EU to protect civilians in armed conflicts, especially
its initiatives to protect women, girls and children
affected by such conflicts. We also support the EU
commitment to preventing sexual and gender-based
violence and providing victims with protection against
it, as well as its efforts to strengthen the role of women
in all peace and security initiatives, particularly those
aimed at preventing, resolving and reducing the impact
of conflicts.
Furthermore, with respect to security, peace and
sustainable development, we reaffirm the need to
strengthen cooperation between the two organizations
in order to achieve the goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change and to work on putting in place a
comprehensive plan to reduce the impact of climate
change as an emerging threat that exacerbates
vulnerability and conflicts.

S/PV. 8792

Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank Estonia for organizing this
important and timely briefing and High Representative
Borrell Fontelles for his remarks today.
The partnership between the United States and the
European Union (EU) is built on a foundation of shared
values. It is built on a common vision that includes
a commitment to democracy and the rule of law,
respect for human rights, the promotion of economic
opportunity and the pursuit of transatlantic prosperity
and security.
The European Union remains an indispensable
partner to the United States and our efforts to promote
global security and prosperity, and Europe’s security
and success are inextricably linked to our own. President
Biden will meet Presidents Michel and Von der Leyen
on 15 June to discuss a common agenda to ensure
global health security, build a sustainable economic
recovery, fight climate change, enhance digital trade
and cooperation, push back against malign behaviour
and address global challenges.
Together, the United States and the EU have
pledged funding towards coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) vaccine distribution efforts and the health
and humanitarian response. We are working to defeat
COVID-19, rebuild our communities, rebuild our
economies, strengthen our trade networks and come
back even stronger.

We believe that common investment in youth for
comprehensive growth and sustainable development,
as set out in the outcomes of the Abidjan summit, will
surely broaden the prospects for building a more stable
future in Africa.

The United States deeply appreciates the European
Union’s contributions across the globe, including its
cooperation with the United Nations. In Africa, the
EU has played a key role in counter-terrorism, conflict
prevention, security assistance and peacebuilding. We
are grateful for the significant support the EU provides
for peace and security initiatives in Africa, including
for the African Union Mission in Somalia, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel. The European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI and its assistance in
implementing the arms embargo are contributing to
peace and security in Libya.

In conclusion, Tunisia reaffirms the importance of
multilateral work and the need to strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations and other regional
organizations, similar to the cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU, in order to tackle new
challenges to international peace and security.

We share the EU’s deep concern about the human
rights violations, abuses and atrocities in Tigray,
including the lack of access of humanitarian actors to
the most vulnerable populations who are on the cusp
of famine. We will continue to work closely with our
EU partners to address crises — not only in Tigray,

21-1472813/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

but around the world, including in Burma, Syria and
Venezuela. The Security Council can and must also do
better in responding.
We greatly appreciate the EU’s critical role
in holding Russia accountable for its violations of
international law. Moscow’s actions in Ukraine
remain a threat to European security seven years
after Russia’s intervention in eastern Ukraine and its
occupation of Crimea. Our support and that of the EU
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine
and Georgia is unwavering — whether via the United
Nations system, other multilateral forums or bilaterally.
We will continue to stand with our allies and partners
in calling on Russia to immediate cease its evolving
military, economic, diplomatic and disinformation
efforts to destabilize Ukraine and Georgia.
We also thank the European Union for its decisive,
quick and clear action on the forced diversion of a flight
between two EU member States and the subsequent
removal and arrest of journalist Roman Protasevich in
Minsk. We will enhance our efforts, including through
the coordination of our sanctions policies, to ensure
that the authorities of Belarus are held accountable for
their actions.
With regard to the dire human rights situation in
Belarus, we are committed to close coordination with
the EU to promote transparency and accountability.
We support international efforts to independently
look into the human rights situation, including as it
impacts Polish minority communities. In that regard,
we welcome efforts by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, an international
accountability platform for Belarus.
The United States unequivocally affirms the EU’s
role as a crucial partner to the United Nations and, in
particular, to the Security Council in the maintenance
of peace and security around the world.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles,
for his comprehensive briefing.
The cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union (EU) strengthens both organizations
and allows for a more coordinated approach to address
key issues affecting Europe, its neighbours and the
global community. Regional and subregional groups
14/24

10/06/2021

have a critical role to play as contemporary peace and
security issues become more globalized. It is only
through a multi-stakeholder approach that we can hope
to address long-standing challenges such as climate and
security, the proliferation of terrorism and the ongoing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Our delegation supports collaboration between
the United Nations and the European Union, which
has been an essential partner in addressing the global
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard,
we applaud the European Union’s contributions to
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility as we
push to ensure equitable distribution of the COVID-19
vaccine. We must continue to support such efforts as
we build back better.
Europe, like most locales around the world, has
experienced the ramifications of the COVID-19
pandemic. Many European countries were hard hit by
the coronavirus, experiencing high infection rates and
fatalities. A coordinated approach to the post-pandemic
recovery will be critical. The European Union’s Next
Generation EU fund creates an opportunity to usher
EU member States into a more sustainable future
by rethinking financing, enhancing food security,
addressing inequality and pushing for a more
circular economy.
Coordination between the United Nations and
EU continues to be invaluable in promoting global
peace and security, especially on issues like the fight
against terrorism and the pursuit of peaceful conflict
resolutions. The United Nations and the EU continue to
work closely together on several issues on the Security
Council’s agenda, including through the Framework
Agreement Between the United Nations and the
European Union for the Provision of Mutual Support in
the context of their respective missions and operations
in the field, signed in September. The framework
underscores the value of enhancing complementarity
between the two organizations.
AS a member of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
recognizes the vital role of regional and subregional
organizations in promoting economic integration
and social development. Organizations such as the
European Union, CARICOM, the African Union and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations utilize key
partnerships with national Governments and other local
actors to better address peace and security challenges.
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The EU, through its member States, has a significant
presence on the Security Council and is a feature in
the peace and security landscape across all regions.
We particularly value the EU’s cooperation on matters
affecting conflict in Africa, where we pursue African
solutions for African problems. It follows that, when
Africa speaks, we should all listen.
Looking ahead, we hope for concrete progress with
our EU partners on issues such as unilateral coercive
measures that oftentimes do more harm than good,
as well as the reversal of unfair financial blacklisting
practices that hurt developing economies.
We conclude by reiterating our full support to
further enhance the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
line with Chapter VIII of the Charter. Such cooperation
remains essential for delivering the Council’s mandate
for maintaining international peace and security.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the High Representative of the
European Union (EU) for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, for his outstanding
briefing and welcome him to the Council.
The international community is at a complex
juncture which, despite the many challenges, opens up
great possibilities for generating collective cooperation
schemes. Today’s meeting allows us to take stock of the
state of cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union. Both the Charter of the United
Nations and the Lisbon Treaty recognize the importance
of cooperation between international organizations.
In conflict prevention, crisis management,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, regional and
subregional organizations play a key role, given that
they are well positioned to understand the origins
and root causes of conflicts, as well as to promote
confidence-building measures and tailor-made political
dialogue schemes. Although we refer to regional and
subregional organizations in general terms, it is
important to point out that they have diverse mandates
and capacities.
In that connection, with regard to the European
Union, my country recognizes the importance of road
maps for the establishment of strategic priority areas that
guide the strategic partnership between the EU and the
United Nations, as well as the signing of the agreement

S/PV. 8792

to enhance cooperation and strengthen coordinated
responses in peace operations in September 2020.
I wish to underscore three crucial points regarding
EU-United Nations cooperation.
First, the close, efficient and coordinated work of
the EU with the United Nations through its 18 civilian
missions and military operations in Europe, Africa and
Asia is fundamental. In many cases, those missions share
a headquarters with their United Nations counterpart.
The coordination of efforts in peacekeeping,
development, human rights and humanitarian assistance
is therefore vital to the performance of such missions.
We highlight the excellent cooperation in the cases of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the European Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta
and the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI, as examples.
With regard to Operation IRINI, we hope that
concrete steps can soon be taken in coordination with
the Libyan authorities to protect the human rights and
dignity of migrants in the Mediterranean.
Secondly, as we witness conflicts becoming more
entrenched, we note the crucial role played by the
European Union in the management and handling
of those crises. The EU plays an important role in
stabilizing the Sahel through the deployment of its
technical training mission in Mali. In particular, we
highlight the assistance the EU provides to the Malian
armed forces in terms of respect for human rights and
protection of civilians, as well as its participation in
the Sahel Alliance, which addresses development and
governance — issues that lie at the heart of the conflicts
in the region.
In the case of the Middle East, we recognize the
work of the EU in the framework of the Middle East
Quartet, the early reactivation of which we look
forward to in order to achieve a two-State solution for
Israel and Palestine.
We are closely following the efforts of the EU
in conflict management in Europe, in particular in
Ukraine, Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Kosovo and
Nagorno-Karabakh regions, among others. We also
recognize the importance of the process to gradually
integrate the Western Balkans into the European Union,
as Mr. Borrell Fontelles mentioned earlier.

21-1472815/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Finally, Mexico underlines the importance of
continuing to make progress on cross-cutting issues
such as gender. Women play a fundamental role in
the peace and security agenda, hence why we must
take advantage of their contributions and guarantee
their participation in all processes and at all levels of
decision-making.
Mexico calls for increased efforts to foster
cooperation between the European Union and other
regional and subregional mechanisms, in particular
the African Union, the League of Arab States and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, among others.
It is only through an interconnected and efficient
network that we will see results in favour of sustainable
peace and effective multilateralism.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I welcome the presence of Mr. Borrell Fontelles, the
High Representative of the European Union (EU) for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, at today’s meeting
and thank him for his briefing.
Strengthened cooperation between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations
helps to consolidate and strengthen international
collective security mechanisms and maintain
international peace and security while contributing to
the response to global challenges and promoting the
common development of all countries.
China supports cooperation between the United
Nations and the EU in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We must work together to uphold and practice
true multilateralism.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has once again
demonstrated how the interests of all countries of the
world are intertwined and that we share a common
future. No country can stay out of harm’s way by
looking after only its own interests and no country
can fight the challenges of our time alone, making
multilateralism imperative.
The EU itself is the product of a multilateral response
to common challenges. As an important force on the
world stage and an active advocate of multilateralism,
the EU should take the lead in complying with
international law and the universally accepted and
recognized basic norms governing international
relations. It should hold fast to the principles of mutual
respect, treating one another as equals and working
16/24

10/06/2021

together towards mutually beneficial outcomes. It
should abandon double standards, avoid bloc politics
and oppose division and confrontation.
Earlier, Mr. Borrell Fontelles and the representative
of the United Kingdom mentioned Hong Kong in their
statements. I would like to remind them that Hong
Kong is a special administrative region of the People’s
Republic of China. Purely and simply, any matter
related to Hong Kong is part of China’s internal affairs,
in which there is no place for external interference.
Moreover, it has nothing whatsoever to do with the
theme of today’s meeting.
China hopes that, in its foreign exchanges, the EU
will pursue the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of other States. China would like to
see an EU that champions genuine multilateralism and
plays a greater, more positive and constructive role in
international affairs.
Over the years, the EU has done a great deal of
useful work in neutralizing tensions and differences
between various parties, promoting the resolution
of conflicts and relevant regional hotspot issues and
implementing Security Council resolutions.
China acknowledges the EU’s efforts towards the
resumption of compliance with the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. We hope that the EU will continue
to play a coordinating role and work with all parties
concerned to help bring about an expeditious political
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
China looks forward to the EU’s continued
contribution to the maintenance of peace and stability
on the African continent, especially in terms of lending
greater support to African-owned peace operations.
China commends the EU for its long-standing
assistance in improving the humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestine territory. We hope the EU
will continue to play a constructive role in promoting
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian issue. Further, China encourages the EU,
as a player in the resolution of hotspot issues, to be
mindful in fully respecting the sovereignty of the
countries concerned, taking into serious consideration
the realities of the countries in question, safeguarding
the authority of the United Nations in earnest and
effectively strengthening coordination and cooperation
with other regional organizations.
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV. 8792

Secretary-General António Guterres has repeatedly
underscored that achieving sustainable and inclusive
development is the most effective way to tackle the root
causes of conflict once and for all. As the largest provider
of official development assistance, the EU should do
more to help developing countries in general and wartorn countries in particular so as to recover and rebuild
and eliminate the root causes of conflict. We hope
that the EU will further increase its international aid
efforts, place a greater focus on eradicating hunger and
poverty, developing health and education, promoting
post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19) reconstruction,
and channel resources into areas where the most urgent
needs exist with a view to making a greater contribution
to the efforts of developing countries to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, achieve
sustainable development and promote and consolidate
peace through development.

of peace, reconciliation, democracy and human rights
in Europe.

China attaches great importance to its relations
with the EU and has always seen the Union as an
important force in the process of forging a multipolar
world. Both sides have extensive common interests
and broad prospects for cooperation in maintaining
world peace and promoting common development.
China is ready to strengthen dialogue and exchanges
with the EU, deepen our coordination and cooperation,
join hands in tackling the COVID-19 pandemic and
climate-change-related challenges, jointly safeguard
genuine or true multilateralism, strengthen and improve
global governance and work hand in hand to safeguard
the international system with the United Nations at
its core and the international order on the basis of
international law.

In Libya, the EU contributes to the enforcement
of resolution 1973 (2011) through the European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, and
the European Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta
continues to contribute to enforcing the weapons
embargo on Somalia in accordance with resolution
2182 (2014) as well as to protect vessels of the World
Food Programme.

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I join others in warmly
welcoming High Representative Borrell Fontelles to the
Security Council today and thank him for his briefing.

Norway and the EU share a common vision for
a free and democratic Europe. We share the EU’s
deep concern for the shrinking democratic space and
deteriorating human rights situation in Belarus. The
forced landing of the passenger plane in May was a
blatant violation of international norms and a threat to
European security. Norway fully supports the strong
and appropriate reactions from the EU.

In many ways, Norwegian foreign policy starts
in Europe. The European Union (EU) and its member
States are our close neighbours and friends, with shared
values and interests, and this is reflected in our frequent
alignment with EU positions and measures, including
on key issues on the agenda of the Security Council.
The EU is clearly shouldering its responsibilities
as a steadfast promoter of multilateralism and as an
implementer of Council-mandated tasks. We recognize
the important role the EU has played in transforming
Europe from a continent of war into a continent of
peace. The EU contributes to advancing the causes

In Africa, the EU plays a key role in
peacebuilding, conflict prevention, security assistance
and development. With Norway’s long-standing
engagement and commitments in Africa, we welcome
the High Representative’s remarks on this matter. We
also look forward to seeing the further development
of the strategic partnership between the EU and
African Union.
The report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations (S/2000/809), known as the Brahimi report,
and resolution 1327 (2000) on peace operations called
for a clear division of labour between the United
Nations and regional organizations. These documents
also encourage efforts aimed at promoting synergies,
and we welcome the EU’s endeavours in this regard.

The EU has also provided significant financial and
technical support for African-led security initiatives
and has borne much of the financial support for the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, where
new structures are needed to facilitate stable and more
diverse financing.

European security and international law are
also undermined by the conflict in Ukraine. Norway
welcomes the engagement of the EU in addressing
this conflict and its support for Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Alongside our international
partners, we will not accept Russia’s illegal annexation
of Crimea and Sevastopol.

21-1472817/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

10/06/2021

It is of great importance that the EU and the United
Nations continue to join forces to respond to global
challenges. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a
case in point. Throughout the pandemic, the EU has
demonstrated solidarity with the rest of the world and
its readiness to coordinate actions under the leadership
of the United Nations. We welcome the EU’s leadership
in COVAX and the Access to COVID-19 Tools
Accelerator, including its distribution and export of
vaccines globally and efforts aimed at increasing global
vaccine-production capacities.

In the Sahel, the European Union is providing
valuable support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, particularly in terms of equipment and
by financing the support mechanism via the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. This support remains insufficient. At
the N’Djamena summit, France, like the countries of
the Group of Five for the Sahel countries, the European
Union and the African Union, again called for increased
support for the Joint Force from the United Nations and
all international partners.

We would also like to pay tribute to the EU’s
leading role in the fight against climate change. Norway
cooperates closely with EU member States at the United
Nations and elsewhere to highlight and address the
security risks that arise from climate change.

In Syria, the European Union and its member
States are the main contributors to the humanitarian
response with more than €24 million committed since
2011. Europe will be able to contribute to the financing
of reconstruction only after a credible political solution
based on resolution 2254 (2015) is firmly in place.

Finally, we welcome the EU Action Plan on Women,
Peace and Security 2019-2024 and the strong focus on
gender equality, human rights and peace and security
within and beyond its borders. Council members can
rest assured that Norway will continue to advocate
these priorities in cooperation with the EU, both inside
and outside the Security Council.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell
Fontelles, for his briefing.
The European Union (EU) is providing concrete
solutions to threats to international peace and security.
With regard to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, the EU has demonstrated its commitment
by initiating the launch of the Access to COVID-19
Tools Accelerator in April 2020, together with the
World Health Organization (WHO). It has initiated two
resolutions that are paving the way for strengthening
the WHO and the multilateral health architecture.
The COVAX facility, funded to the tune of more
than €2.4 billion by the European Union and its member
States, has already made it possible to distribute nearly
20 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine to 43 African
states. The EU’s humanitarian airlift has supported
United Nations efforts aimed at ensuring humanitarian
access in the context of the pandemic.
In the face of crises, the European Union and its
member States are on the move. We collectively deploy
more than 5,000 personnel in peace operations. Let me
highlight some concrete examples.
18/24

On the Iranian nuclear issue, the European
coordinator and the other participants in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action have been engaged
in discussions in Vienna for more than two months
to enable the United States and Iran to return to full
compliance with the 2015 agreement and resolution
2231 (2015). We hope for a swift conclusion.
In the Middle East, the European Union mobilized
to bring about a cessation of hostilities during the latest
escalation of violence in Gaza. But, for the ceasefire
to be sustainable, the underlying causes of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict must be addressed by creating the
conditions for a resumption of the political process and
by implementing the two-State solution. That is the
position of France and the European Union, which will
continue to work towards that goal.
In Libya, the European Union is fully committed
to ending the crisis. It is deploying the European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, whose
priority is the implementation of the United Nations
arms embargo on Libya. The EU can contribute to the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement, under the
aegis of the United Nations, in full agreement with the
Libyan parties. The United Nations should deploy the
ceasefire-monitoring mechanism as soon as possible.
Finally, in Afghanistan, the European Union is the
leading donor in supporting stability and preserving
the gains that benefit the Afghan people. As such, the
European Union is fully entitled to contribute to the
intra-Afghan political negotiations, which are the only
way to peace in Afghanistan.
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

On the European continent, the hijacking of a flight
by the Belarusian authorities was a blatant reminder
that repeated human rights violations also have direct
consequences for security in Europe. The European
Union responded firmly.
In Ukraine, the European Union mobilized to
respond to the renewed tension on the eastern border
and in Crimea between March and April. Within the
Normandy format, France and Germany are making
every effort to relaunch the political process.
We also hope that the European Union can continue
to be involved in the intra-Cypriot talks conducted
under the aegis of the United Nations.
Lastly, the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms are joint priorities,
as is the protection of civilians. The European Union
and its member States are committed to implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
on the women and peace and security, the youth
and peace and security and the children and armed
conflict agendas.
The Security Council can count on the strong
commitment of the European Union and its member
States to working with the United Nations, within
the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, in all crisis areas and to contributing to
building a strong and vibrant multilateralism.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for his excellent briefing.
Sharing the vision of a rules-based multilateral
global governance system, the United Nations and the
European Union respond to global crises, threats and
challenges that require cooperation and coordination
based on universal rules and values. Their partnership
covers a variety of issues that are relevant to the
challenges facing the world today.
For example, in the area of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and crisis resolution, the United Nations
and the European Union work together to help build
effective long-term security and governance institutions
and to conduct preventive diplomacy initiatives to
address emerging crises.

S/PV. 8792

They cooperate closely in providing political,
financial and operational assistance to peace processes
and peacekeeping operations.
In Africa, for example, the partnership between
the United Nations and the European Union manifests
itself in the areas of conflict resolution and political,
technical and financial support to countries in fragile
situations. In that regard, we can cite the strategic
advisory support missions and the training and
equipping of defence and security forces through the
European Union Common Security and Defence Policy
missions in Niger and in Mali.
In the area of peacekeeping, my delegation
welcomes and appreciates the EU’s role in the quest for
stability in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa through its
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia.
In Libya, the European Union works closely with
the United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
African Union to help Libyan actors to make genuine
progress towards reconciliation through a national
dialogue and elections. We hope that the new European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI
will further contribute to the fight against breaches
of the arms embargo on Libya and to combating the
smuggling of migrants in the Mediterranean.
The fight against climate change is an area where
the United Nations and the European Union, through
pilot projects, are developing tools to combat the
risks related to climate fragility. In addition, the EU
cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration in providing advice on how
to manage climate-induced displacement.
In addition, with regard to the global response to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the
European Union and its member States have mobilized
€38.5 billion to address the humanitarian, health,
social and economic consequences of the health crisis.
In 2020, the EU-sponsored pledging conference raised
$16 billion from donors around the world, providing
a major boost to the prevention and treatment of and
vaccine research for COVID-19.
The United Nations and the European Union
pool their efforts to strengthen cooperation on
advancing, protecting and promoting human rights and
fundamental freedoms. The European Union supports
the implementation of the Secretary-General’s call to

21-1472819/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

action to advance the human rights of all human beings.
The human rights compliance framework signed with
the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel in that
regard is an illustrative case.
The adoption of the 2020-2024 Action Plan for
Human Rights and Democracy is also to be welcomed.
The Action Plan includes protecting and empowering
individuals; building resilient, inclusive and democratic
societies; promoting a global system for human rights
and democracy; harnessing the opportunities and
challenges of new technologies; and acting by working
together. By promoting the rule of law and justice, that
partnership is clearly helping to create conditions for
the maintenance of peace and security in many regions
of the world.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
work of the United Nations should continue to benefit
from the partnership support that the Organization has
with the European Union, the African Union and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. By drawing on
the comparative advantages afforded by those regional
organizations, the United Nations will achieve its
primary objective of maintaining international peace
and security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I warmly thank the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union (EU),
Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, for joining us here today
and for highlighting the issues of close cooperation
between the Security Council and the European Union
in New York, in Brussels and on the ground.
The European Union and the United Nations share
the same values and interests. The EU is committed
to multilateralism, with the United Nations at its core.
Estonia is glad that the cooperation between the two
organizations has steadily and firmly expanded, as
today’s world is becoming increasingly interconnected
with regard to both its opportunities and its multifaceted
challenges. Sitting here as the President to the Security
Council and as a representative of an EU member State,
I can proudly profess that a strong EU equals a stronger
United Nations, and vice versa.
Mr. Borrell Fontelles highlighted respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Those are the values
we share and stand up for. We need not be silent when
freedoms and human rights are suppressed. We strongly
20/24

10/06/2021

condemn the Belarusian authorities’ blatant attempts to
silence all opposition voices, including the episode of
plane hijacking, and we demand the immediate release
of all political prisoners, whose number is growing
rapidly and already extends to over 400.
The situation remains deeply concerning also in
Myanmar. We strongly support the five-point consensus
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
work of Special Envoy Burgener in Myanmar.
The EU and its member States have always been
strong advocates for a rules-based international order
and for international law. Estonia condemns Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine in Donbas, the illegal
annexation of Crimea and the occupation of the
territories in Georgia. Russia’s recent military buildup near Ukraine borders and continuous fuelling of
the conflict in Donbas are truly worrisome and have
aggravated the security situation in the region. It is
also regrettable that Russia, a party to the conflict, has
chosen to use the Arria Formula meetings to extensively
spread false and divisive narratives about Ukraine.
Let me highlight the fact that the efforts of the
United Nations play an important role in advancing
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. As a
priority, the EU and its member States are committed
to promoting a global, free, open, stable and secure
cyberspace, grounded in existing international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations in its
entirety, international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
The EU has actively contributed to peace and
security beyond the region and across all continents.
In crisis management, the partnership between the EU
and the United Nations is crucial. That also includes the
work on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, where the EU continues to show
leadership also at the regional level.
Estonia welcomes the efforts of the European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI in
supporting the implementation of the Security Council
arms embargo on Libya. We call for the implementation
of all necessary measures to allow for the Libyan-led
and Libyan-owned ceasefire monitoring mechanism
and its international support component to be deployed
as soon as possible, as mandated by resolution 2570
(2021).
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the EU
and the United Nations have a central role to play in
creating conditions for resuming direct negotiations
between the parties, especially through the Middle
East Quartet. Continued humanitarian aid efforts in the
occupied Palestinian territory are also vital.
Regarding Yemen, there is a need for continued,
concerted efforts of the EU and the United Nations
towards a ceasefire and political talks, as well as
to support the development, crisis response and
humanitarian assistance in the country.
In the Sahel region, the EU, including Estonia,
offers important support to the counter-terrorist efforts
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
The EU, together with its member States, is also
the largest donor of humanitarian aid in Syria and
the region. Estonia has contributed financially to the
humanitarian relief for Syria and the region since the
start of the crisis. The fifth Brussels Conference, held
earlier this year, once again contributed billions to
alleviating the human suffering of Syrian people.
While cooperation between the United Nations
and the EU has strengthened in field operations, we
are glad that it has also strengthened on political and
strategic levels. For example, in Afghanistan, efforts
to unitedly promote the rule of law have evolved. Both
organizations have affirmed that a sustainable peace
can be achieved only through a negotiated and inclusive
political settlement. Estonia is extremely worried about
the growing level of violence, which has taken a heavy
toll on the civilian population. We urge the Taliban to
immediately put an end to violence and commit itself
to the peace negotiations. The historic momentum for
peace and stability that all Afghans have longed for
after decades of immense human suffering should not
be left unused.
Mr. Borrell mentioned that sanctions are never an
end in themselves, but a tool to push for the respect of
universal rights. We could not agree more. The EU and
the United Nations sanctions are targeted and do not
obstruct in any way the fight against the pandemic or
the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Finally, there is no doubt that climate change
is making the world a more challenging place. The
Security Council must do more to fully understand
climate-related security risks and integrate that
knowledge into all aspects of its work.

S/PV. 8792

I thank Mr. Borrell Fontelles once again for your
excellent briefing, which reminded us how deep,
important and multifaceted the EU-United Nations
cooperation is.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I should like to respond, first and foremost,
to the statement delivered by the representative of
the United States of America, the tone of which was
more bellicose and aggressive towards Russia than the
remarks of the majority of our European colleagues.
Perhaps because the United States of America is on the
other side of the ocean, it does not really care what is
happening in Europe, but we are certain that it clearly
understands how dangerous such fiery rhetoric and
action can be.
I would like once again to call on our sensible
European partners to be guided by the interests of their
common European home and stop looking for partners
across the ocean, as they sometimes do so openly, and
choose instead constructive cooperation on an equal
footing, without condescension and with respect for
the sovereignty and internal affairs of neighbouring
countries, and to strive to impartially address the most
delicate and dangerous situations on their borders.
They must also understand that, without respect for
people’s choices, including those living in Luhansk and
Donetsk, and without direct dialogue with them, it will
not be possible to achieve a resolution of the situation
in Donbas.
We still trust that we can count on that
common-sense approach but, unfortunately, we must
come to the conclusion that the European partners have
not quite got the hang of it yet, despite the laudable
goals that were mentioned.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Borrell
Fontelles to respond to comments and possibly questions.
Mr. Borrell Fontelles: I thank you, Sir, once
again for allowing me to present today the views of
the European Union on international security to the
Security Council, which has maximum international
responsibility in that regard.

21-1472821/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

It would be impossible to try to answer all the
questions or comment on all the considerations I have
heard here. But allow me to say that I am emerging
from this exchange even more encouraged than when
we started. I am truly grateful to one and all for the
comments and expressions of appreciation. I can assure
the Council that the European Union is willing to work
diligently with each and every one of the countries
represented here in order to contribute to global security
and prosperity.
That is the purpose of the European Union, and
I am also very grateful that many here today have
acknowledged the efforts of the European Union to
contribute to a safer and more just world. I am particularly
thankful for the recognition that the European Union
has been the tool for the transformation of Europe from
a continent of war to a continent of peace, which is the
most important deliverable and success of what the
European Union has represented since its creation.
Allow me to give some general and some specific
answers. As many here have noted, multilateral
frameworks — and not only those provided by the
United Nations — must remain the centre of our efforts.
This applies to peace and security, but also to health,
especially in these times of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The COVID-19 crisis has
shown the importance of reinforcing the Word Trade
Organization and promoting development in many
formats by combating climate change and a long series
of items that have been mentioned.
In this regard, it seems difficult to argue seriously
that a rules-based world order structured around the
principles of international organizations and the key
international treaties and declarations is not the heart
of the multilateral system, because it is. We must
recognize it because we are living through a dangerous
juncture in world history. We must understand that we
are all part of the same whole, and that we can only
survive and prosper by recognizing common interests
and goals. We have repeated so many times that no one
is safe until everyone is safe. That is true, but at the
same time, we have to recognize that it is easier said
than done. And we have to increase our efforts to ease
international tensions and to return to some kind of
stronger cooperation.
In that context, a rules-based multilateral order
is at the heart of the return to a more cooperative and
peaceful approach. The European Union seeks to work
22/24

10/06/2021

hand in hand with the United Nations and key regional
organizations to that end. I want to pay special tribute to
the African Union in that regard, and we look forward
to working with many United Nations Member States
on a bilateral basis.
I would now like to touch upon some specific issues
that I must comment on.
First, with regard to sanctions and criticism about
sanctions, I want to say that the restrictive measures
that the European Union imposes comply with
international law, including the obligations deriving
from international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. There are key instruments at our
disposal to counter breaches of international law, the
proliferation of weapons and the flow of arms into war
zones, to combat human rights abusers and to target
those individuals who seek to undermine the peace
process. In that connection, I want to thank the Council
members that spoke positively of the European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI.
I also note that the principle of non-interference
in domestic affairs is not a licence to disregard human
rights, and we must invest in conflict prevention.
However, European Union sanctions are not punitive,
retaliatory or coercive in nature. Rather, they are
designed to bring about a change in policy or activity.
They are always targeted at policies or activities in order
to ensure accountability. Our sanctions are reversible
and proportionate to the objective they seek to achieve.
As best we can, we reduce adverse humanitarian effects
or unintended consequences for non-targeted persons,
in particular the civilian populations.
Our sanctions are not intended to impede the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and humanitarian
activities. We have a system of humanitarian exceptions,
which is a standard feature of our sanctions regime and
is consistent with the system of exceptions used for
United Nations sanctions. However, sanctions applied
in the territory of the European Union by its persons
and entities do not have extraterritorial applications
because we consider the extraterritorial application of
sanctions by third States to be contrary to international
law. I think that must be clearly stated in response to
certain criticisms.
I would like to thank the representative of India
for the positive words about the European Union’s role,
in general, and particularly in the Balkans, Africa and
Iran, as well as in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
21-14728

10/06/2021

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV. 8792

Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA was also mentioned by
others, especially Russia and China, as they are part of
the JCPOA Joint Commission, which I have the honour
to chair as Coordinator.

economic development, which has lifted so many
millions of people out of poverty in the past 40 years,
constitutes a historic record in the history of humankind.
We acknowledge that extraordinary success.

We recently held a summit between the European
Union and India in an excellent atmosphere. It led
to positive outcomes and we are forging a strategic
partnership that can be a force multiplier for the
global good in this century, as Prime Minister Modi
said. I think that this meeting was a turning point in
our strategic partnership, with a particular emphasis
on connectivity, trade and investment. I think that the
Indo-Pacific will be at the centre of our cooperation on
foreign and security policy. To keep this region stable,
open and rules-based, working on security, especially
maritime security and counter-terrorism is a very
important part of our common endeavour.

We also agree with the Ambassador’s statement
on multilateralism. We agree that no country can be
fight today’s challenges or be multilateral alone, so I
think that we must look for ways to establish the same
understanding of what multilateralism means in theory
and in practice.

The same goes for the comments from the
representative of Viet Nam.
I would now like to turn to Libya, which has been
mentioned. We need to do our utmost to promote
stability in Libya. We are engaging with the United
Nations in its efforts in that regard, as well as with
the Government of National Unity. We thank the
Special Representative for his efforts and hope that
the forthcoming Berlin Conference on Libya will
give new impetus to the promotion of security and
stability in Libya, which is an important part of our
security. We remain very active and ready to support a
political solution towards the maintenance of a peaceful
environment in Libya. We have deployed several
instruments in that regard — including the European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI,
which was commended by many here today — in
support of the implementation of the Security Council
arms embargo. We are probably one of the few
international actors that are regularly reporting on their
efforts to help implement the arms embargo, which
remains crucial for Libya’s stability. I wish that those
still harbouring doubts on the role played by European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI
would display equal zeal in helping to ensure that the
arms embargo is effectively implemented. That would
be a great contribution to those efforts.
I would like to talk about China, because the
Chinese representative made a very important comment.
I want to stress the extent to which the European Union
values its relationship with China. China’s impressive

On Hong Kong, we agree on the principle of “one
country, two systems” which, by the way, comes from
an international agreement. However, we are very much
concerned by the erosion of democratic principles
in Hong Kong due to recent changes in the electoral
system that, in our understanding and according to
the question of fundamental freedoms, democratic
principles and political pluralism, are central to Hong
Kong’s identity and prosperity and are recognized
under the international agreement on “one country,
two systems”.
I would like to thank the representative of China
for his words of appreciation regarding the European
Union’s support in Palestine, as well as our role in the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and our efforts
to keep it alive. I think that there is still a lot of work
we must do together in order to solve the underlying
conflict in Israel and Palestine and to ensure a return to
the Iran nuclear agreement, which contributes greatly
to global security and to the security of our member
States, Europe and the broader Middle East region
in particular.
We will continue working together on the root
causes of conflicts, on sustainable development and
especially on climate change, which cannot be resolved
without China’s strong involvement.
Finally, I wish to make some comments regarding
Africa. Africa is our first partner in the field of peace
and security. We are active in all crises and 10 of our 16
missions are deployed across the African continent. We
have police officers, soldiers and civilian advisers from
Europe training more than 30,000 African military,
police and judicial personnel. We are so extensively
engaged with promoting peace and stability in Africa
that it would take too long to list everything we are
doing. Nevertheless, we strongly believe that African
States must be the main actors for their own stability
and security. We need African solutions to African

21-1472823/24

S/PV.8792

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

problems, but it is important to keep in mind that solid
governance and development are integral in restoring
security and overcoming crises.
My final remarks are addressed to the representative
of the United States. This is a special time in our
relationship with the United States. Just today, President
Biden arrived on the European continent. Although he
has landed on an island that has just left the European
Union, it is still part of Europe. Next week, we will
be holding important meetings at the highest level
between President Biden and the Presidents of the
European Union institutions, as well as several member
States that have the honour to participate. I think it will
be a good way to relaunch transatlantic relations from
both sides of the Atlantic. It is important to mark the
fact that we are starting a new relationship and a new

24/24

10/06/2021

era in terms of transatlantic relations that will benefit
the rest of the world.
The European Union strongly believes that the
future of humankind will depend strongly on our
capacity to cooperate and to work together to overcome
conflicts and build a shared future for all of us. This
institution, namely the Security Council, plays such an
important role in that endeavour that I must once again
reiterate our will to strongly cooperate with it in order
to achieve prosperity for us all.
The President: I thank Mr. Borrell Fontelles for
the clarifications he has provided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

21-14728
