S/2005/158

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 March 2005
English
Original: English/French

Letter dated 11 March 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to submit for the consideration of the members of the
Security Council the report of the assessment mission I dispatched at their request to
Burundi (see S/2004/72), with the objective of considering the advisability and
feasibility of establishing an international judicial commission of inquiry, as
provided for in the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement of 28 August 2000.
The assessment mission visited Burundi in May 2004. Its report, however, takes
account of facts and events which postdated its visit, to the extent of their relevancy
to its final recommendations.
Given a mandate to consider the advisability and feasibility of establishing an
international judicial commission of inquiry for Burundi, the mission is convinced
of the necessity of establishing a commission, though not necessarily in the shape
and form requested by the Government of Burundi. In considering the modalities for
establishing an accountability mechanism to clarify the truth, investigate the crimes
and identify and bring to justice those responsible for the crimes of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes committed in Burundi since its independence, the
mission took into account the Arusha Agreement, the needs and expectations of the
Burundians, the capacity of the Burundian administration of justice, established
United Nations principles and practices, and the practicality and feasibility of any
proposed mechanism. It accordingly recommends the establishment of a twin
mechanism: a non-judicial accountability mechanism in the form of a truth
commission, and a judicial accountability mechanism in the form of a special
chamber within the court system of Burundi.
To avoid the establishment and operation of two virtually identical
commissions — a national truth and reconciliation commission and an international
judicial commission — the mission recommends a single, national truth commission
based on the recently promulgated Law on the National Truth and Reconciliation
Commission as amended, with a mixed composition of both national and
international components. A truth commission with a substantial international
component would enhance the objectivity, impartiality and credibility of the
commission, and at the same time provide a sense of national “ownership” through
participation of Burundians in the process of clarifying the historical truth and
pursuing national reconciliation. In recommending a special chamber within the
court system of Burundi, the mission opted for a judicial mechanism located in the
country and forming part of the Burundian legal system (a “court within a court”)
with a view to strengthening the judicial sector in material and human resources,
05-26471 (E) 160305 230305

*0526471*

S/2005/158

and leaving behind a legacy of international standards of justice, and trained judges,
prosecutors, defence counsel and experienced court managers.
The Council will recall that three United Nations commissions of inquiry have
been established in the last decade at the request of the Government of Burundi.
Each had a limited mandate to investigate the assassination of the President of
Burundi on 21 October 1993 and the massacres that followed. No legal or practical
effect, however, has been given to any of their recommendations, and no action has
been taken by any of the United Nations organs. In calling upon the Security
Council to act, the mission concludes that the “United Nations can no longer engage
in establishing commissions of inquiry and disregard their recommendations without
seriously undermining the credibility of the Organization in promoting justice and
the rule of law”. I fully concur with this conclusion.
In considering the recommendation of the mission to establish a twin
accountability mechanism, members of the Security Council should take fully into
account the financial costs involved, and the need to provide a viable funding
mechanism to ensure a continuous and sustained source of funding for the duration
of their operation.
If the Council approves the report and instructs me to negotiate its practical
implementation, it would be my intention to initiate an all-inclusive process of
negotiation with the Government of Burundi in consultation with a range of national
actors and civil society, to ensure that, in the establishment of judicial and nonjudicial accountability mechanisms for Burundi, the views and wishes of the people
of Burundi are taken into account.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2005/158

Report of the assessment mission on the establishment of an
international judicial commission of inquiry for Burundi
I.

Introduction
1.
In his letter of 24 July 2002 addressed to the Secretary-General, the then
President of Burundi, Pierre Buyoya, requested that an international judicial
commission of inquiry for Burundi, as provided for in the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement of 28 August 2000 be established by the United Nations.
Pursuant to that request, the President of the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General on 26 January 2004 to dispatch an assessment mission to Burundi
with the objective of considering the advisability and feasibility of establishing such
an international commission (see S/2004/72).
2.
The terms of reference of the assessment mission were approved by the
Security Council (see S/2004/72) and are annexed to this report. The mission was
accordingly given the following tasks:
(a) To specify the modalities and options for the establishment of an
international commission of inquiry in reference to the Arusha Agreement, and
consider approaches which support the peace process and foster “truth and
reconciliation while achieving justice”;
To that end the mission was required:
(i) To assess the progress made towards the implementation of the judicial
reforms provided for in the Arusha Agreement and the capacity of the
Burundian judicial system, including its powers of investigation, to bring
criminals to trial in an impartial and effective manner;
(ii) To recommend structures within the international commission, which
would have a beneficial impact on the Burundian legal system;
(iii) To assess the progress made towards the establishment of the national
truth and reconciliation commission, and the implications of the law on
provisional immunity for political leaders returning from exile;
(b) To assess the added value of an international commission of inquiry in
the light of the reports submitted by previous commissions of inquiry, notably the
1985 Whitaker report, the 1994 report of non-governmental organizations, the 19941995 Aké-Huslid report and the 1996 report of the international commission of
inquiry;
(c) To determine the possible division of powers and competences between
the national truth and reconciliation commission and the international commission
of inquiry, inter alia, with regard to their complementary investigatory
responsibilities, the status of individuals to be investigated and the question of
amnesty;
(d) In devising the modalities for the establishment of an international
commission of inquiry, the mission was required:
(i) To examine the possibility of limiting the temporal jurisdiction of the
commission;

3

S/2005/158

(ii) To assess the capacity of the Government to guarantee the security of the
members of the commission and facilitate their investigations;
(iii) To evaluate the necessary logistical, human and financial resources of the
commission;
(iv) To state the expectations of the Burundian authorities regarding the
conclusions of the inquiry and their practical implementation, with regard in
particular to possible prosecutions before an international or a national
jurisdiction.
3.
The assessment mission visited Burundi from 16 to 24 May 2004. It was led by
Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and included
representatives of the Department of Political Affairs, the Office of Legal Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and the Office of the
United Nations Security Coordinator. The mission also benefited from the valuable
assistance of the representatives of the United Nations Office in Burundi (UNOB)
who accompanied the mission for its duration in Burundi.
4.
The mission held extensive consultations with representatives of the
Government and local authorities, political parties, judicial authorities, religious
leaders and civil society. On its way to Burundi, the mission met with the Deputy
President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma, the Facilitator of the Burundi peace process.
While in Burundi, it met with the President of Burundi, Domitien Ndayizeye, the
Vice-President, Alphonse Marie Kadege, the Minister for Good Governance and
General Inspection, the President of the National Assembly and the President of the
Senate, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Public Security, the Minister of the
Interior, the Minister of Human Rights, Institutional Reforms and Relations with the
Parliament, the Minister of External Affairs and Cooperation, and the President of
the Government Commission on Human Rights. The mission also held consultations
with two former Presidents of Burundi, Sylvestre Ntibantunganya and Jean-Baptiste
Bagaza, the leaders of the political parties and military political movements,
representatives of the Muslim community in Burundi and, upon its return to New
York, with representatives of the Episcopal Conference. The mission also met with
the United Nations country team, the Special Representative of the President of the
Commission of the African Union, members of the Implementation Monitoring
Committee and the diplomatic corps, national and international non-governmental
organizations, a group of returnees and individual experts (law professors, defence
lawyers and historians).
5.
The mission visited the premises of the various courts and met with the
judicial authorities and members of the legal profession, notably the Prosecutor
General, the Vice-President and judges of the Supreme Court, members of the
Constitutional Court, the Court of Appeals and the High Court (Tribunal de grande
instance). It also met with the President of the Military Tribunal, the Director of the
Investigative Police, members of the Bar Association and the prison authorities in
the Central Prison of Mpimba. In addition to Bujumbura, the mission visited the
town of Gitega, where it met with the Governor and the Military Commander of the
region of Gitega, visited the Tribunal de grande instance and met with the President
of the Court and the Prosecutor General.

4

S/2005/158

6.
The report of the mission includes facts and events which occurred in the
period between the visit of the assessment mission and the submission of its report.
They were taken into account in the reformulation of some of its recommendations
to adapt them to the changing realities in Burundi. The political context set out
below reflects, however, the situation at the time of the mission’s visit; political
developments since then have been covered in subsequent reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Operation in Burundi.

II.

The political context and the expectations of the Burundians
7.
At the time of the mission’s visit, the implementation of the Global Ceasefire
Agreement signed on 16 November 2003 between the Transitional Government and
CNDD-FDD (Nkurunziza) had experienced some delays. Despite efforts made to
encourage FNL (Rwasa), the only armed movement outside the peace process, FNL
refused to enter into serious negotiations with the Transitional Government.
8.
The visit of the mission took place five months before the end of the transition
period and the elections scheduled for 31 October 2004. Maintaining the timetable
for the elections was, in the view of many of its interlocutors, the most immediate
challenge. Under the Arusha Agreement, the transitional period was to end with the
holding of local, parliamentary and presidential elections. The mission was
informed that, in spite of the very limited time remaining, little progress had been
made with regard to the electoral process since the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2004/210). None of the key electoral laws (post-transition constitution,
electoral code, law on political parties and law on the communal administration) had
been adopted, and no preparatory activities, including a civic education campaign,
the registration of voters and the establishment of an Independent Electoral
Commission, had yet begun.
9.
The mission noted that the time frame for the holding of the elections had
become a serious bone of contention among the Burundian political actors. While
FRODEBU (Front pour la démocratie au Burundi) and all the other members of the
G-7 political parties (Hutu) as well as CNDD-FDD (Nkurunzina) demanded that the
schedule for elections be respected, the G-10 political parties (Tutsi) raised
numerous conditions which should be fulfilled before elections were held. Many of
the mission’s interlocutors expressed concerns at the fact that, if the current
deadlock continued and no elections were held before the deadline, all the existing
institutions would lose their legitimacy, which would create a serious constitutional
impasse. Some believed, however, that elections would not be free and fair unless
the question of impunity was addressed, while others were of the view that it should
await the elections.
10. Some political parties stressed that a number of issues of critical importance
needed to be dealt with in order to hold credible and fair elections in a secure
environment. Disarmament, demobilization of former combatants as well as security
sector reform were among those mentioned.
11. The dispatch of the mission was warmly welcomed by all interlocutors
although many of them regretted the Council’s delay in responding to the request
and stressed that instead of examining the advisability of establishing the
commission, the mission should rather consider its feasibility or the technical
modalities for its establishment. All its interlocutors, including the Facilitator,

5

S/2005/158

unanimously stressed the urgent need for setting up the commission. They noted that
only a commission made up of international experts would be able to clarify the
contentieux de sang between Burundians which has been the root cause of the
conflict. The mission’s interlocutors assured it that the commission would receive
full support in carrying out its tasks and that its conclusions would be accepted by
all because of its independence and impartiality. They also expressed the view that
the commission’s temporal competence should remain as agreed in the Arusha
Agreement (1962 to 2000) while acknowledging that some periods (1965, 1972,
1988 and 1993) had been marked by more intense crimes than others. The main
issue of disagreement among the Burundians concerned the timing for the
establishment of the commission. While some political parties (mainly Tutsis)
strongly believed that the establishment of the commission should be a prerequisite
to the holding of the elections, others (FRODEBU and Nkurunziza) considered that
the elections should be held on schedule and warned that such a commission would
lead to further political instability.
12. In an ethnically divided society, where little agreement exists on any of the
issues relating to the major events in Burundi since its independence in 1962, there
was unanimous support for the establishment of an international judicial
commission of inquiry to clarify the truth, investigate the crimes and, should it
classify the crimes as genocide, war crimes and other crimes against humanity, serve
also as a trigger mechanism for the establishment of an international criminal
tribunal.
13. In the margin of its consultations, the mission met with one of the authors of
the UNESCO-led project “Writing the history of Burundi”. The project originated in
the 1997 Conference on the History of Burundi convened by UNESCO with the
participation of some 30 Burundian experts of different political tendencies, and
chaired jointly by the current President of Mali, Amadou Toumani Touré, and the
current Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Africa, Mohamed Sahnoun.
Conceived in the spirit of the Arusha Agreement,1 the project was designed to
establish an official, scientific and agreed account of the history of Burundi from its
origin until 2000. It was divided by periods among some 50 authors, both
Burundians and foreigners, experts in history, geography, linguistics and
anthropology. The project was sponsored by UNESCO and the Agence
intergouvernementale de la Francophonie; it was assisted by UNDP and UNOB with
the cooperation of the Government of Burundi, and was funded through voluntary
contributions. Premised on the assumption that a common and better understanding
of the history of Burundi would contribute to peace and national reconciliation, the
project’s main objective was to serve as an educational tool in primary and
secondary schools and a history manual for the public at large.
14. In their quest for the truth, the Burundians expressed expectations not only for
a full and truthful account of their history since independence, from a credible,
independent and impartial international authority, but also and more importantly,
__________________
1 Article 8 of protocol I of the Arusha Agreement sets out the principles and measures relating to

national reconciliation. Paragraph 1 (c) thereof provides as follows:
The [National Truth and Reconciliation] Commission shall also be responsible for
clarifying the entire history of Burundi, going as far back as possible in order to inform
Burundians about their past. The purpose of this clarification exercise shall be to rewrite
Burundi’s history so that all Burundians can interpret it in the same way. (emphasis added)

6

S/2005/158

perhaps, for the eradication of impunity and the holding to account of those
responsible for the crimes committed. Truth and justice, in their vision, were
inextricably linked. Combined, they were also indispensable for national
reconciliation.

III.

The nature and added value of an international judicial commission
of inquiry
15. The Arusha Agreement envisaged the establishment by the United Nations of
an international judicial commission of inquiry on genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and entrusted it with the following mandate:
(a) To investigate and establish the facts relating to the period from
independence to the date of signature of the Agreement;
(b)

To classify them;

(c)

To determine those responsible;

(d)

To submit its report to the Security Council;

(e) To make use of all the reports that already exist on this subject, including
the 1985 Whitaker report, the 1994 non-governmental organizations’ report, the
1994-1995 report by Ambassadors Aké and Huslid and the 1996 report of the
international commission of inquiry. (protocol I, art. 6, para. 10)
16. With a mandate to clarify the truth, classify the crimes and identify those
responsible, the proposed commission had the characteristics of both a truth-telling
mechanism and a judicial or quasi-judicial accountability mechanism.
17. If established, the international commission of inquiry would be the latest in a
series of international missions and commissions of inquiry established in the last
decade for Burundi at the request of the Government and pursuant to a Security
Council mandate. Its added value, therefore, should be examined in the light of the
results achieved by the commissions that preceded it, their usefulness and impact on
the Burundian society.
18. Three international commissions for Burundi have previously been established
by the United Nations: the preparatory fact-finding mission to Burundi led by
Ambassadors Martin Huslid and Simeon Aké in 1994,2 the Special Envoy appointed
to examine the feasibility of establishing either a commission on the truth or a
judicial fact-finding commission in Burundi in 1995,3 and the international
commission of inquiry concerning the assassination of the President of Burundi and
__________________
2 Pursuant to a note by the President of the Security Council (S/26757) and the request of the

Government of Burundi, the Secretary-General decided to send a preparatory fact-finding mission to
Burundi with the mandate to investigate the coup d’état and the massacres of October 1993. The
report of the fact-finding mission was submitted to the Secretary-General on 20 May 1994 (the
Aké-Huslid report: S/1995/157 of 24 February 1995).
3 Pursuant to the statement of the President of the Security Council (S/PRST/1995/13) proposing
the establishment of an international commission of inquiry in Burundi, the Secretary-General
entrusted his Special Envoy, Pedro Nikken, with the task of investigating the possibility of
establishing a commission on the truth to address the problem of impunity in Burundi. The
Nikken report is contained in document S/1995/631 of 28 July 1995.

7

S/2005/158

the massacres that followed in 1995.4 The fourth commission, the international
commission of inquiry into human rights violations in Burundi since 21 October
1993, was a non-governmental organization-based commission composed of 13
human rights experts, and set up at the request of the Burundian Human Rights
League ITEKA.5
19. While different in some respects, the four commissions share the following
common features:
(a) Their subject-matter and temporal jurisdiction was limited to the events
of 1993, namely, the coup d’état and assassination of President Ndadaye, and the
massacres that followed — events which were only the latest in the bloody cycles of
violence which had shattered Burundi in its four decades of ethnic conflict.
(b) While cursory references were made in some reports, notably the
Whitaker and Aké-Huslid reports, to the 1972 genocide of Hutus,6 a legal
determination that the crime of genocide had been committed in Burundi was made
only in respect of the 1993 massacres of Tutsis.7
(c) All four commissions recognized that an inquiry into the historic truth
without a measure of accountability would not suffice to eradicate impunity. In the
words of the Special Envoy, Pedro Nikken:
An objectively established “truth” that does not give rise to consequences or
hope would be extremely dangerous in the country’s current situation, since it
would encourage the sense of impunity of those who escape justice, thereby
inducing them, in a way, to repeat their crimes. (S/1995/631, para. 18)
__________________
4 In its resolution 1012 (1995) of 28 August 1995, the Security Council requested the Secretary-

General to establish an international commission of inquiry with the following mandate: (a) to
establish the facts relating to the assassination of the President of Burundi on 21 October 1993,
the massacres and other related serious acts of violence which followed; (b) to recommend
measures of a legal, political and administrative nature, as appropriate, after consultation with
the Government of Burundi, and measures with regard to the bringing to justice of persons
responsible for those acts, to prevent any repetition of deeds similar to those investigated by the
commission and, in general, to eradicate impunity and promote national reconciliation in
Burundi. The commission’s report is contained in document S/1996/682 of 22 August 1996.
5 Commission internationale d’enquête sur les violations des droits de l’homme au Burundi depuis
le 21 octobre 1993: rapport final (5 juillet 1994).
6 The Whitaker report was a thematic report on the question of the prevention and punishment of
the crime of genocide (E/CN.4/Sub.2/1985/6 of 2 July 1985). Among other examples of
genocide committed in the twentieth century, it cites the “Tutsi massacre of Hutu in Burundi in
1965 and 1972”, where the “Tutsi minority government first liquidated the Hutu leadership in
1965, and then slaughtered between 100,000 and 300,000 Hutu in 1972” (para. 24, n. 15). The
1972 massacre of the Hutu was also cited as an example of genocide committed against a
protected group constituting the majority in the country (para. 30). The Aké-Huslid report
referred to the “genocidal repression” of Hutus, where the elite, the leaders and future
professional staff were particularly targeted (para. 36).
7 The 1995 international commission of inquiry concluded:
The Commission considers that evidence is sufficient to establish that acts of
genocide against the Tutsi minority took place in Burundi on 21 October 1993, and the
days following, at the instigation and with the participation of certain Hutu FRODEBU
functionaries and leaders up to commune level.
The Commission considers that the evidence is insufficient to determine whether or
not those acts of genocide were planned or ordered by leaders at a higher level.
(S/1996/682, paras. 483 and 484)

8

S/2005/158

(d) Finally, no legal or practical effect was given to any of their
recommendations and no action was taken by any of the United Nations organs,
including the one which requested their establishment.
20. In a society deeply divided along ethnic lines, where the inter-ethnic killings in
1965, 1972, 1988, 1991 and 1993 form part of the same whole, limiting the mandate
of any inquiry to a single cycle of massacres and, worse still, characterizing them,
and them alone, as genocide, was considered by many in Burundi as a partial and
biased account of the events, and one oblivious to the suffering of an entire ethnic
group, by far the largest. In a society where “genocide” is not only a legal
characterization of a crime but a political statement8 and global attribution of guilt
to an entire ethnic group, the 1996 report had a divisive effect on Burundian society
and contributed to the perception of a biased international community. The call for
the establishment of a commission of inquiry whose temporal jurisdiction extends
over four decades of Burundi recent history is thus an appeal for fairness in
recounting the historical truth and putting the 1993 massacres in historical
perspective. It was also a plea for recognition that members of all ethnic groups
were at different times both victims and perpetrators of the same crimes.
21. The mission took pains to explain to its various interlocutors that, even if
established to investigate four decades of cyclical conflict, a judicial determination
by the commission that genocide had been committed in Burundi by and against all
ethnic groups can by no means be presumed. Many of its interlocutors, however,
remained unconvinced.

IV.

Possible limitations on the temporal jurisdiction of the commission
22. In accordance with its mandate, the mission examined the possibility of more
effectively limiting the temporal competence of the commission to specific events or
periods. With few exceptions, such as Accord Cadre, a political group
predominantly Tutsi, the leaders of all political parties and civil society across the
ethnic divide were of the opinion that the temporal jurisdiction of the commission
should not be limited, although in its investigations it should focus on specific
events, notably the massacres of 1965, 1972, 1988, 1991 and 1993. As for the end
date of the commission’s jurisdiction, many of them expressed the view that it
should be set at the time of its establishment, and in any event beyond 2000, to
include the massacres perpetrated after the signature of the Arusha Agreement,
notably the massacre on 9 September 2002 of 183 civilians in Itaba, Gitega Province.

__________________
8 The Agreement embodying the Convention on Governance concluded in 1994 between the

forces for democratic change (majority parties) and the political parties of the opposition on
power-sharing provides in article 36, in its relevant part, as follows:
It is requested that an international judicial fact-finding mission be formed; … it shall be
composed of competent and impartial persons to investigate the coup d’état of 21 October
1993 and what the political partners have agreed to call genocide without prejudice to the
outcome of the independent national and international investigations ... (emphasis added)
(A/50/94-S/1995/190, annex)
Similarly, the Arusha Agreement provides, in article 3 of protocol I, as follows:
… without prejudice to the results and conclusions of the International Judicial Commission of
Inquiry and National Truth and Reconciliation Commission … the Parties recognize that acts
of genocide, war crimes and other crimes against humanity have been perpetrated since
independence against Tutsi and Hutu ethnic communities in Burundi. (emphasis added)

9

S/2005/158

23. The mission is convinced that, if the international commission is to have any
added value, its temporal jurisdiction must extend beyond the events of 1993, to
include the entire period since independence.9 It is at the same time convinced that,
if the commission is to have a temporal jurisdiction spanning more than four
decades, its nature as a judicial commission of inquiry must change. A judicial
commission of inquiry which would conduct in-depth criminal investigations into
the individual criminal responsibility of those presumed responsible for the
massacres committed since 1962, throughout the country and in the absence of a
prosecutorial strategy to guide the investigation, would be lengthy, costly and
heavily burdened. What is more, there is no guarantee that the evidentiary value of
its findings would be acceptable in a court, whether national or international. In the
United Nations practice of establishing commissions of inquiry and other judicial
accountability mechanisms, practical considerations have dictated a temporal
jurisdiction limited to an event, a conflict or a period of relatively short duration. In
the case of United Nations-assisted truth and reconciliation commissions, however,
an extended temporal jurisdiction has been a common feature.10
24. If the international judicial commission is to shift its nature to a truth-telling
mechanism, its relationship with the national truth and reconciliation commission
envisaged under the Arusha Agreement and the law on the establishment of a truth
and reconciliation commission would have to be re-evaluated.

V.

The national truth and reconciliation commission and its
relationship to the international judicial commission of inquiry
25. The national truth and reconciliation commission envisaged in the Arusha
Agreement was entrusted with the functions of investigation, arbitration and
reconciliation, and clarification of history. Its powers of investigation under article 8
of protocol I of the Arusha Agreement were described in terms almost identical to
those of the international judicial commission. They provided:
The Commission shall bring to light and establish the truth regarding the
serious acts of violence committed during the cyclical conflicts which cast a
tragic shadow over Burundi from independence (1 July 1962) to the date of
signature of the Agreement, classify the crimes and establish the

__________________
9 The need to examine the Burundi ethnic conflict in its historical perspective was stressed by the

1995 commission of inquiry, which recommended:
If it is decided to assert international jurisdiction regarding acts of genocide in
Burundi ... the investigation should not be limited to acts committed in October 1993, but
should also extend to other acts committed in the past, in order to determine whether they
also constituted acts of genocide and, if such is found to be the case, to identify those
responsible and bring them to justice. Particular attention should be given to the events
that took place in 1972 when, according to all reports, a systematic effort was made to
exterminate all educated Hutus. No one was ever prosecuted for these acts. (S/1996/682,
para. 498)
10 In the case of Sierra Leone, the temporal jurisdiction of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission extended from the beginning of the conflict in 1991 to the signing of the Lomé
Peace Agreement in 1999 (The Truth and Reconciliation Commission Act, 2000 (art. 6, para. 1)).
In the case of Timor-Leste, the Commission on Reception, Truth and Reconciliation was
competent to consider human rights violations and other criminal acts committed in the period
from 25 April 1974 to 25 October 1999 (Regulation 2001/10 on the Establishment of a
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in East Timor (sects. 13.2 and 22.1).

10

S/2005/158

responsibilities, as well as the identity of the perpetrators and the victims.
However, the Commission shall not be competent to classify acts of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.
26. The Law on the Composition, Organization and Functions of the National
Truth and Reconciliation Commission was promulgated on 27 December 2004 to
give effect to the provisions of the protocol in the Burundian legal system. Under
the Law, the commission was mandated to establish the truth on acts of violence
committed in the course of the conflict since 1 July 1962, qualify the crimes, other
than genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, establish the
responsibilities, and identify both perpetrators and victims of such crimes. The
commission can propose means of arbitration and reconciliation and clarify the
truth. It is endowed with enforcement powers to induce the appearance of witnesses
and the submission of documents, and the power to review final judgments rendered
in cases of “assassination and political processes” with a view to taking the
necessary decisions for the reconciliation process in Burundi. The commission has
no power to grant amnesty but can determine the “political crimes” in respect of
which an amnesty law can be adopted.
27. The commission is to be composed of 25 members, all of whom must be of
Burundian nationality, and otherwise qualified. The procedure before the
commission is contentious, and has a quasi-judicial nature: the “plaintiff” presents
his case; the person suspected of having committed the crime has the right of reply;
witnesses are heard; and the “respondent” or “defendant” has the final word.
28. The process of consultations which preceded the adoption of the law on the
establishment of the truth and reconciliation commission was limited, at best. The
mission wishes to stress that a broad, comprehensive and fully inclusive process of
consultations with all sectors, groups, grass-roots organizations, political actors and
individual citizens is a precondition for the respect and credibility of any truth and
reconciliation commission, without which there is little likelihood that its findings
will be acceptable to the society at large. The mission believes that the deep-seated
suspicions and serious doubts expressed by many of its interlocutors about the
credibility of the national truth and reconciliation commission and the acceptability
of its findings are largely attributed to the lack of a transparent and genuine
consultative process and the all-Burundian composition of the truth and
reconciliation commission.
29. In an attempt to delineate the respective competences of the national truth and
reconciliation commission and the international judicial commission of inquiry, the
Arusha Agreement empowers the former to “bring to light and establish the truth
regarding the serious acts of violence committed during the cyclical conflicts which
cast a tragic shadow over Burundi”. It added that the truth and reconciliation
commission “shall not be competent to classify acts of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes”. (emphasis added)
30. In the view of the mission, the delineation between the two commissions is
blurred. It is equally of the view that, if the crimes falling within the jurisdiction of
the truth and reconciliation commission were “serious acts of violence committed
during the cyclical conflicts” and of such a nature as to cast a “tragic shadow” over
Burundi, it could not be seriously argued that they were anything but crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. Despite, therefore, the
limitations put on the powers of the truth and reconciliation commission to

11

S/2005/158

pronounce itself on crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, its
temporal and subject-matter jurisdiction, including its powers of investigation, are
both legally and practically identical to those of the international judicial
commission.
31. Their largely overlapping mandates and the practical difficulties ensuing from
their concurrent or sequential operation, including in particular a potential risk of
contradictory findings, led the mission to consider the advisability of combining
elements of both commissions and creating, instead, a single truth commission of
mixed composition.

VI.

Implications of “provisional immunity”, its scope and legal validity
before the national and international commissions, and before the
Burundian national courts
32. Amnesty provisions are scattered throughout the Arusha Agreement and its
different protocols, the 2003 Pretoria Protocol on Outstanding Political, Defence
and Security Power-Sharing Issues, and the Law on Provisional Immunity from
Prosecution of Political Leaders Returning from Exile. Protocol II, article 22,
paragraph 2 (c), provides that the National Assembly shall adopt “such legislation as
is necessary for the granting of temporary immunity against prosecution for
politically motivated crimes committed prior to the signature of the Agreement”.
Article 26, paragraph 1 (l) of protocol III provides:
Amnesty shall be granted to all combatants of the political parties and
movements for crimes committed as a result of their involvement in the
conflict, but not for acts of genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes,
or for their participation in coups d’état. (emphasis added)
The Pretoria Protocol extends the scope of the amnesty to all leaders and
combatants of CNDD-FDD, and the security forces of the Government of Burundi
(article 2). Though referred to as “temporary immunity”, its duration in time is not
explicitly limited.
33. The amnesty granted under the Law on Provisional Immunity from
Prosecution of Political Leaders Returning from Exile is limited in time and in
personal and material scope. The “immunity” from prosecution covers crimes
committed since 10 July 1962 and until the promulgation of the Law. Its
“beneficiaries” are political leaders or members of the political parties signatories of
the Arusha Agreement who returned from exile to participate in the transitional
institutions. During the period of its validity, that is, the duration of the Transitional
Government, no political leader could be arrested, indicted or prosecuted for
political crimes committed during the period covered by the amnesty. Beyond the
transitional period, however, all those leaders and members of political parties are,
in theory, prosecutable. The material (subject-matter) scope of the “provisional
immunity” extends to politically motivated crimes — although those crimes
remained largely undefined — from which genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes were explicitly excluded.
34. While the validity of the “provisional immunity” beyond the transitional
period remains to be seen, for the reasons elaborated below, it is unlikely to affect

12

S/2005/158

the proceedings before the truth and reconciliation commission or the international
judicial commission or, for that matter, the trial process before the national courts.
35. Although, in principle, proceedings before a truth and reconciliation
commission, as a non-judicial accountability mechanism, should not give rise to a
plea of amnesty, the Law on the National Truth and Reconciliation Commission
expressly provides that no person can use his position, his privileges and
immunities, any amnesty granted or a statute of limitation, among others, as a
reason for refusing to appear before the commission.
36. Similarly, amnesty would not be a bar to investigation before the international
judicial commission of inquiry because of the limited material scope of the amnesty,
and the legal basis of the commission. Since it is limited to politically motivated
crimes, to the exclusion of the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, the “provisional immunity” cannot be a bar to investigation into any of those
crimes. Furthermore, if established by a Security Council resolution, the
international commission would be a United Nations subsidiary body and as such
would not be affected by a national legislation measure, including amnesty.
37. The question of the validity of the provisional immunity before the national
courts of Burundi is at present largely theoretical. Not only is the capacity to
prosecute crimes of such complexity virtually non-existent, but their competence to
do so under the Law on the Punishment of Genocide, Crimes against Humanity and
War Crimes is in doubt. Article 33 of the Law entrusts the power to investigate the
crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed since 1962
until the promulgation of the Law to the international judicial commission, and the
power to prosecute such crimes to the international tribunal. While the national
courts remain technically competent, it was clearly the intention of the legislator to
entrust the prosecution of past crimes to the international tribunal.11

VII.
A.

Implementation of the legal reforms and the capacity of the
Burundian administration of justice
Legal reforms
38. In accordance with its mandate, the mission assessed the progress made
towards implementation of the judicial reforms provided for in the Arusha
Agreement and the capacity of the Burundian judicial system to bring to trial those
responsible for the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes in
an impartial, fair and effective manner.

__________________
11 Article 33 of the Law provides:

... the investigation and characterization of acts of genocide, war crimes and other
crimes against humanity committed in Burundi from 1 July 1962 until the promulgation of
the present Act shall be entrusted to the International Judicial Commission of Inquiry.
Should the report of the International Judicial Commission of Inquiry establish that
acts of genocide, war crimes and other crimes against humanity have occurred, the
Government shall request that, in addition to the competent national judicial bodies, the
Security Council of the United Nations should establish an international criminal tribunal
to prosecute and punish those responsible.

13

S/2005/158

39. The legislative, judicial and institutional reforms provided for in the Arusha
Agreement12 include the following:
(a) Promulgation of legislation to suppress and punish the crimes of
genocide, war crimes and other crimes against humanity;
(b) Establishment of a national observatory for the prevention and
eradication of genocide, war crimes and other crimes against humanity;
(c) Reform of the judicial machinery at all levels, inter alia, with a view to
correcting ethnic and gender imbalances where they exist;
(d) Reform of the Judicial Service Commission, as the highest disciplinary
body of the magistracy, so as to ensure its independence and that of the judicial
system as a whole;
(e) Amendments of the Criminal Code, Code of Criminal Procedure, Civil
Code, and other laws as may be necessary;
(f) Organization of a judicial training programme, inter alia, through the
establishment of a national school for the magistracy;
(g) Promotion of gender and ethnic balance in the Burundian judicial sector
through, inter alia, recruitment and appointment, establishing of training colleges
for employees of the judicial system and improving the status and internal
promotion procedures for magistrates;
(h) Taking measures to combat corruption in all its aspects, including
enforcing legislation against corruption, establishing oversight bodies and
improving conditions of employment in the judicial sector;
(i) Provision of the necessary resources to the judicial sector so as to enable
it to discharge its responsibilities impartially and independently.
40. Of particular importance is the provision included in article 17, paragraph 10,
of protocol II, which encourages international cooperation in improving and
reforming the legal system: “Foreign jurists, including former Burundian nationals
living outside the country shall be requested to assist in the reform of the judicial
system. The Transitional Government may appoint any such persons to judicial
positions so as to promote confidence in the judiciary.” In recommending the
establishment of a judicial accountability mechanism to prosecute those responsible
for the crimes committed, the mission took note of this provision as an expression of
the Government’s willingness to introduce foreign jurists into its national court
system.
B.

Implementation of the legal reforms
41. In implementation of the legislative reforms mandated by the Arusha
Agreement, the Government of Burundi has promulgated a number of laws, notably
the following:
(a) Law No. 004 of 8 May 2003 on the Suppression of the Crime of
Genocide, Crimes against Humanity and War Crimes (Loi portant répression du
crime de génocide, des crimes contre l’humanité et des crimes de guerre). The Law

__________________
12 Protocol I, articles 6 and 7, para. 18, and protocol II, article 17.

14

S/2005/158

establishes the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes but
entrusts the international commission of inquiry and the international tribunal for
Burundi, respectively, with their investigation and prosecution.
(b) Law No. 1/014 of 22 September 2003 on the Establishment of a
National Observatory for the Prevention and Eradication of the Crime of
Genocide, War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity (Loi portant missions,
composition, organisation et fonctionnement de l’Observatoire national pour la
prévention et l’éradication du génocide, des crimes de guerre, des autres crimes
contre l’humanité et de l’exclusion). The National Observatory was conceived as an
early warning mechanism and an oversight body of national processes likely to lead
to inter-ethnic violence with a view to preventing the recurrence of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and combating impunity. The 45 members of
the National Observatory, however, have not yet been appointed.
(c) Law No. 1/015 of 22 September 2003 Attributing Criminal
Jurisdiction to the High Courts (Loi portant attribution de compétence répressive
aux Tribunaux de grande instance en matière criminelle). The Law decentralized the
criminal jurisdiction of the Appeals Courts and empowered the High Courts
(Tribunaux de grande instance) to sit, as a first instance, in criminal cases
punishable by life imprisonment or by capital punishment. The devolution of
criminal jurisdiction from the three Appeals Courts (sitting in Bujumbura, Gitega
and Ngozi) to the 17 High Courts had the effect of significantly reducing the case
load of the Appeals Courts, and effectively introducing the right of appeal. It
provided also for an opportunity to correct the ethnic imbalance in the High Courts
through recruitment and promotion, as provided for in the Arusha Agreement.
Following the promulgation of the Law, 70 Hutu judges from the Magistrates’
Courts (Tribunaux de résidence) were promoted to the High Courts.
(d) Law No. 007 of 30 June 2003 regarding the Organizational Structure
and Functions of the Judicial Service Commission (Loi portant organisation et
fonctionnement du Conseil supérieur de la magistrature). Under the Transitional
Constitution, the Judicial Service Commission oversees the administration of
justice, guarantees the independence of the judiciary, and serves as the highest
disciplinary authority. The 17 members of the Commission, however, have not yet
been appointed.
42. The implementation of the legal reforms has been partial and delayed. Judicial
reforms were for the most part considered effectuated with the adoption of the law,
but little regard was paid to the modalities of its implementation. In many ways,
therefore, it was an exercise in legislation. With the exception of the law attributing
criminal jurisdiction to the High Courts and the collective promotion of Hutu judges
which ensued, few legal or institutional reforms have been effectively implemented.
Where they were, their impact on the capacity of the Burundian judicial system and
its administration of justice to prosecute impartially and independently has been
limited.
C.

State of the judiciary
43. In its assessment, however inexhaustive, of the state of the Burundian
judiciary and the capacity of the administration of justice to investigate and
prosecute those responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes,
the mission focused on the following indicators: (1) the availability of resources

15

S/2005/158

(financial, material and human); (2) the state of the magistracy, its independence
and ethnic composition, the qualification of the judges, and conditions of
employment; and (3) the investigatory and prosecutorial capacity.
1.

Availability of resources
44. In the justice sector, financial, material and logistical resources are practically
non-existent, and the infrastructure is minimal. The Palais de justice in Bujumbura
disposes of two court rooms, of which one serves in rotation the Appeals Court and
the Supreme Court, and the other serves the High Court. The most elementary office
equipment — paper, furniture and typewriters, and means of transportation are
lacking. The laws are published in the Official Bulletin after long delays and in
French only (while Kirundi is by far the most commonly spoken language in
Burundi). They are disseminated in few copies to the various Court libraries, but are
not otherwise available in the public domain. There is no systematic publication of
judgements; the last was published eight years ago.

2.

State of the magistracy
45. Human resources, throughout the justice sector, are likewise lacking, both in
numbers and adequate qualifications. At the heart of the problem are the notoriously
low salaries which are conducive to corruption. Low remuneration is also the reason
for the brain drain and the massive departure of judges from the judiciary to other
lucrative occupations, and notably non-governmental organizations, United Nations
agencies and private practice.
46. In a system where judges are few, poorly remunerated and ill-trained, fewer
still possess the required legal qualifications. In the absence of a National School for
the Magistracy, the field office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Burundi has been engaged for over a decade in strengthening the
judicial system through a programme of judicial assistance (providing international
lawyers to support local prosecutors and defence counsel) and organizing seminars
and training courses for members of the police force, civil and military judges,
prosecutors, registry staff and members of the prison authorities.
47. The poorly trained, overburdened and underresourced judiciary is also prone to
the political interference of the Executive and the Legislature. Notwithstanding the
constitutional provisions on the independence of the judiciary, its perception among
the population at large is that of a partial, ethnically biased and politically
dependent judiciary.
48. The lack of independence of the judiciary is compounded by the fact that the
composition of the justice sector is still Tutsi-dominated, while Hutu members of
the legal profession account for a negligible minority. The mission recognizes,
however, that efforts are being made to correct the ethnic imbalance. Hutu judges
currently account for the majority of judges in the Magistrates’ Courts (Tribunaux
de résidence), where a degree in law is not a necessary requirement for appointment
as a judge. With the promotion of 70 Magistrates’ Court judges to the High Courts,
the ethnic composition in the latter has shifted. Several more years would be
required, however, to train the newly appointed judges. The Supreme Court and the
Appeals Court are still Tutsi-dominated and, in the newly created Constitutional

16

S/2005/158

Court, four out of seven judges are Hutu.13 The Tutsi-dominated composition of the
Burundi court system, particularly in the higher instances, is due in part to the
unequal access to legal education. It is due in large part, however, to the fact that in
the 1972 massacres many of the Hutu intellectuals, scholars, students, high-school
pupils and members of the legal profession were particularly targeted. With the
wiping-out of a generation of Hutu lawyers, there was little inclination among nextgeneration Hutu to engage in the study of law.
49. In a largely weak and dysfunctional administration of justice, legal
proceedings against those responsible for mass killing and other serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law are either not instituted or are
too lengthy, and in most cases in flagrant violation of the most elementary rights of
the accused. The Burundian justice system is in many ways a selective justice, or
“justice à deux vitesses”. While no one has ever been brought to justice for the
killing of at least 80,000 Hutu civilians in 1972, large-scale arrests of Hutu civilians
were carried out diligently in the aftermath of the 1993 coup d’état and the
massacres that followed.
3.

Investigatory and prosecutorial capacity
50. The flaws which characterize the judiciary are endemic to the entire justice
sector, including in particular, the investigative police (Police judiciaire des
parquets) responsible for the conduct of criminal investigation. The lack of financial
and human resources (only 142 police officers serve in the Police judiciaire), office
equipment and means of transportation and logistics seriously hampers the conduct
of criminal investigation — which relies almost exclusively on testimonial
evidence — the appearance of witnesses in court and the execution of judgements.
As in all organs of the justice system, investigators in the Police judiciaire lack
adequate qualifications and training.
51. As part of its overall assessment of the administration of justice, the mission
visited the Mpimba prison, where it witnessed the severe overcrowding and harsh
conditions of detention. With over 2,500 detainees in a prison whose maximum
capacity is 800, more than 1,000 of whom are awaiting trial, the Mpimba prison, the
highest-security prison in Burundi, has no capacity to absorb any more detainees.
52. For all these reasons, the Burundian justice system has failed to command the
respect and trust of the population. Many Burundians have lost confidence in the
judiciary and its ability to bring justice and afford basic protection. The mission is
convinced that its capacity to deal with complex cases involving genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes is virtually non-existent.

VIII.

Recommendations
53. In considering the modalities for establishing an accountability mechanism for
Burundi to clarify the truth, investigate the crimes and bring to justice those
responsible, the mission has taken into account the Arusha Agreement, the needs

__________________
13 Attempts were also made to correct the gender imbalance. With more women joining the legal

profession, there are now women represented in all courts, including the Appeals Court, the
Supreme Court, where four of the nine judges are women, and the Constitutional Court, where
two of the seven judges, including the President, are women.

17

S/2005/158

and expectations of the Burundians, the capacity of the Burundian administration of
justice, established United Nations principles and practices, and the practicality and
feasibility of any proposed solution. It accordingly recommends a two-phase
approach: the establishment of a non-judicial accountability mechanism in the form
of a truth commission, and the establishment of a judicial accountability mechanism
in the form of a special chamber within the court system of Burundi.
54. The mission recognizes that its proposed twin mechanism deviates from the
letter — though not the spirit — of the Arusha Agreement. It is at the same time
convinced that the establishment of the two commissions in parallel, as envisaged
under the Arusha Agreement, would create the almost certain risk of overlapping
jurisdictions, contradictory findings, waste of resources and, more importantly
perhaps, marginalize the national truth and reconciliation commission.
A.

A national truth commission of mixed composition
55. In devising the modalities of a non-judicial accountability mechanism, the
mission took account of the promulgation of the Law on the Composition,
Organization and Functions of the National Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
and the need to avoid the establishment and operation of two almost identical
commissions, one national and one international. It has thus opted for a single truth
commission combining elements of both commissions. The legal basis of the
proposed truth commission would be a national law, which may be either a
modification of the present law or a newly promulgated law. The commission would
in this sense remain national in character; its composition, however, would be mixed
to include both international and national members, the former constituting the
majority. A truth commission with a substantial international component would
enhance objectivity, impartiality and credibility, and at the same time promote a
sense of national “ownership” through participation of Burundians in the process of
clarifying the historical truth and pursuing national reconciliation. The modalities of
the proposed truth commission would be based on the following principles:
(a) The legal framework for the establishment of the truth commission
would consist of a national law and an agreement between the United Nations and
the Government of Burundi. The national law would establish the subject-matter,
temporal and personal jurisdiction of the commission, its powers and competences
and its relationship with the special chamber. The agreement between the United
Nations and the Government would establish the terms and conditions for United
Nations cooperation in the establishment and operation of the commission. The law
shall be annexed to the agreement and form an integral part thereof.
(b) In accordance with the Arusha Agreement, the mandate of the
commission would be to establish the facts and determine the causes and nature of
the conflict in Burundi, classify the crimes committed since its independence in
1962, and identify those responsible for the crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes committed in the various cycles of conflict.
(c) In proposing a mixed composition of international and national
commissioners, the mission is acutely aware of the deep ethnic divisions within
Burundian society, and the mutual distrust between the two ethnic groups. It thus
proposes that in the choice of the Burundian commissioners particular care should
be taken to ensure that the national commissioners should be known for their

18

S/2005/158

integrity, objectivity and impartiality and recognized in Burundi as transcending the
ethnic divide.
(d) The relationship between the truth commission and the special chamber
would depend on the sequence of their establishment, and the modalities of their
cooperation would be accordingly determined in the founding instrument of each
mechanism. It is expected, however, that because of its limited requirements in
human and financial resources the truth commission will be established first.
Expeditious establishment of the commission will ensure that, by the time a special
chamber is established, the results of the investigations carried out by the
commission could be shared with the Prosecutor of the special chamber. It is quite
likely however that, for a while at least, the two mechanisms will operate
simultaneously.
(e) To the extent of their concurrent operation, the modalities for their
cooperation could include a referral of cases from the commission to the chamber,
sharing of information and evidentiary material and, where appropriate, sharing of
services, knowledge and expertise. The mission recalls that, in the case of Sierra
Leone and Timor-Leste, the concurrent operation of a truth and reconciliation
commission and a national or international court gave rise to a similar need to
determine the relationship between the two United Nations-assisted judicial and
non-judicial accountability mechanisms.
56. On the basis of previous experience, and notably the United Nations-assisted
Truth and Reconciliation Commission in Sierra Leone, the mission recommends a
more streamlined structure and composition as the basis for establishing the
financial, logistical and personnel requirements of the truth commission for
Burundi, as follows:
(a) The mission considers the number of 25 commissioners provided for in
the Law on the National Truth and Reconciliation Commission to be unnecessarily
cumbersome. It recommends, instead, that the proposed truth commission be
composed of five commissioners, of whom three would be internationals and two
nationals.
(b) An executive secretary should be responsible for the administration of
the commission, and administrative support staff.
(c) The core activities of the commission would be carried out by two units,
namely, an investigative unit responsible for investigating the crimes and identifying
those responsible, and a research unit responsible for establishing the causes and
facts of the conflict and the nature of the crimes committed in the different cycles of
violence. The composition of the investigative and research units would be mixed,
with a substantial international component. They will include, respectively,
investigators, forensic experts, historians, political scientists and other experts, as
appropriate. While the investigation conducted by the truth commission would not
be a criminal or judicial investigation, investigators would conduct their
information-gathering activities in full respect of the rights of witnesses and due
process of law.
(d) The commission would establish its main office in Bujumbura, and a
number of regional offices throughout the country. It would be provided with
furniture, office equipment and maintenance supplies, services and utilities, means
of transportation and communication.

19

S/2005/158

(e) The Government of Burundi is responsible under international law for
the safety and security of United Nations personnel and other international
personnel of the commission. Notwithstanding its expression of willingness to do
so, the capacity of the Government to fulfil its international obligations is limited.
The commission would, therefore, establish a security office responsible for the
protection of material, personnel and facilities, in liaison with local and government
authorities. While precise security measures will have to be determined at the time
of the establishment of the commission, it is envisaged that internal security of the
premises of the commission would be provided by security guards contracted by or
provided to the commission, and external security would be provided by the
Government. A protective detail would be required for the commissioners, and
escort would be provided for investigators travelling on mission throughout the
country. In the circumstances, adequate protection should also be provided for
witnesses. Depending on the security requirements at the time of their
establishment, the possibility of extending the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi to provide security for the commission and the special
chamber may be considered.
(f) While more detailed cost estimates would be prepared at the time of the
establishment of the truth commission, the mission notes that the financial cost of a
similar structure for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission for Sierra Leone was
in the amount of $6 million.
B.

A special chamber in the court system of Burundi
57. In considering a judicial accountability mechanism for Burundi, the mission
has examined the variety of United Nations-based or assisted tribunals, their legal
status, financial mechanism, efficiency and cost-effectiveness and the legacy they
left behind, in the light of experience gained in a decade-long United Nations
engagement in promoting justice and the rule of law.
58. The two ad hoc international tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda,
the first international criminal tribunals to be established by a Security Council
resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, are subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council, financed in their entirety through assessed
contributions. The costs entailed in their operation since their establishment in 1993
and 1994, and their lengthy procedures and location outside the country where the
crimes were committed were among the factors which persuaded the mission not to
recommend a similar ad hoc international tribunal for Burundi.
59. An international tribunal of a different kind is the Special Court for Sierra
Leone established by agreement between the United Nations and the Government of
Sierra Leone, and initially financed by voluntary contributions. Unlike the ad hoc
tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the Special Court is located in the
country where the crimes were committed, but does not form part of the Sierra
Leone court system. A financial shortfall in its second year of operation led to a
request for a limited subvention, which was approved by the General Assembly in
resolution 58/284 of 8 April 2004.
60. In deciding to recommend a special chamber within the court system of
Burundi, the mission has drawn upon the model of the War Crimes Chamber now
being established in the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has thus opted for
a judicial accountability mechanism not only located in the country, but forming

20

S/2005/158

part of the Burundian court system (a “court within a court”), with a view to
strengthening the judicial sector in material and human resources, leaving behind a
legacy of trained judges, prosecutors, defence counsel and experienced court
managers.
61. The special chamber established in the court system of Burundi as a “court
within a court” would have the competence to prosecute those bearing the greatest
responsibility for the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
committed in Burundi. Its temporal jurisdiction would be limited to specific phases
of the conflict and would include, as a minimum, the events between 1972 and
1993, inclusive.
62. The legal basis for the establishment of the special chamber and the applicable
law governing its operation will be Burundian law, with the necessary modifications
introduced to ensure procedural guarantees of fair trial and due process of law. For
the United Nations to cooperate in the establishment of the special chamber,
however, its founding instrument will have to exclude the death penalty from the
possible list of punishments imposed, and declare any amnesty given to genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes invalid before the chamber.
63. An agreement would be concluded between the United Nations and the
Government to determine the terms and conditions of United Nations cooperation in
the establishment and operation of the special chamber, to which the law
establishing the special chamber would be annexed.
64. The special chamber would consist of a trial panel (or panels) and an appellate
penal, composed, respectively, of three and five judges.
65. The composition of the special chamber would be mixed, with a majority of
international judges and an international prosecutor and a registrar. The prosecutor’s
office and court management would include a substantial international component.
66. Given the available infrastructure in the Palais de justice in Bujumbura,
additional premises will have to be provided by the Government, and refurbished, if
necessary, by the special chamber.
C.

Financial mechanism
67. The truth commission and the special chamber will be established as national
law entities. As such, they will not be United Nations bodies, and would not
normally be financed through assessed contributions. In the circumstances of
Burundi, however, the establishment of any accountability mechanism will have to
rely in its entirety on international funding, whether in the form of voluntary
contributions or, in part at least, through assessed contributions. While it is, at this
stage, premature to assess the financial and other requirements of the truth
commission and the special chamber, the mission wishes to stress that a decision to
establish either or both mechanisms should be taken in full consideration of the
financial costs involved and the need to ensure a viable and sustained operation. In
this connection it wishes to reiterate the plea made by the Secretary-General in his
report of 23 August 2004 on the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict societies:
... any future financial mechanism must provide the assured and continuous
source of funding that is needed to appoint officials and staff, contract

21

S/2005/158

services, purchase equipment and support investigations, prosecutions and
trials and do so expeditiously. Resort, therefore, to assessed contributions
remains necessary in these cases. The operation of judicial bodies cannot be
left entirely to the vagaries of voluntary financing. (S/2004/616, para. 43)

IX.

Observations
68. Having been mandated to consider the advisability and feasibility of
establishing an international judicial commission of inquiry at the request of the
Government of Burundi, the mission is convinced of the necessity of establishing a
commission, though not necessarily in the shape and form requested. In an
integrated and “holistic approach” to establishing justice and the rule of law in postconflict Burundi, the mission proposes the establishment of a truth-telling
mechanism to clarify the truth objectively, impartially and in a credible manner; and
the establishment of a special chamber in the court system of Burundi to enhance
the capacity of the judicial sector, and leave behind a legacy of international
standards of justice and a generation of trained judges, prosecutors, defence counsel
and court managers. The establishment of the twin accountability mechanism should
thus be placed within the general context of the overall judicial reform and capacitybuilding in Burundi, and be pursued in complementarity with any such justice and
rule of law initiatives.
69. The presence of the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) affords a
unique opportunity for the United Nations to engage in restoring the peace, building
national reconciliation and achieving justice. It is within this context also that both
ONUB and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
should engage, within their respective mandates under Security Council resolution
1545 (2004), in the establishment and operation of the international truth
commission and strengthening the capacity of the Burundian judicial sector.
70. The Security Council has repeatedly reaffirmed the vital importance of the
Burundian parties themselves taking ownership of the process to address the
devastating impact of impunity. On a number of occasions, it has pledged the
willingness and readiness of the international community to assist in efforts to build
up the Burundian capacity for promoting respect for human rights standards and the
rule of law and put an end to impunity (S/PRST/2003/4). In its report, the Security
Council mission to Central Africa in June 2003 recommended that the Security
Council assist Burundi in putting an end to impunity and that it consider carefully
the Government’s request for the establishment of the international judicial
commission of inquiry as provided for in the Arusha Agreement (S/2003/653,
para. 44).
71. In recommending that an agreement be concluded between the United Nations
and the Government of Burundi on the terms of United Nations cooperation in the
establishment and operation of both accountability mechanisms, it is the intention of
the mission to ensure that the Government’s responsibility to cooperate — including
in surrendering indictees at the request of the special chamber — be internationally
engaged, and that its political will to eradicate impunity and bring to justice those
responsible be tested.
72. In the light of the Council’s declarations and statements of intent, it is the view
of the mission that the United Nations can no longer engage in establishing

22

S/2005/158

commissions of inquiry and disregard their recommendations without seriously
undermining the credibility of the Organization in promoting justice and the rule of
law. The mission is, therefore, of the view that a comprehensive approach to the
pursuit of truth and justice in Burundi is now necessary.
73. Unlike the Arusha Agreement which foresees two parallel tracks, the national
and the international, the mission proposes a cooperative effort in which the
international community lends its assistance and the Government of Burundi
remains ultimately responsible for the eradication of impunity and restoring the rule
of law.
74. The present report, submitted in response to the Council’s request to examine
the advisability and feasibility of establishing an international judicial commission
of inquiry for Burundi, is the first in a two-stage process of establishing judicial and
non-judicial accountability mechanisms in Burundi. If this is acceptable to the
Council, it should mandate the Secretary-General to engage in negotiation with the
Government of Burundi on the practical implementation of the proposal to establish
the truth commission and the special chamber.
75. At the second stage and in parallel to the negotiation process with the
Government, a broad-based, genuine and transparent process of consultation would
be conducted with a range of national actors and civil society at large, to ensure
that, within the general legal framework for the establishment of judicial and nonjudicial accountability mechanisms acceptable to the United Nations and the
Government, the views and wishes of the people of Burundi are taken into account.

23
