UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/351
5 May 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 5 MAY 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In its presidential statement of 11 March 1997 (S/PRST/1997/12), the
Security Council asked me to keep it informed about the follow-up to the
incident on 10 February 1997 in Mostar, in which one person died and others were
wounded in a violent assault against a group of civilians.
Pursuant to this request, and supplementing the information provided to the
Council by the High Representative for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/1997/310 of 14 April 1997), I have the honour
to attach the executive summary and the conclusions of a report, issued on
26 March 1997, entitled "Mostar - Human rights and security situation,
1 January-15 February 1997". The report was prepared by the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) and the Human Rights Coordinating Centre at the request
of the principals of the major international implementing organizations. Its
full text is available in the files of the Secretariat to members of the
Security Council upon their request.
In relation to the Council's request to be kept informed about the
follow-up to the 10 February incident, I regret to report that, since the letter
by the Principal Deputy High Representative of 23 March 1997 (S/1997/256), there
has been no further action by the responsible authorities to implement the
demands contained in the presidential statement of 11 March 1997. However, the
general situation in Mostar has improved in the past six weeks. Evictions from
West Mostar have stopped and 100 police officers (50 Bosniacs and 50 Croats) are
jointly patrolling the central district of the town. IPTF has also made
progress in its negotiations for the establishment of the joint Federation
police force in the Neretva (Mostar) Canton.
Members of the Security Council will recall that, in its resolution
1103 (1997) of 31 March 1997, the Council acknowledged "the importance of
ensuring that the IPTF is able to carry out all the tasks with which it has been
entrusted, in particular those tasks set out in the conclusions of the London
Conference" - of which the IPTF investigation into the Mostar incident is a
prime example. In the same resolution, the Security Council decided to
"consider expeditiously" the recommendations concerning those tasks contained in
my report of 14 March 1997 (S/1997/224), which include an increase in IPTF

97-11772 (E)

050597

/...

S/1997/351
English
Page 2

strength by 120 personnel. I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
my recommendation and to express the hope that the Security Council will find it
possible to respond positively to it.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/351
English
Page 3

Annex
Mostar
Human rights and security situation, 1 January-15 February 1997
Prepared by the International Police Task Force and the Human
Rights Coordination Centre pursuant to the request of the
principals of the major international implementing
organizations on 24 February 1997

I.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In their meeting of 24 February 1997 the principals of the major
international implementing organizations requested IPTF and the Human Rights
Coordination Centre of the Office of the High Representative to submit a report,
for consideration by the Federation partners, detailing the incidents preceding
and following the violence of 10 February 1997. In his letter of
25 February 1997, the Principal Deputy High Representative stated that the
Federation partners "must commit themselves to draw all necessary conclusions
[from this report], including personal consequences for all officials and police
officers who have failed to perform their duties". The decision to produce this
report followed the finding in the earlier IPTF investigation report dated
24 February 1997, which stated that police and civil authorities on both sides
of the city failed to respond effectively to security and human rights incidents
that occurred in connection with and following the 10 February 1997 violence.
The period of review was from 1 January to 15 February 1997. The nearly 200
incidents which occurred during that period are the subject of this report.
From 1 January to 10 February 1997, there were a substantial number of acts
of violence, including assaults and explosions, in Mostar. These, along with
violations of human rights and freedom of movement, contributed to a growing
environment of lawlessness throughout the area. Residents of both east and west
Mostar, as well as travellers to and from the city, were subjected to criminal
attacks, some of which appeared to involve organized criminal elements operating
in the city. In the 28 recorded cases of such threats and assaults, both
Bosniacs and Croats were victims in equal proportion. In addition, over the
41 days of this period, there were more than 40 explosions and firing incidents,
and 6 illegal evictions. In a number of these incidents, local police were
implicated either directly or through failure to act. There were few arrests
from 1 January to 15 February of those who committed these acts of violence.
These events followed a pattern of incidents that had been occurring during
the previous year. While there has been an ebb and flow of violent events from
week to week, with some peak periods and some periods of lesser activity, the
general environment in Mostar has been one of unchecked violence, with little
police or political action being taken to create a sense of normalcy, peace and
security. The incident on 10 February 1997 was, therefore, not the logical
culmination of a steadily increasing level of violence but instead was a
particularly egregious consequence of the lawlessness which has been permitted
to flourish in Mostar.
/...

S/1997/351
English
Page 4

The 10 February incident became, however, the excuse for two series of
abuses which were different in scale from the more sporadic acts which preceded
them. In a period of less than five hours, 22 cases in which Croat travellers
were stoned, threatened, robbed or assaulted occurred on the M-17 highway. In
nearly half of these cases, east Mostar police were reported to have been either
directly responsible for the violence or to have failed to respond appropriately
to actions by Bosniac civilians. Beginning that same afternoon and continuing
into the evening, 23 Bosniac families were forcibly evicted from their homes in
west Mostar, and a number of other attempted forced evictions were reported.
These evictions occurred in a localized geographic area and appeared to be the
work of well-organized criminal groups. In many cases, victims reported that
the perpetrators identified themselves as police or special police.
There have been six arrests relating to two of the incidents on the M-17,
including one off-duty police officer, but no prosecutions in the remaining 20
cases. While those who were illegally evicted were quickly returned to their
dwellings, there have been no arrests of those responsible for the pattern of
evictions which occurred on the night of 10 February. Although there is
evidence of police involvement with respect to a number of the criminal acts of
violence and eviction which followed the 10 February incident, little
substantive investigation or action has been taken to identify the police
responsible, and to hold them accountable for their actions.
Indeed, the police have consistently failed to investigate crimes involving
persons of a different ethnicity or, alternatively, to arrest suspects of their
own ethnicity. It is clear that the police leadership, in both east and west
Mostar, has failed to provide adequate protection to persons living and
travelling in the city. The police have often appeared to be simply instruments
of the political establishment, enforcing restrictions on freedom of movement
while permitting those who commit acts of violence to remain free from
prosecution. When Mostar police have intervened to address criminal behaviour,
their actions have usually been limited at best to returning the situation to
the status quo ante rather than arresting those responsible for inter-ethnic
violence. The ability of the police to perform their basic duties, including
investigation of crimes, is also severely hampered by the fact that the east and
west Mostar police do not even share rudimentary information regarding criminal
offences, much less cooperate in responding to them. The police failures have
been so substantial that there has been virtually no professional police
protection for a population of east and west Mostar that has come to live in
fear of violence and harassment.
The failures in Mostar involve political authorities as well as police.
The absence of functioning local institutions is a crucial factor. Instead of
initiatives to address Mostar's problems, the political leadership relies on a
continuous flow of invective directing blame at "the other side". The actions
of political leadership have had a direct impact on tensions in the city and the
atmosphere of divisiveness between the parties. The death of an elderly woman
after she was evicted from her flat, the start of construction on the Croat
national theatre, the televised burning of a Croat flag, the placing of
"sleeping policemen" on the Bulevar by east Mostar police, and the continued
threat, eventually acted upon, to remove local police officers from the Unified
Police Force of Mostar, have added to tension in a city where violence has
/...

S/1997/351
English
Page 5

become the norm. Irresponsible and inaccurate reporting by the local media,
often inflammatory and with a strong ethnic bias, has contributed to the
instability of the Mostar environment. The political leaders of Mostar have
capitalized on these shortcomings, using the media to further their own agendas.
This summary of the incidents during the period from 1 January to
15 February 1997 shows a city gripped by ethnic tension and outbreaks of
violence, unchecked by responsible police or political action. It cannot be
permitted to continue. Police must accept their responsibility to protect all
citizens, regardless of their ethnicity. Those who commit criminal acts must be
arrested and prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. As a first step, the
integrated cantonal police force must be established as agreed by with all
urgency, and full participation in the United Police Force of Mostar is required
until that force is operational. At the same time, the political leadership
must commit itself to building a stable environment, in which there is freedom
of movement, freedom from harassment, and strong, effective, integrated
institutions. The establishment of functioning local institutions is a crucial
step to ensuring that problems are addressed when they occur, before they
escalate or invoke retaliation. Working together, the political authorities and
police of Mostar will be able to ensure that the security concerns of all
citizens are properly addressed.

II.

CONCLUSIONS

This review of events preceding and following the 10 February incident
portrays a city troubled by intra-ethnic violence, and a political and police
leadership not unable, but unwilling to intervene. From 1 January to
10 February, there were substantial abuses of freedom of movement on routes
within and through the city, the security climate was tense due to a
concentrated series of shooting incidents and explosions, and frictions had been
exacerbated by several well-publicized events (including the death of an elderly
woman following an eviction, the start of construction on the National Theatre,
televised burning of a Croat flag, and the construction of sleeping policeman on
the Bulevar). The events of 10 February, however, stand out starkly in their
intensity and consequences from prior incidents. Tensions were certainly high
immediately prior to 10 February 1997, but Mostar has experienced similar
periods of heightened security concerns that have subsided without culminating
in such violence.
In the period prior to 10 February 1997, the political and police
authorities in Mostar did not take any notable steps to defuse growing
tensions - just the opposite. The leadership on both sides of the city instead
engaged in its familiar pattern of name-calling and destructive tit-for-tat
measures. Both sides attempted to exploit security incidents to their
advantage, rather than addressing their causes and consequences in a
collaborative, constructive manner. For example, west and east Mostar
authorities exacerbated the fears generated by shooting incidents and
explosions. Rather than investigating and prosecuting those responsible for
forced evictions or dealing responsibly with attacks on the M-17 between
Capljina and Mostar, the west Mostar media and leadership painted a picture of
the Croat community under attack. Threats and injuries faced by Bosniacs were
/...

S/1997/351
English
Page 6

ignored. East Mostar authorities, rather than effectively addressing concerns
over stonings and explosions near the Bulevar, aggravated the problem by
erecting "sleeping policemen".
In this context, the actions of the Mostar authorities with regard to the
cemetery visit on 10 February also raise questions. The IPTF report
conclusively finds that the west Mostar authorities were formally notified
concerning the planned visit. Nevertheless, under the tense circumstances which
then existed in Mostar, the east Mostar leadership could have handled the visit
more responsibly, including by informing the appropriate political authorities,
as well as making technical notifications. For example, Deputy Mayor Orucevic
did not notify the Office of the High Representative (South) despite
opportunities to do so on or before the planned cemetery visit, although
Orucevic has since acknowledged that the event might be difficult given the
existing political climate. Of course, this omission in no way excuses the
criminal response to the visit by certain west Mostar police documented in the
24 February IPTF investigation report, or the current failure of the authorities
to investigate, brought to trial before an independent and impartial court and
prosecuted to the full extent of the law.
Events in Mostar from 1 January to 15 February 1997 amply demonstrate a
failure by both the political authorities and police to act responsibly and
effectively in providing security for all citizens. At the heart of the issue
is the failure of the local authorities and the police to work together and to
build common structures and institutions to ensure the well-being and security
of all Mostar citizens. For the abuses identified in the report to be
addressed, functioning police and political institutions must be established in
Mostar.
The ability of the Mostar police to fulfil the most fundamental policing
responsibilities is severely hampered by the failure of the east and west Mostar
police to cooperate with each other. The fact that it was only the efforts of
the team preparing the report which led to the east and west Mostar police
exchanging their reports of incidents which occurred to Bosniacs and Croats
respectively is indicative of the problem. Police on both sides, with the
leadership and full support of political authorities, must work together on the
ground by sharing information and liaising to anticipate and deal with future
incidents. They must investigate and act on the criminal incidents prior to, on
and after the 10 February incident. In particular, the series of attacks on the
M-17 and the wave of illegal evictions in west Mostar which occurred immediately
following the 10 February incident must be thoroughly investigated by the east
and west Mostar police. In the course of these investigations, particular
attention must be paid to the role of the police, including an in-depth look,
followed by timely and appropriate response, concerning all allegations of
police involvement in criminal acts, or failure to respond adequately to crimes
committed by others. Police leadership must be made professional, and police
officers responsible for wrongful acts removed.
Finally, police on both sides of the city, with conscientious and sustained
support and oversight by political authorities and the media, must now carry out
in full the instructions of the Federation government with respect to
restructuring and reconfiguration as a single cantonal force with all urgency.
/...

S/1997/351
English
Page 7

In the interim, full participation in the United Police Force of Mostar is
required.
But it is not only the police force which must be integrated in order to
address the abuses described in the report. The events in Mostar from 1 January
to 15 February 1997 amply demonstrate that the failure of the political
authorities of Mostar to be both responsible and effective threatens the
security of all Mostar's citizens. Functioning local institutions must be
established which will effectively address incidents when they occur, rather
than allowing problems to fester until "payback time". The leaders of Mostar
must communicate directly with each other, and appear together in the local
media, rather than addressing their to international interlocutors and using the
media only as a means to further their own political objectives. Only through
the proper functioning of Mostar's government, including the interior ministry
and police, will all citizens of the city be properly protected and served.

-----
